Chapter CHA
CITY CHARTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 2.
CHA:1

ARTICLE I
GRANT OF POWERS TO THE CITY
Sec. 1. Corporate existence of Biddeford retained.
The inhabitants of the City of Biddeford, in the County of York, shall
continue to be a body politic and corporate by the name of the City of
Biddeford, and shall have, exercise and enjoy, all the rights, immunities,
powers, privileges and franchise, and shall be subject to all the duties,
liabilities and obligations provided for herein, or otherwise, pertaining to,
or incumbent upon the City of Biddeford as a municipal corporation or to
the inhabitants or municipal authorities thereof; and may enact reasonable
bylaws, regulations, and ordinances for municipal purposes, not
inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of the State of Maine; and
impose penalties for the breach thereof, to the maximum allowed by Maine
state law to be recovered for such uses as said bylaws, regulations, or
ordinances shall provide.
Sec. 2. Powers and duties. [Amended 11-8-2016]
The administration of all fiscal, prudential, and municipal affairs of the
City, with the government thereof, except the general management, care,
conduct, and control of the Schools, which shall be vested in the School
Committee as hereinafter provided, and also except as otherwise provided
by this Charter, shall be and is vested in the Mayor and one body of
members, which shall constitute and be called the City Council, all of whom
shall be inhabitants of the City, and shall be elected and sworn in the
manner hereinafter prescribed.
The Mayor and the members of the City Council shall be and constitute
the municipal officers of the City of Biddeford for all purposes required by
statute, and, except as otherwise herein specifically provided, shall have all
powers and authority given to, and perform all duties required of, municipal
officers and mayors of cities under the laws of the State of Maine.
All other powers now or hereafter vested in the inhabitants of the City, and
all powers granted by this Charter, except as herein otherwise provided,
shall be vested in the Mayor and City Council.
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 2
CHA:3

ARTICLE II
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR
Sec. 1. Executive Authority of the Mayor. [Amended 11-8-2016]
The Chief Executive of the City of Biddeford shall be the Mayor, who with
the exception of the administration of the Department of Education, shall:
Sec. 2. Appointments/nominations.
On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in December, biennially, or no
later than one month after taking office, Council members will be nominated
by the Mayor to all standing committees and all other committees, boards
or commissions as prescribed by Ordinances or City Charter. All nominees
are subject to confirmation by the City Council.
Sec. 2a. Appointments of Citizens. [Added 11-8-2016]
In the event of a City board, commission or committee member vacancy,
the Mayor and Chairperson of the board, commission or committee may
each, within 30 days, nominate an individual to fill the vacancy and the City
Council shall select a person to fill the vacancy from the two nominations;
and to further provide that if the Mayor has not nominated a replacement
within 30 days, the City Council President may present a nomination for the
City Council’s consideration.
Sec. 3. Veto power.
Every resolve or order appropriating money, having passed the City Council,
shall forthwith be presented to the Mayor for approval and signature. If
disapproved, the Mayor shall return it unsigned to the City Council within
seven working days of its enactment with objections in writing, which
(a) Assure that the Laws and Ordinances are enforced;
Exercise general oversight over all departments, divisions, agencies,
offices, and boards created herein or that may be hereafter created;
(b)
Sign warrants to be paid from the treasury after appropriations by the
City Council;
(c)
Preside at meetings of the City Council and School Committee, and
shall vote only in case of a tie;
(d)
Keep the City Council advised as to the business and financial condition
and future needs of the City;
(e)
(f) Call special meetings of the City Council;
Issue warrants for calling meetings and elections for any purpose in the
several wards;
(g)
(h) Perform all other duties conferred by State Law or City Ordinances.
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 3
CHA:5
objections shall be entered into the minutes of the City Council. If, upon
reconsideration, 2/3 of the members present and voting shall vote to pass
the resolve or order, it shall have the same effect as if signed by the Mayor.
Sec. 4. Election; tenure of office; prohibition; compensation.
[Amended 11-6-2012]
A candidate for Mayor shall be a resident of the City of Biddeford for at
least six months prior to the date on/or before which nomination papers
are to be filed. The Mayor shall be sworn to the faithful performance of the
duties of the office at 7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday after the first Monday
in December, following a biennial election, by the City Clerk or person
authorized by law to administer oaths. The Mayor shall hold the office for
two years and be re-elected without limitations. The Mayor shall not directly
or indirectly enter into any contract with the City, except as provided by
30-A M.R.S.A. § 2605. The salary and compensation of the Mayor shall be
$10,000 per year.
Sec. 5. Vacancy.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of the Mayor due to death,
resignation, recall or inability to serve, the President of the City Council
shall perform all duties of the office of the Mayor. If less than 180 days
remain in the unexpired term, the President of the City Council shall serve
as Mayor Pro Tempore until the end of the unexpired term. If more than
180 days remain in the unexpired term, the vacancy shall be filled within 60
days at a special or general election called in accordance with Article VIII,
Elections, of this Charter.
Sec. 6. Elected Office. [Added 11-8-2016]
Mayor will not hold any other elected city, county, state or federal office.
Sec. 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6
CHA:6
ARTICLE III
CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 1. City to be divided into wards.
For the purpose of all elections, the City shall be divided into seven wards.
The City Council shall, once every 10 years, by ordinance establish compact
and contiguous wards of approximately equal population. The City Council,
for voting purposes, may by ordinance divide said wards into further voting
wards.
Sec. 2. Composition; election; tenure of office; compensation;
prohibition. [Amended 11-6-2012; 11-8-2016]
The City Council shall be composed of nine members, who shall hold office
for a term of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified.
The City Council shall serve as the Municipal Officers, and be composed of
the nine Council members. A candidate for City Council shall be a resident
of the City of Biddeford for at least six months prior to the date on/or before
which nomination papers are to be filed. Councilors shall be elected by
the registered voters of the City; two shall be elected at large, and one
shall be elected from each of the seven wards in which they reside and
which they seek to represent. The Councilors-Elect shall be sworn to the
faithful performance of their duties at 7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in December, following a biennial election, by the City
Clerk or person authorized by law to administer oaths. They shall receive
compensation at the rate of $100 per month, not to exceed $1,200 per year.
No member of the City Council shall be employed by the City of Biddeford
or Biddeford School Department as an employee or agent, or hold any office
or employment, the compensation of which is payable by the City, during
the term for which the Councilor was elected.
Sec. 3. President of the Council.
On the first Tuesday after the first Monday in December following the
regular municipal election, or as soon thereafter as possible, the City
Council shall elect one of its members as President of the Council for
the entire term, and until a successor is elected and qualified. In case of
the death, resignation or inability of the Mayor to serve, the President of
the City Council shall perform the duties of the Mayor. In the temporary
absence or disability of the President, the Council may select a President
Pro Tempore from among its number and such person shall exercise all the
powers of the President.
Sec. 4. Vacancies.
A vacancy in the membership of the City Council shall occur in the event of
any of the following:
(1) The death of a member;
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 4
CHA:7
Sec. 5. Meetings of the Council.
The City Council shall meet at the usual place for holding meetings at
7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday in December following the regular municipal
election, or as soon thereafter as possible. The City Council shall establish
a regular place and time for holding its meetings, and shall meet regularly
at least twice a month. The City Council may, in the absence of the Mayor
and the President of the Council, choose a President Pro Tempore, who shall
preside at the meetings of the Council.
Sec. 6. Special meetings.
Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, and in case of the Mayor's
absence, disability, or refusal, may be called by a majority of the members of
the City Council. Notice of such meeting shall be served in person, or left at
the residence of each member of the City Council, at least 24 hours before
the time for holding the special meeting, and the public shall be notified
under the provisions in Article X, Section 3(a) of this Charter.
Sec. 7. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business.
(2) The effective date of the resignation of a member;
The removal of a member from the ward from which the councilor was
elected, except those elected at large;
(3)
(4) The removal of a member from the City;
(5) The conviction of a member of a felony while in office;
(6) The recall of a member, pursuant to the provisions of Article IX; or
The employment of a member by the City of Biddeford or the Biddeford
School Department as an employee or agent.
A member may submit a resignation, in writing, directly to the Mayor.
Once accepted by the Council, said resignation may not be withdrawn,
and said member's office shall become vacant on that date.
If a vacancy in the membership of the City Council occurs within 180
days after the previous election, a special election shall be held within
a period not to exceed 60 days of the vacancy. If a vacancy in the
membership of the City Council occurs more than 180 days after the
previous election, the Mayor shall nominate, and the City Council shall
confirm, a person to fill this vacancy within a period not to exceed
30 days of its occurrence. The person elected/named to fill a vacancy
shall serve until the first Tuesday after the first Monday in December
following the next biennial election. [Amended 11-6-2012]
(7)
Sec. 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 8
CHA:8
Sec. 8. Procedure. [Amended 11-8-2016]
The City Council shall keep a record of its proceedings and shall determine
its own rules of procedure and make lawful regulations for enforcing the
same. The meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public. The
City Council shall create an ordinance and establish procedures to allow
the public to address the City Council at all City Council meetings. Said
ordinance shall also establish procedures to allow any City Councilor (with
concurrence of at least one other City Councilor) the authority to place
any item on the agenda within 30 days. The City Council shall act only by
ordinance, order, or resolve. All ordinances, orders and resolves, except
orders or resolves making appropriations of money, shall be confined to
one subject which shall be clearly expressed in the title. An appropriation,
order or resolve shall be confined to the subject of appropriations only.
No ordinance and no appropriation order or resolve shall be passed until
it has been read on two separate days, except when the requirement of
a second reading on a separate day has been dispensed with by the vote
of 2/3 of the members present and voting. The yeas and nays shall be
taken upon the passage of all ordinances and entered on the record of the
proceedings of the City Council by the Clerk. The yeas and nays shall be
taken on the passage of any order or resolve when called for by any member
of the City Council. Every ordinance, order, and resolve shall require on
the final passage the affirmative vote of the majority of the members of the
City Council. No ordinance shall take effect until 30 days after its passage,
except as herein otherwise provided for emergency ordinances.
The City Council may, by vote of 2/3 of the members present and voting,
pass emergency ordinances, orders or resolves to take effect at the time
indicated therein, but such emergency ordinances, orders or resolves shall
contain a section in which the emergency is set forth and defined; provided,
however, that the declaration of such emergency by the City Council shall
be conclusive.
Sec. 9. Audit.
The City Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all City
accounts and may provide for such more frequent auditing, as it deems
necessary.
Sec. 8 CITY CHARTER Sec. 9
CHA:9

ARTICLE IV
CITY MANAGER
Sec. 1. Appointment; confirmation; compensation; term of office.
There shall be a City Manager who shall be nominated by the Mayor
and whose appointment shall be confirmed by the City Council. The City
Manager shall be employed by the Mayor and City Council who shall
establish compensation and contract terms of employment not to exceed
three years. The City Council shall evaluate the job performance of the City
Manager yearly with input from the Mayor.
Sec. 2. Powers and duties.
The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the City of
Biddeford, and shall:
Be responsible for the day-to-day administration of the affairs of the
City in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and the Code of
Ordinances;
(a)
Be responsible for implementing policies as established by the Mayor
and the City Council;
(b)
Report to and receive policy guidance from the Mayor and the City
Council;
(c)
Appoint, suspend, or remove after consultation with the Mayor and
confirmation by the City Council, department heads and subordinate
officers provided for in the Charter, except as otherwise provided by
law or this Charter;
(d)
Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and
agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by
law, and evaluate the performance, at least once per calendar year, of
all subordinates;
(e)
Attend meetings of the City Council, and report to the Mayor and
Council upon inquiry;
(f)
See to the enforcement of all laws and ordinances of the City and of
the provisions of this Charter and carry out the lawful directives of the
City Council personally or through department heads or subordinate
officers;
(g)
Prepare and submit the annual municipal budget, to include a Capital
Improvement 5-year budget plan. [Amended 11-8-2016]
(h)
Submit to the Mayor and City Council such reports and
recommendations as the Mayor and City Council shall require;
(i)
(j) Be a non-voting member of the City Council Finance Committee;
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 2
CHA:11
Sec. 3. Residency. [Amended 11-8-2016]
The City Manager shall establish residence within the City of Biddeford
within six months from the date of hire, unless otherwise approved by the
City Council.
(k) Perform all other duties as assigned by the Mayor and City Council.
Sec. 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 3
CHA:12
ARTICLE V
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Sec. 1. Composition; election; tenure of office; organization;
compensation. [Amended 11-6-2012]
The School Committee shall be composed of seven members who shall hold
office for a term of two years and until their successors are qualified. A
candidate for School Committee members shall be a resident of the City
of Biddeford for at least six months prior to the date on/or before which
nomination papers are to be filed. Each Committee member shall be elected
at large by the registered voters of the City of Biddeford; however, there
shall be no more than two members from any one ward. The Committee
members-elect shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties at
7:00 p.m. on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in December, following
a regular municipal election, by the City Clerk or person authorized by
law to administer oaths. School Committee members shall receive
compensation at the rate of $10 for every regularly scheduled full
Committee meeting attended, not to exceed $500 per year. The Committee
shall meet regularly, twice a month.
Sec. 2. Chair.
The Mayor shall be the ex officio chair of the School Committee and shall:
Sec. 3. Powers and duties.
(a) Have no veto power;
(b) Not make a motion; and
(c) Only vote to break a tie.
The School Committee shall have all powers and perform all duties
in regard to the care and management of the City's public schools
pursuant to Maine State law and except as otherwise provided in this
Charter.
(a)
The Committee shall appoint a Superintendent of Schools for a term
not exceeding three years, and the Superintendent shall receive
compensation at a rate determined by the Committee. The duties of the
Superintendent shall be those as prescribed by law and regulations.
The Superintendent of Schools may be removed for just cause. The
Superintendent of Schools shall establish residence within the City of
Biddeford within six months of being hired, unless otherwise approved
by the School Committee. The Superintendent shall cause to be
published all agendas of School Committee meetings in a local
newspaper at least 24 hours before such meetings are to be held,
and shall cause to be posted said agendas on the City bulletin board.
[Amended 11-8-2016]
(b)
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 3
CHA:13
Sec. 4. The budget. [Amended 11-8-2016]
The School Committee shall submit to the City Budget Committee a budget
for operation of the Department of Education, to include a Capital
Improvement 5-Year Budget Plan by the third Monday in March. After
review, the Budget Committee shall forward their recommendations to
the City Council, whose decision on the budget shall be final; subject to
State mandated school budget validation requirements, if any. The proposed
budget shall be comprised of: expenditures for the functions of instruction,
student support, staff support services, administration, operation and
maintenance, pupil transportation, adult education, debt service, and any
other function(s) the Committee wishes to have funded for the fiscal year.
The total approved for each individual function by a majority vote of Council
shall become the School Committee's aggregate fiscal year budget after
having received its second reading. The School Committee shall not allow
the transfer of funds from one function to another without first receiving 2/
3 vote of the members present and voting from both the School Committee
and the City Council in separate deliberations.
Sec. 5. Vacancies.
A vacancy in the membership of the School Committee shall occur in the
event of the following:
With the exception of the School Committee Standing Committees,
residents of Biddeford shall be allowed to serve on and chair, with full
voting rights, all Subcommittees of the School Committee, including
but not limited to the Policy, Capital Improvement Projects, Curriculum
and Transportation Committees. [Added 11-6-2012]
(c)
(1) The death of a member;
(2) The effective date of the resignation of a member;
(3) The removal of a member from the City;
(4) The conviction of a member of a felony while in office;
(5) The recall of a member, pursuant to the provisions of Article IX.
The employment of a member by the City of Biddeford or the Biddeford
School Department as an employee or agent. [Added 11-8-2016]
(6)
Sec. 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 5
CHA:14
A member may submit a resignation, in writing directly to the School
Committee Chairperson. Once accepted by the School Committee,
the resignation may not be withdrawn and the member's office shall
become vacant on that date indicated.
If a vacancy in the membership of the School Committee occurs, the
School Committee Chairperson shall nominate a person, consistent
with Article V, Section 1, and Article VIII, Section 3 of this Charter, to
fill the vacancy in a time period not to exceed 30 days of its occurrence.
The nomination shall be subject to the confirmation of the School
Committee. The person named to fill a vacancy shall serve until the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in December following the next
biennial election.
Sec. 5 CITY CHARTER Sec. 5
CHA:15

ARTICLE VI
POLICE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
[Amended 11-8-2016]
The City Council shall create an ordinance to establish a Police Advisory
Committee in the Code of Ordinances.
CITY CHARTER Sec. 5
CHA:17

ARTICLE VII
FIRE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
[Amended 11-8-2016]
The City Council shall create an ordinance to establish a Fire Advisory
Committee in the Code of Ordinances.
CITY CHARTER Sec. 5
CHA:19

ARTICLE VIII
ELECTIONS
Sec. 1. Regular municipal elections.
On the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November, biennially, a
regular municipal election shall be held and the registered voters of the City
or wards, as the case may be, shall ballot for the Mayor, Councilors, School
Committee, Wardens and Ward Clerks as may be necessary to fill the offices
provided for by this Charter whose terms would normally expire.
Sec. 1A. (Reserved)
Sec. 2. Wardens and Ward Clerks.
The Wardens and Ward Clerks shall be and remain residents of the Ward
for which they qualify and hold their offices for two years and until others
have been chosen and qualified in their stead. The Warden and the Ward
Clerk shall be sworn to the faithful performance of their duties by a person
qualified under the statutes of the State to administer oaths, and a
certificate of such oath shall be entered by the City Clerk on the records of
said ward.
Sec. 3. Nominations/eligibility.
The nomination of all candidates for elective offices provided for by this
Charter shall be by petition. The petition of a candidate for Mayor shall
be signed by no fewer than 125 qualified voters of the City. The petition
of a candidate for Councilor-at-Large shall be signed by no fewer than 50
qualified voters of the City. The petition of a candidate for a Ward Council
seat shall be signed by no fewer than 25 qualified voters of the respective
wards. The petition of a candidate for School Committee shall be signed by
no fewer than 25 qualified voters of the City. The petition of a candidate
for Warden and Ward Clerk shall be signed by no fewer than 20 qualified
voters of the respective wards. The petition of a candidate for the Charter
Revision Commission shall be signed by no fewer than 25 qualified voters of
the respective wards.
Employees of the City of Biddeford or Biddeford School Department are
not eligible to seek or accept nomination, appointment or election to any
elected political office in the City of Biddeford.
Sec. 4. Form of nomination petition.
The signatures to nomination petitions need not all be affixed to one
nomination petition, but to each separate petition there shall be attached
an affidavit of the circulator thereof stating the number of signers of each
petition, and that each signature appended thereto was made in his or
her presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it
purports to be. With each signature shall be stated the place of residence
of the signer, giving the street and number of the street or their description
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 4
CHA:21
sufficient to identify the same. The form of the nomination petition shall
be determined by the City Clerk and shall declare the office in which the
candidate is petitioning for prior to receiving signatures.
Sec. 5. Filing of nomination petitions and acceptance of
nomination.
The nomination petitions for any one candidate must be assembled and
united into one petition and filed with the City Clerk during normal business
hours not later than 45 days before the date of election. No nomination
shall be valid unless the candidate shall file with the City Clerk in writing at
the time of filing of said nomination petitions his or her consent accepting
nomination, agreeing not to withdraw, and if elected, to hold office.
Nomination, petitions and consent, once filed, may not be withdrawn. Any
challenge to a nomination petition must be submitted to the City Clerk in
writing, setting forth the specific reasons for the objection, no later than
five business days from its date of filing or it is barred. No person shall be
nominated, nor shall any person consent to being nominated, at the same
election for any other elective office provided for by this Charter, and no
person shall simultaneously hold more than one elective office provided for
by this Charter.
Sec. 6. Form of ballot. [Amended 11-6-2012]
All official ballots for use in all municipal elections shall be prepared by
the City Clerk and furnished by the City. Ballots for use in elections under
this Charter shall contain the names of the various candidates with their
residence, and the office for which they are candidates. The candidates
for each office shall be grouped under the title of each office, plainly and
distinctly marked. There shall be as many blank spaces under the name
of each office as there are vacancies to be filled. These spaces may be
used by a voter to write in the name of any person for whom the voter
desires to vote. No stickers shall be used. Such ballots shall also contain
such measures as may be submitted to the voters of the City by the Maine
Legislature or by the City Council and shall be without party mark or
designation.
In preparing all ballots for election under this Charter, the City Clerk shall
conduct a random lottery drawing, in a public forum within 14 days after
closing of nominations. The City Clerk shall then arrange the names of all
qualified candidates for each office based on the outcome of that drawing.
Sec. 7. Sample ballots.
The City Clerk shall cause ballots to be prepared from the arrangement of
the first group of ballots as provided above and to be posted in public places
in each ward and/or voting precinct, and advertised in a local newspaper
at least once no later than 10 days prior to a municipal election. Sample
ballots shall be printed on colored paper and marked "Sample Ballot" and
shall contain the names of the certified candidates with the residence of
Sec. 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 7
CHA:22
each, instructions to voters, and such measures as may be submitted to the
voters by the Legislature or by the City Council. Such sample ballots shall
also be without party mark or designation.
Sec. 8. Write-In Candidate. [Added 11-6-20121]
A write-in candidate shall mean a person whose name does not appear on
the ballot under the office designation to which the voter may wish to elect
the candidate and who has filed a declaration of write-in candidacy. To be
elected as a write-in candidate, a person must file a declaration of write-in
candidacy in the City Clerk’s Office on a form provided by the City Clerk, on
or before close of business on the 5th day prior to the election.
Sec. 9. State laws applicable.
The laws of the State of Maine relating to the qualifications of electors,
registration, the manner of voting, the duties of election officials, counting
of ballots, and all other particulars in respect to preparation for conducting
and managing elections, so far as they may be applicable, shall govern all
municipal elections in the City of Biddeford, except as otherwise provided
in this Charter.
1. Editor’s Note: This referendum vote also approved the renumbering of former Sec. 8 as
Sec. 9.
Sec. 7 CITY CHARTER Sec. 9
CHA:23

ARTICLE IX
RECALL
Sec. 1. Applicability.
The Mayor, or any member of the City Council or School Committee may
be recalled and removed from office by the qualified voters of the City of
Biddeford as hereinafter provided.
Sec. 2. Petition for recall. [Amended 11-8-2016]
In the case of the Mayor, Councilor-at-Large and School Committee
Member, the recall must be signed by not less than 15% of registered voters
from the City who voted in the previous Gubernatorial Election. In the
case of a Ward Councilor, who has been elected as such by the registered
voters of said ward, the petition must be signed by not less than 15% of the
qualified voters in that ward at the time of the previous municipal election.
Sec. 3. Verification of recall petition.
Within seven days of the receipt of the petitions, the City Clerk shall
ascertain whether or not the petitions have been signed by the requisite
number of qualified voters. If there are insufficient signatures, the City
Clerk will notify in writing by certified mail those responsible for the
petition who shall have an additional five days from receipt of the notice to
obtain a sufficient number of signatures.
Sec. 4. Calling of recall election.
If the City Clerk's certification should show that the petitions are sufficient,
the petitions and the Clerk's certification shall be submitted by the City
Clerk to the City Council at its next regular meeting following certification
and shall also notify the person or persons whose removal is sought. The
City Council shall, within 14 days of receipt of the City Clerk's certification,
direct the City Clerk to issue a warrant for a municipal election within 60
days.
Sec. 5. Count of ballot. [Amended 11-6-20122]
In case of a majority voting for and against the recall for any official shall
vote in favor of the recall, such official shall be thereby removed and the
City Council shall declare a vacancy in that office in accordance with Article
II, Section 5 of this Charter in the case of the Mayor; Article III, Section 4
of this Charter in the case of a City Councilor; or Article V, Section 5 of this
Charter in the case of a School Committee Member.
2. Editor’s Note: This referendum vote also repealed former Sec. 5, Election to be ordered,
and renumbered former Sec. 6 as Sec. 5.
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 5
CHA:25

ARTICLE X
DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES OR AGENCIES
Sec. 1. Appointments.
Sec. 2. (Reserved)4
Sec. 3. City Clerk.
The Mayor and City Council may enter into an employment contract with
the City Clerk for a term not to exceed three years. The City Clerk shall be
nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The salary and
compensation of the City Clerk shall be established by the City Council. The
City Clerk shall be the Clerk of the City Council and shall:
The City Manager and City Clerk shall be officers of the City and
shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council
as applicable to appropriate articles of this Charter. [Amended
11-8-20163]
(a)
The City Solicitor shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council for a period within the term of the office of the Mayor.
(b)
Heads of departments, offices and agencies, including those prescribed
by Federal and State law, or City Ordinances shall be appointed by the
City Manager and confirmed by the Mayor/ City Council as follows:
[Amended 11-8-2016]
(1) Tax Assessor (per MRSA Title 36, Ch. 101).
(2) Police Chief.
(3) Fire Chief.
(4) Public Works Director.
(5) Code Enforcement Officer.
(6) Director Economic Development.
(7) Building Facilities Manager.
City Treasurer (per MRSA 30-A, Part 2, Sub Para 9, Ch. 221, Sec.
5602-5604).
(8)
(9) Recreation Director.
General Assistance Administrator - MRSA, Title 22, Ch. 1161, Sec.
4301 No. 12.
(10)
(11)Finance Director.
(c)
3. Editor’s Note: This referendum vote also amended the title of Art. X.
4. Editor’s Note: Former Sec. 2, City Treasurer was repealed 11-8-2016.
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 3
CHA:27
Sec. 4. Finance Director.
The Finance Director shall:
Sec. 5. City Assessor. [Amended 11-8-2016]
The powers and duties of the Assessor are prescribed by State Law,
M.R.S.A., Title 36, Ch. 101, Property within the City shall be revaluated by
a total City wide assessment, which includes all residential and commercial
properties.
Sec. 6. General Assistance Administrator.
The General Assistance Administrator is subject to the supervision of the
Municipal Officers. The powers and duties of this position are prescribed by
State Law.
Give notice in a local newspaper of the time and place of regular and
special Council meetings on Friday prior to the week of such meetings.
The agenda for City Council meetings shall appear in local media
sources and shall be posted on the City bulletin board, at least 24 hours
in advance;
(a)
(b) Keep a record of the proceedings of the City Council;
(c) Record the votes of members by yeas and neas;
(d) Perform the specific election duties enumerated in the Charter;
Review the format of all referendum questions in order to determine
compliance with provisions in this Charter and applicable State Laws;
(e)
Provide educational materials to unenrolled voters advising them of
their right to run for office, and guidelines for enrolling and voting;
(f)
(g) Perform all other duties enacted by State Law and/or City Ordinances.
(a) Be a nonvoting member of the Finance Committee;
(b) Direct and supervise the accounts and bookkeeping of the City;
Designate the appropriation and the department for all bills and claims
and certify that they are in proper form and legal for presentation to
the Finance Committee or for a warrant for the Mayor's signature;
(c)
Cause to be prepared and submitted annually by an independent
auditor to the Mayor and the City Council a report on the receipts,
expenditures, property holdings, debts and liabilities of the City;
(d)
Perform any other duties outlined in State Law and/or City Ordinances
and prepare other reports as assigned by the Mayor, City Council, or
the City Manager.
(e)
Sec. 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 7
CHA:28
Sec. 7. Harbor Master.
The Harbor Master shall implement the river and harbor regulations
emanating from the City Council, and such other duties as the City Council
may prescribe.
Sec. 8. Organizational powers.
The Mayor and City Council shall have the power by Ordinance for the
organization, conduct, and operation of the departments, agencies, officers,
and boards/committees/commissions of the City; and for the creation of
additional departments, agencies, officers, and boards/committees/
commissions; and/or for the alteration, abolition, assignment, or
reassignment of all such departments, divisions, agencies, offices and
boards/committees/commissions.
Sec. 9. Civil service rule.
The Mayor and City Council shall provide by Ordinance for a system of
civil services rules for the appointment, promotion, demotion, lay-off,
reinstatement, suspension, or removal of City employees not covered by
union contracts.
Sec. 10. Remuneration of appointees.
The Mayor and City Council shall fix by order the remuneration of the
appointees of the Mayor and City Council.
Sec. 11. Duties.
The duties of the Administrative Officers shall be prescribed by the
appointive power, but such duties shall not be inconsistent with this Charter
or any Ordinance enacted by the City Council as provided herein.
Sec. 12. Continuity of office.
Any and all Administrative Officers and employees of the City of Biddeford
on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in such capacity until
a successor is appointed and qualified as provided herein, unless sooner
removed by the appointive power as designated herein.
Sec. 7 CITY CHARTER Sec. 12
CHA:29

ARTICLE XI
BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1. The City Council Finance Committee.
The Finance Committee shall be comprised of the Mayor, Council President
and two other members of the City Council; one Council member being
nominated by the Council President and confirmed by the City Council, the
other being nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council.
In addition, the Finance Director and the City Manager shall be nonvoting
members.
Sec. 2. Budget Committee.
There shall be a Budget Committee convened annually, not later than
the first week in March which shall review and propose the Municipal
and School Department budgets for the ensuing fiscal year.
(a)
The Budget Committee shall be comprised of the entire City Council.
The Mayor shall serve as Chair and shall vote only in case of a tie. The
City Manager and the Finance Director shall serve as non-voting staff
members to the Committee.
(b)
The Budget shall be submitted to the City Council in two parts, one
by the City Manager and one by the Superintendent of Schools. The
proposed budget shall be submitted by the Superintendent of Schools
in the format outlined in Article V, Section 4.
(c)
The Budget Committee shall, at the latest, by the first Monday in May
each year, submit to the City Council a budget showing the proposed
expenditures for the various departments, other principal or
subordinate departments and a contingent fund.
(d)
A summary of a proposed budget shall be published at least once in a
local newspaper of general circulation within the City within 14 days
following submission to the City Council.
(e)
The City Council may, before adopting the annual appropriation resolve,
make appropriations for current department expenses; however, these
appropriations will be included in the annual appropriation resolve.
(f)
At least one public hearing shall be held on the City budget prior to its
adoption by the City Council.
(g)
The City budget shall be adopted by the City Council prior to the
beginning of the next fiscal year.
(h)
Capital Improvement Program. The City Manager and School
Committee shall submit to the Budget Committee, Mayor and City
Council a Capital Improvement 5-Year Budget Plan at the second
regular meeting of the City Council in November of each year. Annually,
during the budget process, the City shall appropriate at least five
(i)
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 2
CHA:31
Sec. 3. Appropriation resolve. [Amended 11-8-2016]
The City Council shall adopt the annual appropriation resolve for the
current fiscal year. Such resolve shall appropriate those amounts deemed
necessary for general City purposes and for a contingent fund.
There shall be no subsequent expenditures authorized for any purpose;
however, funds may be transferred from one department to another, the
contingent fund, or other source of income, provided the resolution
authorizing the transfer is adopted by a 2/3rds vote of the full membership
of the City Council and the vote is recorded.
Sec. 4. Accounts and records.
Accounts and records shall be supervised by the Finance Director, showing
transactions of all departments included in the budget of the City, the Fire
Department, the Police Department, and the School Department. A general
accounting system for the budget shall be recommended by the Finance
Director and approved by the Municipal Officers. Accounts shall be kept in
such a manner as to show fully at all times the financial condition of the
City.
Sec. 5. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the City shall be July first through June thirtieth of the
ensuing year.
Sec. 6. Borrowing.
Money may be borrowed, within the limits fixed by the Constitution and
Statutes of the State, now or hereafter applying to the City of Biddeford,
by the issue and sale of bonds or notes pledged on the credit of the
City, the proceeds to be used for the acquisition of land, the construction,
reconstruction, major alterations, extraordinary repairs, the equipment of
buildings and other permanent public improvements, the purchase of
department equipment, and the payment or refunding of bonds, notes, and
certificates of indebtedness previously issued.
Sec. 7. Payments.
Money shall be paid only in warrants on the City Treasury examined by the
City Finance Director and signed by the Mayor.
hundredths of one percent (0.05%) of the previous fiscal year’s total
taxable valuation for the sole purpose of funding the capital
improvements. Should the City Council make a determination that
unusual circumstances prevent funding at this level; the City Council
may override this requirement. To override the requirement, at least six
members of the Council must vote in favor of an override order. Said
order shall include the determination and explanation of the unusual
circumstances. [Added 11-8-2016]
Sec. 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 7
CHA:32
The Finance Director shall examine all payrolls, bills, and other claims and
demands against the City and shall issue no warrant for payment until
satisfied that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed, duly certified,
and legally due and payable.
Sec. 8. Collection and custody of City monies.
All monies received by any officer, employee, or agent of the City belonging
to the City, or for or in connection with the business of the City, shall
forthwith be paid by the officer, employee, or agent receiving the same
into the City Treasury, and shall then be deposited with a federally insured
financial institution or institutions to be chosen by the City Council. All
interest from all deposits of money belonging to the City shall accrue to the
benefit of the City.
Sec. 9. Contributions. [Added 11-8-2016]
The City may invest, lend or otherwise contribute to any private entity for
the purposes of assisting that private entity. If there is no exchange of any
goods or services, the entity receiving the funds shall provide an annual
report to the City regarding the use of the funds which shall be available
to the public within 14 days following submission of the proposed budget to
the City Council.
Sec. 7 CITY CHARTER Sec. 9
CHA:33

ARTICLE XII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 1. No personal interest. [Amended 11-6-2012; 11-8-2016]
Neither the Mayor, nor any member of the City Council, School Committee
or board, committee or commission thereof and no officer, agent or
employee of the City or School Committee, or immediate family member of
a City or School Department employee shall:
Sec. 2. Ordinances, orders, resolves.
All ordinances, orders, or resolves in force at the time that this Charter
takes effect, not inconsistent with this Charter, shall continue in force until
amended or repealed. All rules and regulations of the Municipal Officers, or
of any office of the City of Biddeford in force at the time that this Charter
takes effect, not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, shall continue in
force until amended or repealed.
Sec. 3. Continuity of actions.
All rights, actions, proceedings, prosecutions and contracts of the City,
or any of its boards, committees, commissions or departments, pending
or unexecuted when this Charter goes into effect, and not inconsistent
therewith, shall be enforced, continued, or completed in all respects as
though begun or executed hereunder.
Have a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract
entered into by or on behalf of the City of Biddeford, or the School
Committee, except a personal employment contract, or in the sale to
or by the City, or School Committee of any land, materials, supplies or
services, when such officer, agent, employee or member exercises on
behalf of the City, or School Committee any function or responsibility
with respect to such contract or sale. All contracts or sales made in
violation thereof are void, and the City Finance Director is expressly
forbidden to pay any money out of the City Treasury on account of any
such transaction.
(a)
Purchase or accept anything from the City, or School Committee, other
than those items or services which are offered to the public generally,
and then only upon the same terms and under the same procedures
offered to and used for the general public. This shall not include those
items or services which are received as compensation, or as a part
of such person's employment contract, or which are necessary for the
performance of such person's duties.
(b)
Accept or receive from any person, firm, or corporation acting under
a franchise, contract, or license from the City or School Committee,
any frank, free pass, free ticket, or free service, or accept, directly or
indirectly, from any such person, firm, or corporation any service upon
terms more favorable than those granted to the public generally.
(c)
Sec. 1 CITY CHARTER Sec. 4
CHA:35
Sec. 4. General meetings of citizens. [Amended 11-8-2016]
General meetings of the citizens qualified to vote in the City affairs may
from time to time be held to consult upon the public good, to instruct their
representatives, and to take all lawful measures to obtain redress of any
grievances according to the right secured to the people by the Constitution
of this State; and such meetings may and shall be duly warned by the
City Council, upon the requisition of 100 qualified voters of said City. A
moderator shall be selected by majority vote of the citizens attending the
meeting.
Sec. 5. Tidal right-of-way.
Any highway, town way, or bridge which has been, or may hereafter be,
located within the City between high and low mark shall nevertheless be
deemed to be legally located and established.
Sec. 6. Revision of Charter. [Amended 11-6-2012]
The Charter may be changed in matters of form and substance only by
a duly elected Charter Revision Commission consisting of nine members
selected as follows: Seven members, one elected from each ward and two
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, who shall
serve in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A, §§ 2101 — 2106, as amended. A
candidate for the Charter Revision Commission shall be a resident of the
City of Biddeford for at least six months prior to the date on/or before which
nomination papers are to be filed. Charter Revision Commission members
may not hold another elected office within the City.
Sec. 7. Referendum guidelines.
All issues decided by referendum shall be binding on the City Council and
not merely advisory.
All referendum questions are to be decided at a general election or special
election called for the purpose of voting on the referendum.
All referendum questions shall be limited to one part questions and be
stated in the affirmative.
Bond issues. No order providing for the issue of bonds pledged on the
credit of the City of Biddeford shall be passed without notice of the
same having been posted in a public place in the City of Biddeford and
published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation in
the City of Biddeford not later than 14 days before final action of the
City Council. No authorization provided for the issue of such bonds
shall take effect until ratified by a majority of the voters voting thereon
at a general or special election. A question seeking voter approval of
the issue of such bonds shall be accompanied by a statement setting
forth estimates of the total cost of such bonds, total interest, total
(a)
Sec. 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 7
CHA:36
Sec. 8. City boards/commissions/committee meetings.
All meetings of the City of Biddeford shall be duly posted on the central
bulletin board of City Hall, at least 24 hours prior to the meeting.
Sec. 9. Residency requirement. [Amended 11-6-2012]
Any and all members of boards, committees and commissions nominated by
the Mayor shall be residents of the City of Biddeford for at least six months
prior to their appointment, and must be domiciled in the City of Biddeford
throughout their term.
Sec. 10. Code of Ethics. [Added 11-8-2016]
The City shall maintain an ordinance (to be adopted within six months)
establishing a Code of Ethics for all elected and appointed City Officials.
length of term and projected effect on the mil rate. Tax anticipation
notes are exempted from this provision.
Citizen initiated referendum.
Groups, organizations or individuals circulating petitions must
clearly indicate at the top of each and every petition sheet who the
group, persons or entity is and the purpose of the petition.
(1)
Fifteen percent of registered voters in the City of Biddeford at the
time of filing of the petition must sign a petition to bring matters to
a referendum.
(2)
A copy of the petition must be registered with the City Clerk at
the commencement of the petition drive. The petitioners will have
30 calendar days from the date of filing to gather signatures. The
petitions must be submitted to the City Clerk by the 30th day.
(3)
All referendum questions are to be decided by a majority vote at a
general election or special election called for the purpose of voting
on the referendum.
(4)
(b)
Sec. 7 CITY CHARTER Sec. 10
CHA:37
Chapter CHCT
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code. [Code 1975, § 1-1]
The ordinances embraced in the following sections and chapters shall
constitute and be designated the "Revised Code of Ordinances, City of
Biddeford, Maine," and may be so cited.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction. [Code 1975, § 1-2]
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and
definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council. The rules
of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to
any section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding
such construction, or where the subject matter of context of such section
may be repugnant thereto.
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained
in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and
meaning of the City Council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation
and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to be
the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of
the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the
general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater
restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
CHARTER — The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of
Biddeford, Maine, printed as Part I of this volume.
CITY — The word "City" shall mean the City of Biddeford, Maine.
CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL — Whenever the words "Council" or "City
Council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Council of the
City of Biddeford, Maine.
CODE — The word "code" shall mean the Revised Code of Ordinances, City
of Biddeford, Maine, printed as Part II of this volume.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — Whenever a notice is required to be given or
an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be
had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall not be
counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to
be held shall be counted.
Sec. 10 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 1-2
CHCT:38
CORPORATE LIMITS or CITY LIMITS — The term "corporate limits" or "City
limits" shall mean the legal boundaries of the City of Biddeford, Maine.
COUNTY — The word "county" shall mean the County of York in the State
of Maine.
GENDER — A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as
to males.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
MAYOR — The word "Mayor" shall mean the Mayor of the City.
MONTH — The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
NONTECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL WORDS — Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood
according to such meaning.
NUMBER — A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
OFFICIALS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS — Whenever reference is made to
officials, boards and commissions by title only, such references shall be
deemed to refer to the officials, boards and commissions of the City of
Biddeford.
PERSON — The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations,
clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well
as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — The term "personal property" includes every
species of property except real property, as defined in this section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — The words "preceding" and "following" mean
next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY — The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements
and hereditaments.
SHALL — The word "shall" is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION — The word "signature" or "subscription"
includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE — The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean
the State of Maine.
STREET — The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets,
avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public
ways in the City, and shall include all areas thereof embraced between the
property lines or dedicated to the public use.
Sec. 1-2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 1-2
CHCT:39
TENANT or OCCUPANT — The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or
with others.
TENSE — Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING — The word "written" or "in writing" shall
be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures,
whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — The word "year" shall mean a calendar year.
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections. [Code 1975, § 1-3]
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-4. References to chapters or sections.
All references in this Code to chapters or sections are to the chapters and
sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.
Sec. 1-5. History notes.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are
not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate
the source of matter contained in the section.
Sec. 1-6. References and editor's notes.
References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are
inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant
to have any legal effect.
Sec. 1-7. Effect of repeal of ordinances. [Code 1975, § 1-6]
When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive
such former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so
expressly provided.
(a)
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed
or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
(b)
Sec. 1-2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 1-8
CHCT:40
Sec. 1-8. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of
the following ordinances when not inconsistent with this Code:
Any ordinance or order promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money for the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City
or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation
assumed by the City;
(1)
(2) Any ordinance or order granting any right or franchise;
Any ordinance or order dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or
public way in the City;
(3)
(4) Any ordinance or order establishing or prescribing grades in the City;
Any ordinance or order providing for local improvements and assessing
taxes therefor;
(5)
Any ordinance or order dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision
in the City;
(6)
Any ordinance or order prescribing specific parking restrictions, no
parking zones, specific speed zones, parking meter zones and specific
stop or yield intersections or other traffic ordinances pertaining to
specific streets;
(7)
Any ordinance or order pertaining to mobile homes and mobile home
parks, zoning, land use, flood prevention and protection, site plans, land
subdivisions and rezoning;
(8)
Any ordinance or order levying a fee or establishing a rate or charge
which is not included in the Code and is on file in the City Clerk's office;
(9)
Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and
permanent nature;
(10)
(11)Any ordinance regarding the cable television system;
(12)Any ordinance regarding general assistance or welfare;
Any ordinance regarding annexations or contracting the boundaries of
the City;
(13)
(14)Any appropriation ordinance;
Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes;
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
Such ordinances are on file in the City Clerk's office.
(15)
Sec. 1-8 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 1-9
CHCT:41
Sec. 1-9. Amendments to Code. [Code 1975, § 1-4]
Sec. 1-10. Supplementation of Code.
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in
such form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make
the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed to
be incorporated in this Code, so that reference to the Code shall be
understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
(a)
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in the Code.
When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division,
section or subsection, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions
may be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted
pages.
(b)
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number
of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____
of the Revised Code of Ordinances, City of Biddeford, Maine, is hereby
amended to read as follows: . . . " The new provisions shall then be set
out in full as desired.
(c)
If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the
following language may be used: "That the Revised Code of Ordinances,
City of Biddeford, Maine, is hereby amended by adding a section to be
numbered _____, which section reads as follows: . . . " The new section
may then be set out in full as desired.
(d)
All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or
chapter number, as the case may be.
(e)
By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City
Council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive
permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code.
The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit
properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which
have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall
be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be
current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in
the supplement.
(a)
In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
(b)
Sec. 1-9 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 1-10
CHCT:42
Sec. 1-11. Unauthorized alteration or tampering with Code. [Code
1975, § 1-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person in the City to change or amend, by
additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or
delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code
in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Sec. 1-12. General penalty for violation of Code; continuing
violations. [Code 1975, § 1-8]
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is prohibited
or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, or whenever in
such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to
do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided
therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $2,500. All fines shall be
recovered on complaint to the use of the City.
Sec. 1-13. Severability of parts of Code. [Code 1975, § 1-7]
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal,
nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them
into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and
other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make
changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(2)
Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to
be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new
material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
(3)
Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning
to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may
be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to
indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(4)
Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but
in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the Code.
(5)
(c)
Sec. 1-10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 1-13
CHCT:43
this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by
the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
Code.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Charter — See Part I of Code.
Aviation administration — See Ch. 14, Art. II
Building Inspector — See Ch. 18, Art. II, Div.
2.
Superintendent of Burials — See Ch. 26, Art.
II, Div. 2.
Air toxics control administration — See Ch.
34, Art. IV, Div. 2.
Fire Prevention Bureau — See Ch. 38, Art. II.
Recreation Commission — See Ch. 46, Art. II.
Recreation Director — See Ch. 46, Art. III.
Personnel — See Ch. 50.
Director of Public Works — See Ch. 62, Art. II.
Wastewater Management Commission — See
Ch. 70, Art. II, Div. 2.
Harbormaster — See Ch. 74, Art. II, Div. 2.
Harbor Commission — See Ch. 74, Art. II, Div.
3.
Rules of City Council — See Appendix A.
Board of Appeals — See Land Development
Regulations, Art. IX.
Planning Board — See Land Development
Regulations, Art. X.
Sec. 1-13 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 1-13
CHCT:44
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Seal. [Code 1975, § 2-1]
The design shown in this section shall be the device of the Seal of the City
of Biddeford, and the inscription in the margin without the inner circle shall
be "City of Biddeford, Maine."
CITY SEAL
Sec. 2-2. Election wards. [Ord. No. 2001.51, 6-5-2001; amended
3-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.15]
In accordance with City Charter, Article III, City Council, Section 1, City to
be divided into wards, the ward boundaries shall be as follows:
WARD 1
Being more particularly bounded, described and shown as Ward __ on a
plan entitled “City of Biddeford, Maine, Official Ward Map, Adopted by
Order of the Biddeford City Council, March 4, 2014,” scale: one inch equals
2,000 feet, prepared by City of Biddeford, Maine Engineering Department-
GIS Division and recorded in the City of Biddeford, Maine Engineering
Department as Plan D-1900.
Sec. 2-3. Code of Ethics. [Added 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.56]
There shall be a Code of Ethics for all elected and appointed officials in and
for the City of Biddeford:
Officials shall view service to the City as an opportunity to serve the
public, state and nation as the best means to promote the City of
Biddeford and its citizens. We are working to make Biddeford the best
place to live, work and do business.
(1)
Officials must maintain a courteous tone, especially in reference to any
divergence of opinion and shall avoid injecting any personal note into
discussions or debate. Officials must never attack or make any allusion
to the motives of another official.
(2)
Officials shall remember at all times that they have no legal authority
within the City outside the scope of their position, and shall conduct
their relationships with the City of Biddeford staff, the local citizenry,
and all media communications in recognition of their authority.
(3)
Officials shall not interfere with the daily administration of City
business.
(4)
Sec. 2-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-3
CHCT:45
Sec. 2-4. through Sec. 2-25. (Reserved)
Officials shall listen to all citizens and shall refer all complaints or
concerns to the proper authorities.
(5)
Officials shall not criticize City employees publicly, but shall make
such comments to the City Manager for investigation and action, if
necessary.
(6)
Officials shall make decisions only after all facts bearing on a question
have been presented and discussed.
(7)
Officials shall not disclose the confidential business of the City to
unauthorized persons.
(8)
No official shall be permitted to vote on any question when his or her
private rights or interests, distinct from public interest, is immediately
involved.
(9)
Officials shall take notice of the date and time that meetings at which
their attendance is expected are scheduled and shall punctually attend
all meetings unless for good cause they are unavailable.
(10)
Sec. 2-3 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-4
CHCT:46
ARTICLE II
CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 2-26. Ordinances, enacting style. [Code 1975, § 2-2]
All ordinances passed by the Council shall be enacted as follows: "Be it
ordained by the City Council of the City of Biddeford, as follows:"
Sec. 2-27. through Sec. 2-45. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-27
CHCT:47

ARTICLE III
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-46. Subordinate officers to be sworn in. [Code 1975, § 2-22]
All subordinate officers of the City, elected or appointed, shall be duly sworn
to the faithful and impartial performance of the duties of their office.
Sec. 2-47. Establishment of City Departments. [Added 5-3-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016.28]
Sec. 2-48. through Sec. 2-55. (Reserved)
Per the City Charter, Article X, Administrative Officers, Sec. 8,
Organizational powers, there shall be the following City Departments:
Assessing
City Clerk/Tax Collection/General Assistance
Code Enforcement/Emergency Management
Economic Development/Planning
Executive
Facilities
Finance
Fire
Human Resources
Police
Public Works/Wastewater
Recreation
Technology
(a)
Unless otherwise stated in the City Charter or other ordinance, the
oversight of the day-to-day activity of City departments shall be with
the City Manager.
(b)
Sec. 2-46 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-48
CHCT:49

DIVISION 2
CITY CLERK
Sec. 2-56. Duty to submit monthly reports; contents; reports to be
on file and available to public. [Code 1975, § 2-51]
Sec. 2-57. through Sec. 2-65. (Reserved)
The City Clerk shall prepare and present to the City Council at its
regular monthly Council meeting a report for the preceding month of
all fees or payments paid to the City Clerk from any source whatsoever,
designating the character of the fees or payments received and the
amounts paid to the City treasury or to the state.
(a)
The monthly report required by this section shall be recorded and kept
on file in the City Clerk's office for a period of three years following the
presentation thereof to the City Council and shall be available for public
examination on demand.
(b)
Sec. 2-56 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-57
CHCT:51

DIVISION 3
CITY SOLICITOR
Sec. 2-66. Qualifications. [Code 1975, § 2-61]
The City Solicitor shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in this state
and a counsellor-at-law of the supreme judicial court of this state.
Sec. 2-67. Duty to prosecute and defend. [Code 1975, § 2-62]
It shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to:
Sec. 2-68. Duty to draft bonds, deeds, other legal instruments.
[Code 1975, § 2-63]
It shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to draft all bonds, deeds, proposed
legislative enactments and other legal instruments of whatever nature
which may be required of him by any ordinance or by order of the Mayor or
Council of the City.
Sec. 2-69. Duty to render opinions generally. [Code 1975, § 2-64]
The City Solicitor shall, when required, furnish the Mayor and Council,
or any committee thereof, or any board and commission established by
ordinance, with his opinion on any legal subject which may be submitted to
him.
Sec. 2-70. Duty to render opinions regarding duties of City officers.
[Code 1975, § 2-65]
The City Solicitor shall render professional advice to any officers of the
City government or any members of any board or commission of the City
who may require his opinion on any subject touching on the duties of their
respective offices.
Sec. 2-71. Duty to pay over moneys to Treasurer. [Code 1975,
§ 2-66]
It shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to account for and pay over to the
Treasurer all moneys received by him for costs in prosecution of any suit.
Commence and prosecute any suit for a breach of the bylaws or
ordinances of the City.
(1)
Commence and prosecute suits by order of the Mayor, in writing, or
by direction of the Council on account of any of the estate, rights,
privileges, claims or demands of the City.
(2)
Defend all actions and suits brought against the City or any officer
thereof wherein any of the estate, rights, privileges, ordinances, orders
or acts of the City or any branch thereof may be brought in question
before any court in this state.
(3)
Sec. 2-66 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-72
CHCT:53
Sec. 2-72. Duty to make annual report; contents; report to be
published. [Code 1975, § 2-67]
The City Solicitor shall, annually before the close of the municipal year,
make a report in writing to the Council of the unfinished business in his
department, including the names, grounds and stages of progress of all
suits pending in which the City is party or is interested with the names
and results of such suits affecting the City as may have been decided or
adjusted during the year and such other information as to the business of
his department as he may think important or the Council may direct. Such
report shall be published with the other annual reports made to the Council.
Sec. 2-73. Compensation; retainer. [Code 1975, § 2-68]
The City Solicitor shall receive for services rendered such sums of money
as approved by the Mayor and Finance Committee on bills submitted and a
retainer in such sum as the City Council shall determine.
Sec. 2-74. Engaging additional legal counsel authorized. [Code
1975, § 2-5]
When in the opinion of the City Council it becomes necessary to have the
aid of legal counsel in addition to the City Solicitor, such counsel may be
engaged at the expense of the City.
Sec. 2-75. through Sec. 2-85. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-72 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-75
CHCT:54
DIVISION 4
CITY ENGINEER
Sec. 2-86. Qualifications. [Code 1975, § 2-69]
The City Engineer shall be an Engineer duly registered and authorized to
practice engineering in the state.
Sec. 2-87. Nomination. [Code 1975, § 2-70; Ord. No. 99.69,
8-17-1999; amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41]
The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Director of Public Works,
subject to approval by the City Manager.
Sec. 2-88. Duties. [Code 1975, § 2-71; Ord. No. 99.69, 8-17-1999]
The City Engineer:
Sec. 2-89. through Sec. 2-100. (Reserved)
Reviews, designs, prepares plans and specifications and estimates for
construction projects including streets, sidewalks, sewers, bridges,
curbs, gutters, park improvements and public buildings as prepared by
the Engineering Division or by outside consultants or Engineers.
(1)
Performs and supervises field engineering and survey work, planning
location and construction of a variety of public works projects including
sanitary and storm sewers, street systems and City buildings.
(2)
Supervises the work of a survey party in investigations of sewer, street
and public works projects, and any other project.
(3)
Advises the Director of Public Works on all Engineering Division
activities and confers with all Council committees and subcommittees
on those items requiring his input and further confers with
subordinates during the development and progress of various
engineering projects. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41]
(4)
(5) Prepares the budgetary expenditures of the Engineering Department.
Together with the Director of Public Works, conducts inspections of
subdivisions and accessibility of certain properties as required by the
governing ordinance of the Revised Code of Ordinances, or the building
inspector, being Chapter 66, subdivision ordinance or Section 18-63,
building ordinance.
(6)
Performs other technical and engineering tasks as directed by the
Director of Public Works. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41]
(7)
Sec. 2-86 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-89
CHCT:55

DIVISION 5
CITY AUDITOR
Sec. 2-101. Duties, responsibilities generally. [Code 1975, § 2-166]
The City Auditor shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
Sec. 2-102. Duty to keep account of City property, debts and
obligations. [Code 1975, § 2-167]
The City Auditor shall keep accounts of all property belonging to the City
and all debts and obligations due to and from the City.
Sec. 2-103. Duty to direct, supervise manner of keeping books,
accounts; duty to keep books; contents of books. [Code 1975,
§ 2-168]
Sec. 2-104. Duty to submit annual financial reports; contents of
report. [Code 1975, § 2-169]
Sec. 2-105. Duty to submit monthly statement; contents of
statement. [Code 1975, § 2-170]
Prepare all purchase orders in quadruplicate from the requisitions
submitted to him by the heads of departments and present such
purchase orders to the Finance Committee for approval.
(1)
(2) Keep proper records of all authorized purchases.
(3) Have custody of all requisition slips, vouchers, manifests and warrants.
The City Auditor shall direct and supervise the manner of keeping the
books and accounts of the City.
(a)
The City Auditor shall, in a neat and methodical style, keep a complete
set of books setting forth the municipal assets, liabilities and
expenditures and the various appropriations made by the Council, each
under its appropriate head, and charge to each the expenditures and
payments that from time to time may be made by the City Treasurer.
(b)
Annually on the last day of the fiscal year, the City Auditor shall prepare
and submit to the Council a report of all financial transactions for the
fiscal year.
(a)
The annual report required by this section shall contain a detailed
statement of all credits to any account or appropriation, and all
payments or charges to any such appropriation or other fund of the City
or its departments.
(b)
The City Auditor shall, at the first Council meeting of each month,
present to the Council a statement of all revenues and expenses of the
City for the preceding month.
(a)
Sec. 2-101 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-105
CHCT:57
Sec. 2-106. Clerk of Finance Committee. [Code 1975, § 2-173]
The City Auditor shall be the Clerk of the Finance Committee.
Sec. 2-107. through Sec. 2-115. (Reserved)
The statement required by this section shall show the condition of all
accounts and appropriations, and such other financial information as
the Council may direct.
(b)
Sec. 2-105 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-107
CHCT:58
DIVISION 6
CITY TREASURER
Sec. 2-116. Bond required; conditions. [Code 1975, § 2-186]
The Treasurer of the City shall give bond to the City in the amount of not
less than $50,000, with sufficient sureties, to the satisfaction of the Mayor
and Council, that he will faithfully perform the duties of his office, and
justly and truly account for any pay over to his successor, and any other
persons authorized to receive the same, all money in his hands, possession
or control and all books, papers, vouchers and other property belonging to
the City.
Sec. 2-117. Duties and responsibilities. [Code 1975, §§ 2-187 —
2-191]
Sec. 2-118. Procedural policy for disposition of foreclosed property.
[Ord. of 10-18-1994, §§ 22-8—22-16]
The City Treasurer shall receive all fines and penalties accruing to the
City and account for the same.
(a)
The City Treasurer shall have the care and custody of all trust funds of
Woodlawn Cemetery.
(b)
The City Treasurer shall, in a neat and methodical style and manner,
keep a complete set of books containing among other things the various
appropriations made by the Council, each under its appropriate head,
and charge to each the expenditures and payments that from time to
time may be made therefrom.
(c)
The City Treasurer shall cause all books, papers, vouchers, documents
and bills belonging to the City and under his care to be deposited and
kept in a fireproof vault, or such as may be approved by the Mayor and
Council, belonging to the City.
(d)
The City Treasurer shall make up his accounts annually on or before
December 31 and report the same to the Council.
(e)
Generally. The City Treasurer shall annually prepare Council orders for
adoption at a City Council meeting that authorize the City of Biddeford
to hold or dispose of all tax titles acquired by tax lien foreclosure or
sewer lien foreclosure and that allow the City Council authority to
waive foreclosure.
(a)
Sec. 2-116 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-118
CHCT:59
The City Treasurer has the authority to waive foreclosure of any tax
lien, said waiver requiring approval of the City Council. The City
Council shall grant said approval only in circumstances where
foreclosures would prove injurious to the City of Biddeford, such as,
but not limited to, the presence on the property of one or more
substandard structure(s), hazardous materials or other situations for
which the cost of acquiring or holding the property would exceed the
value of holding the property.
The City Council will then make one of the following decisions for each
acquired property:
To hold the property for the purpose of allowing the immediate
former owner or their immediate heirs, one generation, to buy back
title to the property from the City.
(1)
(2) To dispose of the property by public sealed bid auction.
To dispose of the property by conducting a limited public sale
among the parties who own property which directly abut this
property.
(3)
To hold City title to the property.
The decision of the City Council to use any of the above options
shall adhere to the City Council procedural policy for the
disposition of foreclosed property.
(4)
City Treasurer to prepare annual notice. The City Treasurer shall
annually prepare notices identifying all property acquired by automatic
tax lien foreclosure and shall provide the City Council, Mayor, Tax
Assessor, City Clerk, Tax Collector and Planning Department a copy of
this notice. This notice shall be provided within one month of the date of
foreclosure. The sale procedure is to be applied to all sewer accounts.
(b)
City Assessor to provide information. The City Assessor shall provide
the following information for all tax lien foreclosure property to the
City Council and Planning Department within two weeks of receiving
the notice prepared by the City Treasurer: map and lot number of the
parcel, a map identifying location of the parcel, and a photocopy of the
tax card of record.
(c)
Analysis of property; review by City Attorney.
Planning department to conduct an analysis of property. The
Planning Department shall conduct an analysis of all property
acquired by tax lien foreclosure and identifying potential and
preferred uses of each parcel. The analysis shall consider potential
short- and long-term public uses of the property and will result in
a recommendation to the City Manager regarding the retention or
disposition of the property. The Planning Department shall consult
with the Mayor, appropriate City departments, and appropriate
(1)
(d)
Sec. 2-118 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-118
CHCT:60
City committees in conducting this analysis. The Planning
Department analysis and recommendation shall be completed
within four months of the receipt of information supplied by the Tax
Assessor.
Review by City Attorney. The City Attorney, concurrent with the
Planning Department analysis, may review and determine, if
requested by the Planning Department, the City's position and cost
to acquiring "quiet title" of selected properties identified on the
City Treasurer's annual notice list. The review shall be limited to
those selected parcels which the City may want to retain ownership
of, and will be done to make information available to the City
Council regarding the cost and potential concerns involved with
obtaining "quiet title."
(2)
Planning department to provide notice of analysis. The Planning
Department shall provide notice of commencing its analysis by
using the following methods: post notice in City hall; publish this
notice in a newspaper with local circulation; send notice by
certified registered return receipt letter to the former immediate
property owner(s) and mortgage holder(s); and send this notice
to the water district. The notice shall identify the purpose of this
analysis, a schedule to complete the analysis and the opportunity
for the taxpayer to potentially reclaim his property by paying all
taxes and costs owed and satisfying all conditions established by
the City Council.
(3)
City Manager to review. The City Manager shall review the analysis
and recommendation prepared by the Planning Department and
information regarding determination of title which City Attorney may
provide and recommend a specification for each property to the Mayor
and City Council.
(e)
Standards to be used by the City Treasurer. The City Treasurer shall
use the following standards to govern the disposition of a tax lien
acquired parcel by the method of allowing the immediate former owner
or their immediate heirs, one generation to buy back the property:
The former owner shall pay all taxes, interest due on said taxes,
lien costs and filing costs, for all years which taxes are outstanding;
(current tax included). The same procedure is to be applied to all
sewer accounts.
(1)
(2) The former owner shall pay all other costs due.
The former owner may be required to pay an administrative fee
based on the City's direct and indirect costs for redeeming the
property. These costs may include, but are not limited to, staff time
spent researching the property and developing conditions, if any,
mailing expenses and third party expenses.
(3)
(f)
Sec. 2-118 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-118
CHCT:61
The former owner shall satisfy all other conditions established
by the City Treasurer. By way of example only, these conditions
may be the need to eliminate a nonconforming use, to connect a
property to public services, or to eliminate a hazardous condition.
If a redemption occurs within six months of foreclosure, only
conditions that correct or eliminate a hazardous situation or
nonconforming use can be required.
(4)
The City Treasurer shall issue only a quit claim deed to convey title
to tax-acquired property which a former owner buys back.
(5)
Procedure for disposal of property by public and sealed bid. The City
Council, acting at a regular meeting, shall act to use the following
standards to govern the disposition of a tax lien acquired property by
the method of disposal by public sealed bid. The same procedure is to
be applied to all sewer accounts:
The City Council shall direct the City Treasurer to solicit public
bids for the disposal of the property. Public notice of the bid
procedure shall be provided as follows: post notice in City hall a
minimum of 14 days prior to the sale; publish notice in at least two
newspapers of local circulation a minimum of 14 days prior to the
sale; and sending notice by certified registered return receipt letter
to the former owner(s) and mortgage holder(s) a minimum of 45
days prior to the sale. The notice shall describe the time, date and
place of the public sale, and all bid terms.
(1)
An immediate former owner or their immediate heirs, one
generation, may buy back the property within 45 days following
notification, provided all costs and conditions which may be
established by the City Council are satisfied.
(2)
The City Treasurer shall open and act upon all bids received. The
City Treasurer shall ensure the bidder has the ability to satisfy all
bid conditions within 60 calendar days. The City Treasurer shall
reserve the right to accept or reject any and all bids submitted and
to act in the best interest of the City.
(3)
The City Treasurer shall issue a quit claim deed to convey title
to any property which is disposed of by public sealed bid auction,
unless the City Council specifically acts to "quiet title" prior to the
public notice of the sale.
(4)
(g)
Abutting property owners. The City Council, voting at a regular
meeting, shall act to use the following standards to govern the
disposition of a tax lien acquired property by the method of conducting
a limited public sale among parties who directly abut this property.
This limited method of sale is primarily used to address public concerns
which may be harmed if the property were made available for sale to all
members of the public. By way of example only, harm to public concerns
could include: a lot which does not conform to present minimum lot size
standards, where this situation could be addressed by requiring merger
(h)
Sec. 2-118 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-118
CHCT:62
with abutting property(ies); the abutting lots are nonconforming in size
and the addition of this land could make one or more abutting lots
conforming; or the soils on the lot are too poor for on-site septage
disposal.
The City Treasurer shall provide notice of the limited sale to
abutters by certified registered return receipt letter a minimum of
45 days prior to the sale to all parties who directly abut the parcel.
The notice shall describe the time, date, and place of sale and the
bid terms.
(1)
An immediate former owner or their immediate heirs, one
generation, may buy back the property within 45 days following
notification, provided all costs and conditions which may be
established by the City Council are satisfied.
(2)
The City Treasurer shall open and act upon all bids received. The
City Treasurer shall ensure the bidder has the ability to satisfy all
bid conditions within 60 calendar days. The City Treasurer shall
reserve the right to accept or reject any and all bids submitted
and to act in the best interests of the City. The City Treasurer
specifically has the authority to accept bids from more than one
abutter and to permit each abutter to purchase only a portion of
the property, provided this property is merged with the bidders'
property.
(3)
The City Treasurer shall issue a quit claim deed to convey title to
any property which is disposed of by public sealed bid auction to
abutters, unless the City Council specifically acts to "quiet title"
prior to the public notice of the sale.
(4)
City Council decision to retain lien property(ies). The City Council,
voting at a regular meeting, shall use the following standards to govern
a decision to hold City title to a property. A City Council decision to
retain City title to a property will mostly reflect a determination that the
public interest would best be served by keeping this property in public
ownership. By way of example only, a compelling public interest may
include: the use of the property to serve as a site for a public facility; a
significant natural resource, such as a wetland, which could be harmed
if this property is developed; and providing needed open space.
The City Council will consult with City Attorney to determine
potential need to obtain "quiet title" to the property. "Quiet title"
will usually be pursued only when the City desires to use the
property for a specific public purpose, such as a site for a public
building.
(1)
Property retained by the City shall be recorded as City-owned
land by the Assessor's office following its acceptance by the City
Council.
(2)
(i)
Sec. 2-118 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-119
CHCT:63
Sec. 2-119. through Sec. 2-150. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-119 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-119
CHCT:64
ARTICLE IV
BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-151. Roberts Rules of Order. [Ord. No. 2002.116,
11-16-2002]
All committee meetings will be conducted under Roberts Rules of Order.
Sec. 2-152. Internet access by members during public meetings.
[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.48]
Access to the Internet shall be available for use by any person who serves
as a duly appointed member of a City board, committee or commission in
the course of conducting its business during public meetings held in the
Chambers of the City Council.
Sec. 2-153. through Sec. 2-160. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-151 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-153
CHCT:65

DIVISION 2
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT STAFF
Sec. 2-161. Organization created; membership. [Code 1975, § 2-81;
amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.26]
Sec. 2-162. Director nominated; duties generally. [Code 1975,
§ 2-82; amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.26]
The Mayor shall nominate for approval by the City Council, a Director of
Emergency Management who shall report to the Emergency Management
Staff and have direct responsibility for the preparation and maintenance of
a current disaster emergency plan for the City of Biddeford. This plan must
include, without limitation:
Sec. 2-163. Duties of organization. [Code 1975, § 2-83; amended
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.26]
The City of Biddeford Emergency Management Staff shall, through its
Director, perform emergency preparedness and public safety functions
within the City and, in addition, shall conduct such functions outside the
City as may be required in case of mutual aid arrangements.
The Biddeford Emergency Management Staff is hereby established for
emergency management and public safety in accordance with the state
disaster emergency preparedness plan and program.
(a)
The Emergency Management Staff shall include the following
department heads, or designee: City Manager, Fire Chief, Police Chief,
Director of Public Works, the Superintendent of Schools, Health Officer,
Facilities Manager, and the Codes Enforcement Officer.
(b)
Identification of disasters. Identification of disasters to which the City
of Biddeford may be vulnerable, specifically indicating the areas most
likely to be affected;
(1)
Action to minimize damage. Identification of the procedures and
operations which will be necessary to prevent or minimize injury and
damage in the event those disasters occur;
(2)
Personnel, equipment and supplies. Identification of the personnel,
equipment and supplies required to implement those procedures and
operations and the means by which their timely availability will be
assured;
(3)
Recommendations. Recommendations to appropriate public and private
agencies of all preventive measures found reasonable in light of risk
and cost; and
(4)
(5) Other. Other elements required by Staff rule.
Sec. 2-161 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-164
CHCT:67
Sec. 2-164. Mutual aid arrangements. [Code 1975, § 2-84; amended
4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.26]
The local Emergency Management Director, in collaboration with other
public and private agencies of the state, shall develop mutual aid
arrangements for reciprocal emergency preparedness and public safety aid
and assistance in case of disaster too great to be dealt with unassisted.
Such arrangements shall be consistent with the state civil emergency
preparedness and public safety plan and program.
Sec. 2-165. City departments to cooperate. [Code 1975, § 2-85;
amended 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.26]
The officers and personnel of all City departments are directed to cooperate
with and extend their services and facilities, to every reasonable extent, to
the Director of the Emergency Management Staff upon request.
Sec. 2-166. through Sec. 2-175. (Reserved)5
5. Editor’s Note: Former Section 2-166, Unlawful to disregard civil emergency preparedness
test, police orders during tests; penalty, was repealed 4-6-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.26.
Sec. 2-164 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-166
CHCT:68
DIVISION 3
COMMISSION ON ECONOMIC IMPROVEMENT
Sec. 2-176. Established. [Code 1975, § 2-99]
The Biddeford Commission on Economic Improvement is hereby
established.
Sec. 2-177. "Commission" defined. [Code 1975, § 2-97]
Unless otherwise indicated, the term "Commission," as used in this division,
shall mean the Biddeford Commission on Economic Improvement.
Sec. 2-178. Composition; appointment of Commissioners; terms of
office. [Code 1975, § 2-100; Ord. No. 99.69, 8-17-1999]
Sec. 2-179. Filling of vacancies. [Code 1975, § 2-101]
Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the remainder of the term in
the same manner as original appointments are made.
Sec. 2-180. Quorum. [Code 1975, § 2-102]
Four Commissioners shall constitute a quorum.
Sec. 2-181. Functions and purposes. [Code 1975, § 2-98]
The functions and purposes of the Commission shall be as follows:
The Commission shall consist of seven members referred to in this
division as “Commissioners." Such Commissioners shall be nominated
by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council.
(a)
(b) Commissioners shall serve for seven-year terms.
To encourage and promote the expansion and development of existing
industrial and commercial firms and to promote and encourage the
location of new industrial and commercial firms in the City;
(1)
To establish and maintain files of data and information of interest and
assistance for area publicity and recreational development;
(2)
To serve as secretariat and coordinator for such boards as shall be
established from time to time to study matters relating to sewers,
transportation, traffic control, etc.;
(3)
To gather, correlate and preserve in usable form such records,
statistics, surveys and other data relating to land classifications and
uses, buildings, labor and statistics and such other matters that will
enable it to carry out its functions and purposes; and
(4)
To perform such other functions as may be required for economic
development.
(5)
Sec. 2-176 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-182
CHCT:69
Sec. 2-182. Required vote. [Code 1975, § 2-103]
The Commission shall act by majority vote of those present and voting,
except that an absolute majority of three shall be required for actions taken
under Section 2-189.
Sec. 2-183. Annual election of Chairman. [Code 1975, § 2-104]
The Commission shall hold a meeting at the beginning of each fiscal year
for the purpose of electing a Chairman.
Sec. 2-184. Management of Commission. [Code 1975, § 2-105]
The management of the Commission shall be vested in the Commissioners
appointed and confirmed in accordance with Section 2-178.
Sec. 2-185. Nomination of director. [Code 1975, § 2-106]
On the day designated in the Charter, the Mayor shall, upon the
recommendation of the Commission, nominate a Director of the
Commission, who shall be subject to the confirmation of the City Council.
Sec. 2-186. Director to perform assigned duties. [Code 1975,
§ 2-107]
The Director of the Commission shall carry out such duties as the
Commission may assign.
Sec. 2-187. Director to supervise Commission's activities. [Code
1975, § 2-108]
The day-to-day operation and administration of the Commission shall be
under the supervision of a Director.
Sec. 2-188. Director to submit budget, reports. [Code 1975,
§ 2-109]
Annually, the Director of the Commission shall, on or before January 1 of
each year, submit a budget for the ensuing year and submit reports as
requested to the Commission and Council.
Sec. 2-189. Director, Chairman to execute contracts and
agreements. [Code 1975, § 2-110]
All contracts, agreements and other matters entered into under the
authority contained in this division shall be executed by the Director and
Chairman of the Commission.
Sec. 2-182 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-190
CHCT:70
Sec. 2-190. Authority to establish subcommittees. [Code 1975,
§ 2-111]
The Commission may, from time to time, establish subcommittees composed
of such persons as the Commission shall desire to provide advice and
counsel on various subjects.
Sec. 2-191. Authority of Council to assign powers, duties to
Commission. [Code 1975, § 2-112]
The City Council may assign such additional powers and duties to the
Commission as it deems necessary.
Sec. 2-192. Council authorized to designate Commission as agent
for City. [Code 1975, § 2-113]
The City Council may, from time to time, designate the Commission to serve
as agent for the City in matters relating to the federal government, the
state, other cities and towns, persons or corporations.
Sec. 2-193. Expenditures. [Code 1975, § 2-114]
No expenditure of any funds pursuant to this division shall be made without
the prior approval of the Finance Committee.
Sec. 2-194. through Sec. 2-205. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-190 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-194
CHCT:71

DIVISION 4
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
Sec. 2-206. Created. [Code 1975, § 2-125]
A conservation commission for the City is hereby created.
Sec. 2-207. Composition; appointment of Commissioners; terms of
office. [Code 1975, § 2-126; Ord. No. 99.69, 8-17-1999]
Sec. 2-208. Filling of vacancies. [Code 1975, § 2-127]
Vacancies on the Conservation Commission shall be filled for the remainder
of the term in the same manner as original appointments are made.
Sec. 2-209. Quorum at meetings. [Code 1975, § 2-128]
A quorum shall be necessary at all meetings of the Conservation
Commission.
Sec. 2-210. Election of officers. [Code 1975, § 2-129; amended
11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.70]
Annually at its first meeting, the Conservation Commission shall elect a
Chair, a Vice Chair and a Secretary.
Sec. 2-211. Chair to call meetings and preside. [Code 1975, § 2-130;
amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.70]
The Chair of the Conservation Commission shall call all Commission
meetings on three days' notice, unless waived, and shall preside at such
meetings.
Sec. 2-212. Vice Chair's power in absence of Chair. [Code 1975,
§ 2-132; amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.70]
The Vice Chair of the Conservation Commission shall be vested with all the
powers of the Chair in case of the Chair's absence or incapacity to serve.
The Conservation Commission shall consist of seven members referred
to in this division as "Commissioners." Such Commissioners shall be
nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. [Amended
11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.70]
(a)
(b) The Commissioners shall serve for five-year terms.
The Commission may recommend to the municipal officers that
associate members be appointed to assist the Commission as the
Commission requires. Associate members are nonvoting members.
Their terms of office shall be for one, two or three years. [Added
11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.70]
(c)
Sec. 2-206 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-213
CHCT:73
Sec. 2-213. Majority vote required. [Code 1975, § 2-131]
A majority vote of the Commissioners on the Conservation Commission is
required to decide upon any matter before the Commission.
Sec. 2-214. Secretary's duties. [Code 1975, § 2-133]
The Secretary of the Conservation Commission shall record all proceedings
of the Commission and shall give notice of all Commission meetings.
Sec. 2-215. Administration of Commission. [Code 1975, § 2-134]
The Conservation Commission shall be administered by the Conservation
Commissioners appointed and confirmed pursuant to Section 2-207.
Sec. 2-216. Authority to establish committees; membership
restricted. [Code 1975, § 2-135]
The Conservation Commission may, from time to time, establish such
committees as it feels necessary. The members of such committees shall not
be Commissioners on the Conservation Commission.
Sec. 2-217. Duty to conduct research, coordinate conservation
activities. [Code 1975, § 2-136]
The Conservation Commission shall conduct research in conjunction with
the Planning Board into the local land areas and shall seek to coordinate the
activities of Conservation bodies organized for similar purposes.
Sec. 2-218. Authority to advertise, print, distribute books, maps,
plans and pamphlets. [Code 1975, § 2-137]
The Conservation Commission may advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems
necessary.
Sec. 2-219. Index of open areas and working landscapes; purpose.
[Code 1975, § 2-138; amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.70]
The Conservation Commission, or committee thereof, shall keep an index
of all open areas, publically or privately owned, within the municipality,
including farm and forest land, open marshlands, swamps, vernal pools,
other wetlands and water bodies, wildlife habitats, especially large
unfragmented blocks, for the purpose of obtaining information pertinent to
proper utilization, protection, development or use of such open areas, and
may recommend to the City Council or any body politic or public agency
of the state a program for the better utilization, protection, development
or use of such areas, which should include perpetual protection through
conservation easements.
Sec. 2-213 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-220
CHCT:74
Sec. 2-220. To work in advisory capacity. [Code 1975, § 2-139;
amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.70]
The Conservation Commission shall work in an advisory capacity to the City
Council and the Planning Board.
Sec. 2-221. through Sec. 2-230. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-220 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-221
CHCT:75

DIVISION 5
(RESERVED)6
Sec. 2-231. through Sec. 2-250. (Reserved)
6. Editor's Note: Former Division 5, which contained provisions on the Community
Development Commission, was repealed 7-16-2002 by Ord. No. 2002.63.
Sec. 2-231 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-231
CHCT:77

DIVISION 6
DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
Sec. 2-251. Established. [Code 1975, § 2-212]
The Biddeford Downtown Development Commission is hereby established.
Sec. 2-252. "Commission" defined. [Code 1975, § 2-210]
Unless otherwise indicated, the term "Commission," as used in this division,
shall mean the Biddeford Downtown Development Commission.
Sec. 2-253. Composition; appointment of Commissioners; terms of
office; removal of members. [Code 1975, § 2-213; Ord. No. 99.69,
8-17-1999; amended 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.13]
Sec. 2-254. Functions and purposes. [Code 1975, § 2-211; amended
3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.13]
It shall be the function of the Downtown Development Commission to:
The Commission shall consist of 9 members, referred to in this division
as "Commissioners." Such Commissioners shall be nominated by the
Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. [Amended 3-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017.21]
(a)
Commissioners shall serve for three-year terms. The terms of each
Commissioner shall be staggered so that no more than four
Commissioners' terms shall expire in the same year. Any Commissioner
appointed to fill a vacancy for which more than half of the unexpired
term remains shall be deemed to have served one full term.
(b)
A Commissioner shall automatically be removed from office in the event
that he or she no longer is a resident of the City of Biddeford or is
absent for three consecutive regular meetings without being excused
by the Chair.
(c)
Encourage and promote the expansion and development of existing
commercial firms downtown and to promote and encourage the location
of new commercial firms downtown.
(1)
Through the Economic Development Office, establish and maintain
files of data and information of interest and assistance for downtown
publicity and marketing.
(2)
Review downtown ordinances and recommend revisions to the Policy
Committee.
(3)
Serve as coordinator for such boards, merchant groups, commissions
and City departments as shall be established from time to time to
study matters relating to downtown parking, traffic circulation, historic
districts, land use, public utilities, landscape, streetscape and a
(4)
Sec. 2-251 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-254
CHCT:79
Sec. 2-255. Filling of vacancies. [Code 1975, § 2-214]
Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled for the remainder of the term in
the same manner as original appointments are made.
Sec. 2-256. Quorum. [Code 1975, § 2-215; amended 3-21-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013.13]
Seven Commissioners shall constitute a quorum.
Sec. 2-257. Required vote. [Code 1975, § 2-216; amended 3-21-2013
by Ord. No. 2013.13]
The Commission shall act by majority vote of those present and voting. The
Commission by majority vote may permit a Commissioner to participate and
vote in a meeting by conference call, video streaming or similar means of
remote access.
Sec. 2-258. Annual election of Chairman. [Code 1975, § 2-217;
amended 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.13]
The Commission shall hold a meeting at the beginning of each calendar year
for the purpose of electing a Chair. The Chair shall not vote except to break
a tie.
Sec. 2-259. Management of Commission. [Code 1975, § 2-218;
amended 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.13]
The management of the Commission shall be vested in the Commissioners
appointed and confirmed in accordance with Section 2-253. The
Commission shall be staffed by the Economic Development Director or
designee.
Sec. 2-260. through Sec. 2-261. (Reserved)7
downtown comprehensive plan; hold downtown promotions and events;
and promote and implement downtown beautification and cleanup
projects.
Work with the Economic Development Office to gather, correlate and
preserve records, statistics, surveys and other data relating to
downtown land classifications and uses, buildings, commercial firms,
labor, and such matters that will enable it to carry out its functions and
purposes.
(5)
Perform such other functions as may be required or delegated by the
Mayor and City Council.
(6)
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-260, Nomination of Director, as amended, and former
Section 2-261, Director to perform assigned duties, were repealed 3-21-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.13.
Sec. 2-254 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-262
CHCT:80
Sec. 2-262. Director to supervise Commission activities. [Code
1975, § 2-221]
The day-to-day operation and administration of the Commission shall be
under the supervision of a Director.
Sec. 2-263. Chair to submit budget, reports. [Code 1975, § 2-222;
amended 3-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.13]
Annually, the Commission Chair shall, on or before January 1 of each year,
submit a budget for the ensuing year and submit reports as requested to the
Commission and Council.
Sec. 2-264. Director, Chairman to execute contracts and
agreements. [Code 1975, § 2-223]
All contracts, agreements and other matters entered into under the
authority contained in this division shall be executed by the Director and
Chairman of the Commission with Mayor and Council approval.
Sec. 2-265. Authority to establish subcommittees. [Code 1975,
§ 2-224]
The Commission may from time to time establish subcommittees composed
of such persons as the Commission shall desire to provide advice and
counsel on downtown matters.
Sec. 2-266. Authority of Council to assign powers, duties. [Code
1975, § 2-225]
The Council may assign additional powers and duties to the Commission as
it deems necessary.
Sec. 2-267. Designation as agent for City. [Code 1975, § 2-226]
The Council may from time to time designate the Commission to serve as
agent for the City in matters relating to the federal government, the state,
other cities and towns, persons or corporations.
Sec. 2-268. Expenditures. [Code 1975, § 2-227; amended 3-21-2013
by Ord. No. 2013.13]
All Commission expenditures shall comply with the City procurement
policies established in the City Code of Ordinances, Procurement, Sec.
2-331 et seq.
Sec. 2-269. through Sec. 2-280. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-262 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-269
CHCT:81

DIVISION 7
(RESERVED)8
Sec. 2-281. through Sec. 2-295. (Reserved)
8. Editor's Note: Former Division 7, Cultural Affairs Commission, adopted 11-19-1991, as
amended, was repealed 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.103.
Sec. 2-281 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-281
CHCT:83

DIVISION 8
BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW
Sec. 2-296. Adopted. [Code 1975, § 22-33]
Pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 843, a Board of Assessment Review is hereby
established.
Sec. 2-297. Composition. [Code 1975, § 22-34]
The Board of Assessment Review shall consist of five members.
Sec. 2-298. Appointment of members. [Code 1975, § 22-35; Ord. No.
99.69, 8-17-1999]
The members of the Board of Assessment Review shall, subject to
confirmation by the Council, be nominated by the Mayor.
Sec. 2-299. Terms of office of members. [Code 1975, § 22-36]
The terms of office of members of the Board of Assessment Review shall
not exceed five years and no more than two members' terms of office shall
expire in a single year.
Sec. 2-300. Compensation. [Code 1975, § 22-37]
The members of the Board of Assessment Review shall receive such
compensation as determined and approved by the City Council.
Sec. 2-301. Duty to review tax appeals. [Code 1975, § 22-38]
It shall be the duty of the Board of Assessment Review to review appeals
duly filed in writing by taxpayers regarding any tax assessment made by the
Tax Assessor.
Sec. 2-302. Authority to review tax assessments. [Code 1975,
§ 22-39]
Any member of the Board of Assessment Review shall have authority to
initiate an appeal in writing for review of any tax assessment made by the
Tax Assessor which he deems to merit review.
Sec. 2-303. Political activities of members restricted. [Code 1975,
§ 22-40]
The members of the Board of Assessment Review shall not indulge in City
political activity as defined and understood under the Hatch Act.
Sec. 2-304. through Sec. 2-305. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-296 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-304
CHCT:85

DIVISION 9
RECREATION COMMISSION9
[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.3]
Sec. 2-306. Established; membership; meetings.
Sec. 2-307. Functions and purposes.
The functions and purposes of the Recreation Commission shall be as
follows:
There is hereby established in the City a Recreation Commission. The
Recreation Commission shall have seven members, who shall serve for
five-year terms.
(a)
The Recreation Commission shall hold an annual meeting for the
purpose of electing a Chairman and thereafter shall meet monthly at
the time and place as set by the Commission.
(b)
Appointments to the Recreation Commission shall be made by the
Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
(c)
Vacancies on the Recreation Commission shall be filled for the
remainder of the term in the same manner as for original appointments.
(d)
The Recreation Commission shall act by majority vote of those present
and voting, except that an absolute majority of three shall be required
for actions taken under Section 2-308(a).
(e)
To manage and promote the City's existing recreational facilities and
services, to include the J. Richard Martin Community Center, and to
plan, promote and encourage new recreational facilities and services.
(1)
To establish and maintain files of data, and information of interest and
assistance for area publicity and recreational development.
(2)
To serve as coordinator for such boards that may be established from
time to time to study matters relating to school recreation programs
and facilities, state and federal recreational programs and facilities.
(3)
To oversee that the Director is to gather, correlate, and preserve in
usable form, records, statistics, survey and other data relating to
recreational programs and facilities and other matters that will enable
it to carry out its functions and purposes.
(4)
To perform such other functions as may be required by the City Council
for recreational development.
(5)
9. Editor's Note: Former Division 9, Coastal Area Committee, was removed from the Code
pursuant to Ord. No. 2011.38, adopted 9-20-2011, which ordinance disbanded the Coastal
Area Committee.
Sec. 2-306 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-307
CHCT:87
Sec. 2-308. Designation as City's agent; other duties.
Sec. 2-309. Sponsorship and advertising.
The purpose of this section is to aid in the creation of revenue to support
recreation programs and facilities.
To review all applicants and/or tenants, subject to approval of the City
Council.
(6)
To recommend all major repairs, subject to review by the Capital
Projects/Operations Committee.
(7)
The Mayor and City Council may from time to time designate the
Recreation Commission to serve as agent or authorized representative
for the City in matters relating recreational facilities to the federal
government, the state, other cities and towns, persons or corporations.
All contracts, agreements and other matters entered into under the
authority contained in this article shall be executed by the Director and
Chairman. No expenditure of any funds, however, will be made without
the prior approval of the Finance Committee and City Council.
(a)
Notwithstanding the provisions of the City's Code of Ordinances
Section 62-83, Naming of streets, the Commission may designate and
identify the trails and access roads within any of the City parks, by
name or other numbering system, after consultation with the
Recreation Director and the approval of the City's 9-1-1 addressing
officer.
(b)
The Mayor and City Council may assign other powers and duties to the
Recreation Commission as it deems best.
(c)
Make available to the public an opportunity to advertise in, but not
limited to the following areas:
a. Banners displayed in parks and athletic facilities.
b. Publications.
c. Media.
d. Sponsorship of special events and teams.
(1)
Inappropriate marketing activities are deemed but not limited to:
a. Any activity that is prohibited by law or City ordinance.
Any activity that may be offensive to prevailing community
standards.
b.
Any activity that promotes a social, religious or political
organization or position.
c.
(2)
Sec. 2-307 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-309
CHCT:88
Sec. 2-310. through Sec. 2-311. (Reserved)
Any activity that creates a conflicting message with the Recreation
Department.
d.
e. Any activity that promotes negative behavior or values.
Any activity that is inconsistent with promoting a drug-, tobaccoand
alcohol-free environment.
f.
Usage of collected funds is to support the activity or facility for which
they are intended. (Example: a banner at St. Louis Field would help
fund the upkeep, capital projects and repair of that facility.)
(3)
The Recreation Commission will review and approve marketing
activities.
(4)
Sec. 2-309 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-310
CHCT:89

DIVISION 10
PROJECT CANOPY COMMITTEE
Sec. 2-312. Membership; appointments; term; compensation. [Ord.
No. 2008.91, 12-2-2008; amended 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.26]
The Project Canopy Committee, consisting of seven members, shall be
nominated by the Mayor, confirmed by the City Council and shall serve for
staggered five-year terms.
The Committee membership serves without compensation.
The Committee shall annually elect one of its members as Chair.
The Committee shall meet on the call of the Chair at such place and time
designated by vote of the Committee.
The City Clerk will be notified of the time and location of meetings and shall
be provided with an agenda for posting to the general public.
Sec. 2-313. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 2008.91, 12-2-2008]
To promote and enhance the quality of life by planting trees along our
streets, in our parks, in our neighborhoods and developing new green
space.
Sec. 2-314. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2008.91, 12-2-2008]
A vacancy in the membership of the Committee shall be determined upon
the occurrence of any of the following:
(1) The death of a member;
(2) The effective date of the resignation of a member;
(3) The expiration of the term of office;
(4) Three unexcused absences during a one-year period;
The removal of a member from the City.
A member may resign by submitting a written resignation to the Chair
of the Committee. Once received by the Chair of the Committee, the
Mayor's office will be notified. The resignation may not be withdrawn,
and the member's office shall become vacant on the date specified in
the resignation.
If a vacancy in the membership of the Committee occurs, the Mayor
shall nominate a person to fill the vacancy within a period not to
exceed 30 days of its occurrence. The nomination shall be subject
to the confirmation of the City Council. The person named to fill a
vacancy shall serve until the normal expiration date of the term being
filled.
(5)
Sec. 2-312 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-314
CHCT:91

DIVISION 11
FIRE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
[Added 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.118]10
Sec. 2-315. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established the Biddeford Fire Advisory
Committee, herein after BFAC, comprised of five members and a member
of the Biddeford Fire Department to serve as an ex officio member. All
members shall be citizens and reside within the corporate limits of the City
of Biddeford, with the exception of the ex officio member who may reside
outside of the City. In appointing members to the BFAC, the Mayor and City
Council shall seek to appoint members from a cross section of all citizens.
The BFAC is established under the authority of the Biddeford City Council
and shall serve under the directive of the City Council.
Sec. 2-316. Purpose; responsibilities.
The purpose of the Committee is to provide an organized forum for twoway
communication between the Biddeford Fire Department and the
community.
(a)
Responsibilities shall include:
Where appropriate, make recommendations to the City Council and
Fire Department on substantive issues, with the goal of improved
fire services. For the purpose of this division, "substantive issues"
are defined as matters of major or practical importance to all
concerned. It shall not include personnel issues involving individual
members or officers of the Fire Department or daily fire operations
and implementation.
(1)
Assist in identifying potential Fire Department community
partnerships to address public safety related issues within the
community.
(2)
Identify community resources and support for public safety
activities (such as parking and traffic); and give input to the City
Council and the Fire Department regarding perceived
effectiveness.
(3)
Receive information and comments from citizens at the
Committee's open and public meeting forum regarding public
safety issues.
(4)
Make reports to the City Council at such times as may be requested
by the City Council or as the BFAC determines is necessary.
(5)
(b)
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally added Sections 2-326 through 2-330. These
sections were renumbered as Sections 2-315 through 2-319, respectively as the Code
already contained Sections 2-326 through 2-330.
Sec. 2-315 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-317
CHCT:93
Sec. 2-317. Membership.
Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority
of the City Council for staggered three-year terms. All subsequent
appointments, except to fill a vacancy, shall be for three-year terms. A
vacancy is created upon the death or written resignation to the BFAC Chair,
or upon the vote of the City Council to remove a member. Members of the
Committee shall serve without pay and at the discretion of the City Council.
The Biddeford Fire Chief, or his designee, shall serve as the administrator,
advisor and ex officio member, and shall provide assistance to the BFAC.
Sec. 2-318. Organization of Committee.
Sec. 2-319. Meetings.
The Mayor shall appoint a Chair and a Vice Chair. The Chair shall serve
a two-year term. A quorum shall consist of three members. The Chair
shall be counted in determining a quorum and shall have one vote.
(a)
The Vice Chair shall serve a two-year term. The Vice Chair shall serve
as Chair upon the death or resignation of the Chair, or upon the office of
the Chair becoming vacant. The Vice Chair shall discharge the powers
of the office of the Chair at any meeting at which the Chair is absent.
The Vice Chair shall be counted in determining a quorum and shall have
one vote.
(b)
The ex officio member of the BFAC is a nonvoting member and shall
serve in an advisory capacity.
(c)
The duties of a secretary responsible for recording meeting minutes
shall be rotated sequentially among the Committee's membership for
each meeting. The Chair shall be excluded from this responsibility. A
roster for secretarial duties shall be established by the Committee.
(d)
A quorum consisting of three members shall be necessary to take any
BFAC action authorized or required by this division. An issue shall carry
by a majority of those voting.
(e)
Notice of any expired terms and/or vacancies shall be given to the
public. The Mayor shall nominate and the City Council shall confirm all
appointments to fill expired terms and/or vacancies. The City Council
may remove any member for misconduct or nonperformance of duty.
(f)
The BFAC may adopt and amend from time to time rules to govern the
conduct of its administrative business, consistent with the provisions of
this division.
(g)
Meetings of the Biddeford Fire Advisory Committee shall be established
by the BFAC. Meetings shall be held at the Biddeford City Hall or
at a suitable municipal public location. Prior notice of any change in
meeting date, time or place shall be provided to all members, the
public, and the administrative staff 48 hours in advance of said meeting.
(a)
Sec. 2-317 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-319
CHCT:94
All regularly scheduled and special meetings shall have an agenda
approved by the Chair.
(b)
Sec. 2-319 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-319
CHCT:95

DIVISION 12
POLICE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
[Added 1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.119]11
Sec. 2-320. Establishment.
There is hereby created and established the Biddeford Police Advisory
Committee, herein after BPAC, comprised of five members and a member
of the Biddeford Police Department to serve as an ex officio member. All
members shall be citizens and reside within the corporate limits of the City
of Biddeford, with the exception of the ex officio member who may reside
outside of the City. In appointing members to the BPAC, the Mayor and City
Council shall seek to appoint members from a cross section of all citizens.
The BPAC is established under the authority of the Biddeford City Council
and shall serve under the directive of the City Council.
Sec. 2-321. Purpose; responsibilities.
The purpose of the Committee is to provide an organized forum for twoway
communication between the Biddeford Police Department and the
community.
(a)
Responsibilities shall include:
Where appropriate, make recommendations to the City Council and
Police Department on substantive issues, with the goal of improved
police services. For the purpose of this article, "substantive" issues
are defined as matters of major or practical importance to all
concerned. It shall not include personnel issues involving individual
members or officers of the Police Department, or daily police
operational enforcement and implementation.
(1)
Assist in identifying potential Police Department community
partnerships to address public safety related issues within the
community.
(2)
Identify community resources and support for public safety
activities (such as parking and traffic); and give input to the City
Council and the Police Department regarding perceived
effectiveness.
(3)
Receive information and comments from citizens at the
Committee's open and public meeting forum regarding public
safety issues.
(4)
Make reports to the City Council at such times as may be requested
by the City Council or as the BPAC determines is necessary.
(5)
(b)
11.Editor's Note: This ordinance originally added Sections 2-341 through 2-345. These
sections were renumbered as Sections 2-320 through 2-324, respectively as the Code
already contained Sections 2-341 through 2-345.
Sec. 2-320 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-322
CHCT:97
Sec. 2-322. Membership.
Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority
of the City Council for staggered three-year terms. All subsequent
appointments, except to fill a vacancy, shall be for three-year terms. A
vacancy is created upon the death or written resignation to the BPAC Chair,
or upon the vote of the City Council to remove a member. Members of the
Committee shall serve without pay and at the discretion of the City Council.
The Biddeford Police Chief, or his designee, shall serve as the administrator,
advisor and ex officio member, and shall provide assistance to the BPAC.
Sec. 2-323. Organization of Committee.
Sec. 2-324. Meetings.
The Mayor shall appoint a Chair and a Vice Chair. The Chair shall serve
a two-year term. A quorum shall consist of three members. The Chair
shall be counted in determining a quorum and shall have one vote.
(a)
The Vice Chair shall serve a two-year term. The Vice Chair shall serve
as Chair upon the death or resignation of the Chair, or upon the office of
the Chair becoming vacant. The Vice Chair shall discharge the powers
of the office of the Chair at any meeting at which the Chair is absent.
The Vice Chair shall be counted in determining a quorum and shall have
one vote.
(b)
The ex officio member of the BPAC is a nonvoting member and shall
serve in an advisory capacity.
(c)
The duties of a secretary responsible for recording meeting minutes
shall be rotated sequentially among the Committee's membership for
each meeting. The Chair shall be excluded from this responsibility. A
roster for secretarial duties shall be established by the Committee.
(d)
A quorum consisting of three members shall be necessary to take any
BPAC action authorized or required by this article. An issue shall carry
by a majority of those voting.
(e)
Notice of any expired terms and/or vacancies shall be given to the
public. The Mayor shall nominate and the City Council shall confirm all
appointments to fill expired terms and/or vacancies. The City Council
may remove any member for misconduct or nonperformance of duty.
(f)
The BPAC may adopt and amend from time to time rules to govern the
conduct of its administrative business, consistent with the provisions of
this division.
(g)
Meetings of the Biddeford Police Advisory Committee shall be
established by the BPAC. Meetings shall be held at the Biddeford City
Hall or at a suitable municipal public location. Prior notice of any
change in meeting date, time or place shall be provided to all members,
(a)
Sec. 2-322 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-324
CHCT:98
Sec. 2-325. (Reserved)
the public, and the administrative staff 48 hours in advance of said
meeting.
All regularly scheduled and special meetings shall have an agenda
approved by the Chair.
(b)
Sec. 2-324 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-325
CHCT:99

ARTICLE V
FINANCE
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY; MEMORIAL GIFT POLICY
Sec. 2-326. Withholding payment for unpaid taxes. [Added 4-6-2010
by Ord. No. 2010.25]
Pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 905, the City of Biddeford Treasurer is hereby
authorized, at the request of the Tax Collector, to withhold payment of any
money then due and payable to any taxpayer, other than employee wages,
whose taxes are wholly or partially unpaid at a time past the due date of
such taxes, to an amount not in excess of the unpaid taxes together with any
interest and costs. The sum withheld shall be paid to the Tax Collector, who
shall, if required, give a receipt in writing therefor to the officer withholding
payment and to the taxpayer. The Tax Collector's rights under this section
shall not be affected by any assignment or trustee process.
Sec. 2-327. Purpose. [Added 10-2-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.97]
The purpose of this division is to regulate the acceptance of grants or
donations of money or property to the City of Biddeford.
Sec. 2-328. Acceptance of memorial gifts. [Added 10-2-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012.97]
The City of Biddeford may accept any bequest or gift of money or
property for a purpose deemed suitable by the City Council. All gifts
shall be accepted in the name of the City and become the property of
the City.
(a)
Gifts may not be accepted if they involve an excessive cost for
maintenance or installation. The City is under no obligation to replace
a gift if it is destroyed, lost, stolen, or worn out.
(b)
All gifts of $5,000 or greater shall require approval by the City Council.
For those grants or donations of $5,000 or less, the City Manager is
authorized to accept and expend the funds. If the City Manager declines
to accept a grant or donation, the grant or donation shall be placed on
the next Council agenda for possible approval.
(c)
All monetary donations/gifts must be complete to allow for City
acceptance.
(d)
Memorial gifts need to be placed on City property and must be similar
to existing infrastructure to ensure uniformity. The appropriate City
committee, board or commission shall be solicited for input and
suggestions prior to the placement of the gift on or upon City property.
In cases when the donation or gift is for placement on City property
(e)
Sec. 2-326 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-328
CHCT:101
within the Downtown Business District, the City Manager shall notify
groups or organizations that s/he deems appropriate.
A small plaque may be placed on the memorial gift to acknowledge any
benefactors. This plaque must be unobtrusive and consistent across all
City gifts to ensure uniformity.
(f)
(g) Memorials cannot have a commercial appearance or corporate label.
Sec. 2-328 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-328
CHCT:102
DIVISION 1A
MILITARY PERSONNEL TAX EXEMPTION
[Added 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.9]
Sec. 2-329. Exempting eligible active-duty military personnel from
vehicle excise tax.
Sec. 2-330. (Reserved)
Authority. This division is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A,
which expressly authorizes such ordinances.
(a)
Excise tax exemption; qualifications. A motor vehicle owned by a
resident of this municipality who is on active duty serving in the United
States Armed Forces and who is either permanently stationed at a
military or naval post, station or base outside this state or deployed for
military service for a period of more than 180 days and who desires
to register that resident's vehicle in this state is hereby exempted
from the annual excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1482.
Only one motor vehicle per qualifying resident shall be eligible for the
exemption.
(b)
Application for exemption.
To apply for this exemption, the resident must present to the
municipal excise tax collector certification from the commander
of the resident's post, station or base, or from the commander's
designated agent, that the resident is permanently stationed at that
post, station or base or is deployed for military service for a period
of more than 180 days.
(1)
For purpose of this section, "United States Armed Forces" includes
the National Guard and the Reserves of the United States Armed
Forces.
(2)
For purpose of this section, "deployed for military service" has the
same meaning as in 26 M.R.S.A. § 814(1)(A).
(3)
For purpose of this section, "motor vehicle" has the same meaning
as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1481(3) and does not include any snowmobiles
as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 13001.
(4)
(c)
Effective date; duration. This division shall take effect 30 days after its
adoption by the City Council and shall remain in effect unless and until
it or 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A is repealed.
(d)
Sec. 2-329 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-330
CHCT:103

DIVISION 2
PROCUREMENT
Sec. 2-331. Purpose. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment
of all persons involved in public purchasing by the City, to maximize the
purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards
for maintaining a procurement system of quality and integrity.
Sec. 2-332. Application of article. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2); Ord. No.
99.78, 9-21-1999]
Sec. 2-333. Definitions. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
This article applies to contracts for the procurement of supplies,
services and construction entered into by the City. It shall apply to
every expenditure of public funds by any department of the City
irrespective of the source of funding. When the procurement involves
the expenditure of federal or state assistance or contract funds, the
procurement shall be conducted in accordance with any applicable laws
and regulations. Nothing in this article shall prevent any department of
the City from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift
or request that is otherwise consistent with law.
(a)
Representatives of the City involved in the purchase of goods;
especially items of apparel or textiles such as clothing, uniforms,
footwear, linens or fabric; shall not knowingly contract with vendors
offering goods or services produced under sweatshop conditions by
manufacturers, launderers or distributors of such items who may be
paying poverty wages, violating workplace regulations or suppressing
worker rights. In order to promote contracts with vendors having
responsible employment practices, preference should be given to goods
or services produced in the United States and to vendors known for
their responsible labor practices. Responsible labor practices shall
include wage and benefit levels sufficient to meet basic needs while
providing some discretionary income for a family of four, respect for
workers' rights including the right to be heard and to organize and
a safe and healthy work environment. Any complaints or information
received by a representative of the City involved in the purchase of
goods or services identifying vendors or their subcontractors as
producing their products under sweatshop conditions shall investigate
said allegations and shall cease to do business with any vendor or
subcontractor found to be other than maintaining responsible labor
practices.
(b)
Sec. 2-331 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-333
CHCT:105
BRAND NAME OR EQUAL SPECIFICATION — A specification limited to one
or more items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers to describe
the standard of quality, performance and other salient characteristics
needed to meet City requirements, and which provides for the submission
of equivalent products.
BRAND NAME SPECIFICATION — A specification limited to one or more
items by manufacturers' names or catalogue numbers.
CONSTRUCTION — The process of building, altering, repairing, improving
or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public
improvements of any kind to any public real property. It does not include
the routine operation, routine repair or routine maintenance of existing
structures, buildings or real property.
CONTRACT — All types of agreements, regardless of what they may be
called, for the procurement of supplies, services or construction.
CONTRACTOR — Any person having a contract with the City or any of its
departments.
LOCATION AND OPERATION — Is narrowly defined as owning, leasing or
renting physical space within the City limits of Biddeford, and staffing the
same a minimum of 20 hours per week during a period commencing no less
than thirty days prior to the bid deadline and continuing through the end of
the bid agreements.[Added 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.71]
SERVICES — The furnishing of labor, time or efforts by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are
merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include
employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements.
SPECIFICATION — Any description of the physical or functional
characteristics or the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may
include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing or preparing
a supply, service or construction item for delivery.
SUPPLIES — All consumables or property, including but not limited to
equipment, materials, printing and leases for real property, excluding land
or a permanent interest in land.
Sec. 2-334. Scope of authority. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The current policy of the City is to maintain a decentralized purchasing
process which shall be monitored by the City Manager, Finance Director
and Purchasing Agent. Each department head within this decentralized
purchasing function shall be responsible for the function of procurement
of suitable supplies, services or construction for their using departments,
except as may be otherwise noted in these regulations. In all cases,
purchase orders shall channel through the Purchasing Agent's office and,
claims, invoices and any other such supporting documentation shall channel
through the Finance Director's office in order that proper purchasing
records may be maintained.
Sec. 2-333 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-335
CHCT:106
Sec. 2-335. Responsibility of departments. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2);
Ord. No. 99.69, 8-17-1999]
The responsibility of department heads regarding procurement shall be
as follows:
Development of specifications for supplies, services or construction
shall be the responsibility of department heads. Any specifications
to be included in an invitation for competitive sealed bids or
proposals shall be submitted to the Purchasing Agent.
(a)
Procuring the highest quality item(s) for a specified use at the
lowest possible expense is required by all department heads, or
their delegates who have authority to purchase.
(b)
Department heads are required to control, supervise and maintain
any necessary inventories in a storeroom. Such storerooms shall
serve as the receiving and distribution points for materials
purchased by a using department.
With the exception of public works parts and fuel inventories
and school lunch supply inventories, departments will be charged
for items at the time of purchase. Departments receiving parts
and fuel from public works inventories will be charged as items
are used. Public works and school lunch department heads will
conduct a physical inventory count of all supplies at such time
as there is a change in personnel directly responsible for those
storerooms, at fiscal year end, and as required throughout the
year.
(c)
Local purchasing is encouraged where competitive market prices
exist except when Section 2-235(f) and Section 2-336 apply. Local
purchasing is required unless non-local purchasing is more cost
effective. The following factors shall be considered to determine
cost effectiveness:
a. Price;
b. Comparable quality;
c. Cost/ability to secure prices;
d. Shipping and handling cost;
e. Convenience of follow-up service;
f. Time to secure the supply, item or service.
(d)
Inspection of incoming materials or services shall be performed
for compliance with specifications. These inspections are to be
maintained under rigorous review by department heads and their
authorized designees. The receiving report copy of the purchase
(e)
(1)
Sec. 2-335 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-335
CHCT:107
Sec. 2-336. Competitive sealed bidding. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
order and any packing slips are to be completed and returned to
the Finance Department upon acceptance of an order.
Unless otherwise provided, the single purchase of a supply or
construction item in an amount estimated at $5,000 or above shall
be made only by written contract award through the formal bidding
procedure. No supply, service or construction generally purchased
in the whole shall be purchased as a sum of the parts for the
purpose of avoiding the requirement to solicit bids. A single
purchase of services in an amount estimated at $10,000 shall be
made only by written contract award through the appropriate
proposal procedure. Sole source purchases and emergency
purchases shall be exceptions to these rules. [Amended
11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.71]
(f)
Appointment, authority and duties of Purchasing Agent:
The City Manager shall appoint a candidate for Purchasing Agent,
who will be confirmed by the City Council.
(a)
The authority and duties of the Purchasing Agent shall be as
follows:
Except as may be otherwise provided, the Purchasing Agent
shall serve as the principal purchasing official for the City, and
shall be responsible for the procurement of supplies, services
and construction in accordance with this article, as well as the
management and disposal of supplies.
1.
In accordance with this article, and subject to the supervision
of the City Manager, the Purchasing Agent shall:
Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies,
services and construction needed by the City;
a.
Exercise direct supervision over the City's central stores
and general supervision over all other storeroom
inventories belonging to the City;
b.
Sell, trade or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies
belonging to the City; assist the departments of the City
with the establishment and maintenance of programs for
specification development, contract administration and
product inspection and acceptance and coordination of
supplies and service purchases.
c.
2.
Consistent with this article, and with the approval of the City
Manager, the Purchasing Agent may adopt operational
procedures relating to the execution of his or her duties.
3.
(b)
(2)
Sec. 2-335 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-336
CHCT:108
All contracts of the City for purchases of supplies or construction at
or in excess of $5,000 and for the purchase of services at or in excess
of $5,000 shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as
otherwise provided in this article. [Amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No.
2011.71]
(a)
An invitation to bid shall be issued and shall include specifications and
all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement.
(b)
Adequate public notice of the invitation to bid shall be given for a
reasonable time, but not less than 10 calendar days prior to the date
set forth therein for the opening of bids. Such notice shall include
publication in a newspaper of general circulation a reasonable time
prior to bid opening and shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the City's internet website, in a place designated for this purpose. This
public notice shall minimally state the place, date and time of the bid
opening. [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.25]
(c)
Bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the
invitation for bids. The amount of each bid, and such other relevant
information as the Purchasing Agent deems appropriate, together with
the name of each bidder shall be publicly read for the benefit of any
bidders and each bid shall be open to public inspection.
(d)
Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction,
except as authorized in this article. Bids shall be evaluated based on
the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids, which may include
criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality,
workmanship, delivery and suitability for a particular purpose. Those
criteria that will affect the bid price and be considered in evaluation
for award shall be objectively measurable, such as discounts,
transportation costs and total or life cycle costs. The invitation for bids
shall set forth the evaluation criteria to be used. No criteria may be
used in a bid evaluation that are not set forth in the invitation for bids.
(e)
Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or
after bid opening or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such
bid mistakes may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered
before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written or
telegraphic notice received in the office designated in the invitation
for bids prior to the time set for the bid opening. After bid opening,
corrections in bids shall be permitted only to the extent that the bidder
can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a
nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the
bid price actually intended. After bid opening, no changes in bid prices
or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the interest of the City or fair
competition shall be permitted. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder
alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid
if:
(f)
Sec. 2-336 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-336
CHCT:109
Sec. 2-337. Competitive sealed proposals. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but
the intended correct bid is not similarly evident; or
(1)
The bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly
demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit the
correction or withdrawal of bids, or to cancel awards or contracts
based on bid mistakes, shall be supported by a written
determination made by the Purchasing Agent.
(2)
The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by
appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive
bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the
invitation for bids. In the event the low responsive and responsible
bid for a construction project exceeds available fund as certified by
the Finance Director and such bid does not exceed such funds by
more than 10%, the Purchasing Agent is authorized to negotiate an
adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible
bidder in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds.
Any such negotiated adjustment shall be based only upon eliminating
independent deductive items specified in the invitation for bids. When
finalized by the Purchasing Agent, bid results will be submitted to the
Finance Committee of the City Council for acceptance and awarding
of the contract to the successful bidder. Contracts that exceed $30,000
shall be approved by the City Council prior to signing and executing
said contract. [Amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.71]
(g)
When it is considered impractical to prepare initially a purchase
description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids
may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be
followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers
have been determined to be technically acceptable under the criteria
set forth in the first solicitation.
(h)
When the Purchasing Agent determines in writing that the use of
competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not
advantageous to the City, a contract may be entered into by use of the
competitive sealed proposal method.
(a)
(b) Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals.
Adequate public notice of the request for proposals shall be given in the
same manner as provided in Section 2-336(c), provided the minimum
time shall be 20 calendar days.
(c)
No proposals shall be handled so as to permit disclosure of the identity
of any offeror or the contents of any proposal to competing offerors
during the process of negotiation. A register of proposals shall be
prepared containing the name of each offeror, the number of
modifications received, if any, and a description sufficient to identify
(d)
Sec. 2-336 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-337
CHCT:110
Sec. 2-338. Contracting for professional services. [Ord. of
4-21-1998(2)]
the item offered. The register of proposals shall be open for public
inspection only after contract award.
The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of price
and other evaluation factors.
(e)
As provided in the request for proposals, discussions may be conducted
with the responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be
reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of
clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the
solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal
treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision
of proposals and such revisions may be permitted after submissions
and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers.
In conducting discussions there shall be no disclosure of the identity
of competing offerors or of any information derived from proposals
submitted by competing offerors.
(f)
Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is
determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the City, taking
into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the
request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be used in
the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the
award is made. When finalized by the Purchasing Agent, proposal
results will be submitted to the Finance Committee of the City Council
for acceptance and awarding of the contract to the successful bidder.
Contracts that exceed $30,000 shall be approved by the City Council
prior to signing and executing said contract. [Amended 11-1-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011.71]
(g)
For the purpose of procuring professional services such as auditing,
accounting, banking, computer or information processing, architect,
engineering, land surveying, clergy, medical, veterinary or dental; the
department of the City requiring such services may procure them on
its own behalf, following notification of the Purchasing Agent and in
accordance with the selection procedures specified in this section.
(a)
Except as provided under the provisions for sole source procurement
and emergency procurements, professional services as described in
Subsection (a) of this section shall be procured as follows:
Persons engaged in providing the described professional services
may submit statements of qualifications and expressions of interest
in providing such professional services. The department of the City
using such professional services may specify a uniform format for
statements of qualifications. Persons may amend these statements
at any time by filing a new statement.
(1)
(b)
Sec. 2-337 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-338
CHCT:111
Sec. 2-339. Small purchases. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2); amended
11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.71]
Sec. 2-340. Sole source procurement. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
A contract may be awarded without competition when the Purchasing Agent
determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available
sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service or
construction item. The Purchasing Agent with the appropriate department
head or designee shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price,
delivery and terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be
Adequate notice of the need for such services shall be given by
the City department requiring the services through a request for
services. The request for proposals shall describe the service
required, list the types of information and data required of each
offeror, and state the relative importance of particular
qualifications.
(2)
Sealed proposals shall be required with the exception of interest rate
quotations for loans which may be received by telephone or facsimile.
(c)
Discussions may be conducted with any offeror who has submitted
a proposal to determine such offeror's qualifications for further
consideration. Discussions shall not disclose any information derived
from proposals submitted by other offerors.
(d)
Award shall be made to the offeror determined in writing by the head
of the City department procuring the required professional services to
be best qualified based on evaluation factors set forth in the request
for proposals, and negotiation of compensation determined to be fair
and reasonable. If compensation cannot be agreed upon with the best
qualified offeror, then negotiations will be formally terminated with the
selected offeror. If proposals were submitted by one or more other
offerors determined to be qualified, negotiations may be conducted
with such other offer or offerors, in the order of their respected
qualification ranking, and the contract may be awarded to the offeror
then ranked best qualified if the amount of compensation is determined
to be fair and reasonable. Awarding of contracts shall be consistent
with Section 2-337(g).
(e)
Any contract not exceeding $5,000 may be made in accordance with the
small purchase procedures authorized in this section.
(a)
Insofar as it is practical for small purchases in excess of $1,000, no
less than three businesses shall be solicited to submit quotations.
Quotations may be accepted by telephone. Award shall be made to the
business offering the lowest acceptable quotation. The names of the
businesses submitting quotations, and the date and amount of each
quotation, shall be recorded with purchase orders and maintained as a
public record.
(b)
Sec. 2-338 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-340
CHCT:112
maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the
amount and type of each contract, a listing of the item(s) procured under
each contract and the identification number of each contract file.
Sec. 2-341. Emergency procurements. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the City Manager may
make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies,
services or construction items when there exists a threat to public health,
welfare or safety; provided that such emergency procurements shall be
made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances.
Sec. 2-342. Cancellation of invitation for bids or requests for
proposals. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
An invitation for bids, a request for proposals or other solicitation may
be canceled, or any or all bids or proposals may be rejected in whole or
in part as may be specified in the solicitation, when it is for good cause
and in the best interests of the City. The reasons therefor shall be made
part of the contract file. Each solicitation issued by the City shall state
that the solicitation may be canceled and that any bid or proposal may be
rejected in whole or in part for good cause when in the best interest of
the City. Notice of cancellation shall be sent to all businesses solicited. The
notice shall identify the solicitation, explain the reason for cancellation and,
where appropriate, explain that an opportunity will be given to compete
on any resolicitation or any future procurements of similar items. Reasons
for rejection shall be provided upon request by unsuccessful bidders or
offerors.
Sec. 2-343. Responsibility for selection of methods of construction
contract management. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The City Manager shall designate the official(s) to be responsible for any
construction project in excess of $35,000. The designated official shall have
discretion to select the appropriate method of construction contracting
management for a particular project. In determining which method to use,
the designated official shall consider the City's requirements, its resources
and the potential contractor's capabilities. The designated official shall
execute, and include in the contract file a written statement setting forth
the facts which led to the selection of a particular method of construction
contracting management for each project.
Sec. 2-344. Bid security. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for
construction contracts when the price is estimated by the designated
official for construction contracting management to exceed $50,000.
Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized
to do business in the state, or the equivalent in cash, or otherwise
supplied in a form satisfactory to the Finance Director. Nothing herein
(a)
Sec. 2-340 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-344
CHCT:113
Sec. 2-345. Contract performance and payment bonds. [Ord. of
4-21-1998(2)]
shall prevent the requirement of such bonds on construction contracts
under $50,000 when the circumstances warrant.
Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least 5% of the amount of
the bid.
(b)
When the invitation for bids requires security, noncompliance requires
that the bid be rejected unless it is determined that the bid fails to
comply only in a nonsubstantial manner with the security requirements.
(c)
If a bidder is permitted to withdraw a bid before award as provided in
Section 2-336(f), no action shall be taken against the bidder or the bid
security.
(d)
When a construction contract is awarded in excess of $50,000, the
following bonds or security shall be delivered to the City and shall
become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract:
A performance bond satisfactory to the Finance Director executed
by a surety company authorized to do business in Maine or
otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City Manager
and Finance Director in an amount equal to 100% of the price
specified in the contract; and
(1)
A payment bond satisfactory to the Finance Director executed
by a surety company authorized to do business in the state or
otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the City Manager
and Finance Director for the protection of all persons supplying
labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the
performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond
shall be in the amount equal to 100% of the price specified in the
contract.
(2)
(a)
After notice to the City Manager, the Purchasing Agent may reduce the
amount of performance and payment bonds to 50% of the contract price
for each bond when a written determination is made that it is in the
best interests of the City to do so.
(b)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the
City to require a performance bond or other security in addition to
those bonds, or in circumstances other than specified in Subsection (a)
of this section. Nor shall this section be construed to limit the authority
of the City to require warranties or guarantees against defects where
circumstances recommend them.
(c)
Sec. 2-344 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-346
CHCT:114
Sec. 2-346. Maximum practicable competition. [Ord. of
4-21-1998(2)]
All specifications shall be drafted to promote overall economy for the
purposes intended and encourage competition in satisfying the City's needs,
and shall not be unduly restrictive. The policy enunciated in this section
applies to all specifications including but not limited to, those prepared for
the City by architects, engineer, designers and draftsmen.
Sec. 2-347. Brand name or equal specification. [Ord. of
4-21-1998(2)]
Sec. 2-348. Brand name specification. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
Brand name or equal specification may be used when the Purchasing
Agent determines in writing that:
No other design or performance specification or qualified products
list is available;
(1)
Time does not permit the preparation of another form of purchase
description, not including a brand name specification;
(2)
The nature of the product or the nature of the City's requirements
makes use of a brand name or equal specification suitable for
procurement; or
(3)
Use of a brand name or equal specification is in the City's best
interest.
(4)
(a)
Brand name or equal specifications shall seek to designate three, or
as many different brands as are practicable, as or equal references
and shall further state that substantially equivalent products to those
designated will be considered for award.
(b)
Where brand name or equal specification is used in a solicitation,
the solicitation shall contain explanatory language that the use of a
brand name is for the purpose of describing the standard of quality,
performance and characteristics desired and is not intended to limit or
restrict competition.
(c)
Since use of a brand name specification is restrictive of product
competition, it may be used only when the Purchasing Agent makes a
written determination that only the identified brand name item or items
will satisfy the City's needs.
(a)
The Purchasing Agent shall seek to identify sources from which the
designated brand name item(s) can be obtained and shall solicit such
sources to achieve whatever degree of price competition is practicable.
If only one source can supply the requirement, the procurement shall
be made under Section 2-340.
(b)
Sec. 2-346 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-349
CHCT:115
Sec. 2-349. Finance Committee may examine and order payments.
[Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The Finance Committee may examine every bill, claim and demand
presented for payment by any person or department official and may
question its legality and validity. The Finance Committee shall sign a
warrant or order directed to the City Treasurer to pay such bill, claim or
demand and designate the fund or appropriation to be charged therewith in
accordance with the Charter.
Sec. 2-350. Signed statement required. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The City Auditor is expressly enjoined and forbidden from approving any bill
contracted by any official, agent or employee of the City unless the goods,
articles or materials charged in the bill have been delivered and that they
are of the quality and quantity ordered.
Sec. 2-351. Treasurer forbidden to pay or honor certain bills,
warrants. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(2)]
The Treasurer is expressly enjoined and forbidden to pay any bill
contracted by any official, agent or employee of the City unless an
approved purchase order form is attached to each bill presented for
payment.
(a)
The Treasurer is expressly forbidden to honor or pay any warrant
drawn for the payment of moneys from the City treasury when the
appropriation of the department to which such payment would properly
be charged has been fully expended, or when such payment would
overdraw such department's appropriation.
(b)
Sec. 2-349 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-351
CHCT:116
DIVISION 3
(RESERVED)
Sec. 2-352. through Sec. 2-365. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-352 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-352
CHCT:117

DIVISION 4
BONDS AND NOTES
Sec. 2-366. Notes to be countersigned, recorded. [Code 1975,
§ 2-158]
Sec. 2-367. Form of notes. [Code 1975, § 2-159]
All notes given by the City in accordance with this article shall be
substantially in the following form:
Treasurer's Office
City of Biddeford 20_____
Be it known that for value received, the City of Biddeford will pay at
the office of the Treasurer, to ____________________, or order, the sum of
__________ in _____________________ from the date hereof, with interest
annually at the rate of __________ percent.
In testimony whereof, I, the Treasurer, in the name and behalf of said City,
by virtue of authority in me vested for this purpose, by an order of the City
Council of said City, passed on the day of __________ have hereunto set my
hand at said Biddeford, this day of __________.
Treasurer
This note is also countersigned by the Mayor of said City.
Mayor
Attest:
City Clerk
City of Biddeford promises to pay to the order of ____________________
Dollars with interest at __________ percent, per annum, at the
____________________ of __________ of __________, or at the office of the City
Treasurer in Biddeford, Maine.
Value Received.
Authorized by the order of the City Council.
When it shall become the duty of the Treasurer to sign any note by the
passage of any order or ordinance authorizing him to do so, such note
shall be countersigned by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.
(a)
The Treasurer shall keep a record of all notes countersigned by him in
a book to be kept by him for that purpose. He shall record the amount
of each note so signed, the date, name of payee, for what object, when
payable, the rate of interest and the fact and date of payment.
(b)
Sec. 2-366 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-367
CHCT:119
Approved __________ 20_____ whole amount borrowed thus far under the
authority of this order including this note.
No. _____ Due __________, 20_____
City of Biddeford
By , Treasurer
Countersigned
, Mayor
, City Clerk
Sec. 2-368. through Sec. 2-370. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-367 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-368
CHCT:120
DIVISION 5
UNRESTRICTED FUND BALANCE POLICY
[Ord. of 2-16-1999(1); Ord. No. 2000.91, 10-26-2000; amended
4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.24; 6-5-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.45]
Sec. 2-371. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to establish and provide for the sound financial
management of the City's unassigned general fund balances. Establishing
a minimum, adequate level for the unassigned general fund balance can
provide the City the ability to meet financial uncertainties arising from
declining real estate values or the loss of a major tax base, changes in
spending requirements that may be imposed by the federal or state
governments, by natural disasters or infrastructure failure, or by litigation.
Maintaining an adequate level in the unassigned general fund balance is
important to the stability of the City's financial management, especially
towards contributing to adequate operating cash where all liabilities are
recognized. Finally, an adequate general fund balance contributes to higher
bond credit ratings, which offers the potential for lower interest costs on
long-term financings.
Unassigned general fund balances above and beyond a twelve-and-onehalf-
percent level could then aid the City in meeting future capital project
needs by setting aside funds assigned to a specific future use and which
are otherwise not available for appropriation or expenditure unless the
capital project is completed or canceled. The stated goal of maintaining
an unassigned fund balance of 12 1/2% of the total operating budget as
defined in this Division shall not be construed to require an appropriation to
unassigned fund balance to meet the stated goal, unless said appropriation
is the intent of the City Council and further shall not be construed to
limit the City Council in approving an appropriation from unassigned fund
balance in order to meet an emergency.
Sec. 2-372. Definitions.
As used in this Division, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FUND BALANCE — A term used to describe the net assets of governmental
funds. It is calculated as the difference between the assets and liabilities
reported in a governmental fund.
Governmental fund balance is reported in five classifications that
comprise a hierarchy based primarily on the extent to which the City is
bound to honor constraints on the specific purposes for which amounts
in those funds can be spent. The five classifications of fund balance for
the general fund are defined as follows.
NONSPENDABLE FUND BALANCE — Resources which cannot be
spent because they are either:
a.
(1)
Sec. 2-371 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-372
CHCT:121
Sec. 2-373. Unassigned fund balance.
1. Not in spendable form or
2. Legally or contractually required to be maintained intact.
RESTRICTED FUND BALANCE — Resources with constraints
placed on the use of resources which are either:
Externally imposed by creditors (such as through debt
covenants), grantors, contributors, or laws or regulations of
other governments; or
1.
Imposed by law through constitutional provisions or enabling
legislation.
2.
b.
COMMITTED FUND BALANCE — Resources which are subject to
limitations the government imposes upon itself at its highest level
of decisionmaking and that remain binding unless removed in the
same manner.
c.
ASSIGNED FUND BALANCE — Resources neither restricted nor
committed for which a government has a stated intended use as
established by the City Council or body or official to which the City
Council has delegated the authority to assign amounts for specific
purposes.
d.
UNASSIGNED FUND BALANCE — Resources which cannot be
properly classified in one of the other four categories. The general
fund should be the only fund that reports a positive unassigned
fund balance amount.
e.
The committed, assigned, and unassigned classifications are often
referred to, in the aggregate, as the unrestricted fund balance.
(2)
Use. The City's unassigned fund balance represents those funds held
in reserve to cover unexpected expenditure needs and emergencies,
revenue shortfalls and seasonal cash flow variations. The City Council
has determined that maintenance of an adequate fund balance is
essential to the financial health and security of the City of Biddeford.
(a)
Goal. It is the goal of the City to maintain an unassigned fund balance
approximating 12 1/2% of operating expenditures. Annually, prior to
the first reading of the City's appropriation resolves for adoption of
the general fund operating budget, the City Manager shall prepare
and distribute to the City Council an estimate of the change to the
general fund's unassigned fund balance expected at the closing of the
fiscal year. This will be updated prior to the second reading of the
appropriation resolves. An appropriation from unassigned fund balance
for City expenditures when said balance is less than 10% of operating
expenditures shall be avoided except during a most dire emergency.
An appropriation from unassigned fund balance for City expenditures
(b)
Sec. 2-372 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-373
CHCT:122
Sec. 2-374. Other provisions.
when said balance is greater than 15% of operating expenditures shall
be proposed to the Budget Committee by the Manager prior to the
completion of the Budget Committee's deliberations. An appropriation
from unassigned fund balance for City expenditures when said balance
is greater than 10% but less than 15% of operating expenditures may
be proposed to the Budget Committee by the Manager. Any
appropriation proposed from unassigned fund balance should be used
for a capital project, capital equipment purchase, or infrastructure
improvements; it Editor's Note: may be used to offset an increase in
property taxes, with City Council approval, but shall require a sixperson
super majority vote. Funds cannot be spent or moved without a
vote and approval of the City Council.
Computation of unassigned fund balance percentage. This shall be
calculated as follows: General fund budgeted total expenditures shall
be taken from the schedule of revenues, expenditures, and changes
in fund balance. Unassigned fund balance, as defined above, shall be
divided by the budgeted total expenditures to arrive at a percentage
figure to be used for unrestricted fund balance.
(c)
Transfer or appropriation of unassigned fund balance. The City Council
may, by appropriation resolve, transfer amounts from the City's
unassigned fund balance to any assigned fund balance reserve. Funds
may also be authorized for expenditure from unassigned fund balance
through City Council appropriation.
(d)
Priority uses for fund balance surplus. Any surplus unassigned fund
balance carried as unassigned fund balance may be used for the
purposes set forth below:
To increase assigned fund balance reserves set aside to offset
established or anticipated liabilities of the general fund where
existing reserves, if any, are insufficient.
(1)
To increase assigned fund balance reserves for capital
improvements.
(2)
To increase other established capital reserves where such reserves
may be insufficient to meet their purposes.
(3)
To increase the City's appropriated contingency account to address
unanticipated current year needs.
(4)
(5) To offset the increase in property taxes.
(e)
In general, unassigned fund balance should not be used to fund any
portion of the ongoing and routine year-to-year operating expenditures
of the City. It should be used primarily to ensure adequate assigned
fund balance reserves, to respond to unforeseen emergencies, and to
provide overall financial stability.
(f)
Sec. 2-373 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-374
CHCT:123
Sec. 2-375. through Sec. 2-400. (Reserved)
Creation of new reserves. The City Council may create such other
reserve funds as shall be deemed advisable. Such reserves shall be
created by an appropriation resolve which shall include a statement as
to the intent and purpose of the fund, the funding mechanism, the time
line corresponding with the end of a fiscal year, and the authority to use
and withdraw from the fund.
(a)
Elimination of reserves. The City Council may, by appropriation resolve,
eliminate any existing reserve. At the time such reserve is eliminated,
the Council shall either transfer any remaining balance to another
assigned fund balance reserve or unassigned fund balance or
appropriate the remaining balance within the reserve to be used for the
purpose for which the reserve was established.
(b)
Administrative responsibilities. The Finance Director shall be
responsible for monitoring the City's various reserves and for ensuring
that this policy is adhered to. The Finance Director shall be authorized
to create funds on the City's General Ledger, as necessary to provide for
proper accounting for grants, special revenue sources not pertaining
to the general fund, capital projects approved by the City Council or
School Committee or trust/agency arrangements entered into by the
City or schools, as provided for under the provisions of Governmental
Accounting Standards Board (GASB) Statement No. 54. The City
Manager is authorized to make recommendations to the City Council
on the use of reserve funds both as an element of the annual operating
budget submission and from time to time throughout the year as needs
may arise.
(c)
Quarterly. The Finance Director shall project the year-end general fund
balance and report the projections to the Finance Committee within 30
days of the end of the quarter. Should the forecast predict that the year
will end with an operational deficit, a memo shall be given to the entire
Council stating how the deficit will be handled.
(d)
Sec. 2-374 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-375
CHCT:124
ARTICLE VI
CABLE TELEVISION COMMITTEE; PUBLIC, EDUCATION AND
[Ord. Of 5-2G1O-1V9E9R6N; AMmEeNnTdAeLd (BPyE OGr) dAsC. COEf S2S-17-1998(1);
4-21-1998(3); 12-15-1998(1); 8-17-1999 By Ord. No. 99.69;
5-13-2002 By Ord. No. 2002.47; 2-18-2003 By Ord. No. 2003.28;
2-17-2004 By Ord. No. 2004.11; 3-16-2004 By Ord. No. 2004.23;
10-15-2013 By Ord. No. 2013.83]
Sec. 2-401. Established; purpose.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3008 et seq., the City of Biddeford hereby
adopts a cable television ordinance.
Sec. 2-402. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY — Any person, firm or corporation owning,
controlling, operating, managing, or leasing a CATV system within the City
of Biddeford, sometimes hereinafter referred to as "the company."
CATV — Any community antenna television system, multichannel video
provider, or facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly or indirectly,
over the air, and amplifies or otherwise modifies signals transmitting
programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations, or
originates its own signal or signals produced through any of its community
access channels and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing
members of the public who pay for such services, but such term shall not
include any such facility that serves only the residents of one or more
apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management.
CITY — The City of Biddeford organized and existing under the laws in the
State of Maine and the area within its territorial limits.
COMMITTEE — The established Cable Television Committee of seven
members nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by the Biddeford City
Council.
ISSUING AUTHORITY — The City Council of the City of Biddeford.
Sec. 2-403. Cable Television Committee. [Ord. of 5-21-1996; Ord. of
2-17-1998(1); Ord. of 4-21-1998(3), Ord. of 12-15-1998(1); Ord. No.
99.69, 8-17-1999; Ord. No. 2004.11, 2-17-2004; Ord. No. 2004.23,
3-16-2004]
Committee appointment; term.
There is hereby established a cable TV oversight committee
(hereafter referred to as "Cable Committee") consisting of seven
members who shall be residents of the City of Biddeford. The
members of the Cable Committee shall be nominated by the Mayor
and confirmed by the City Council.
(1)
(a)
Sec. 2-401 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-403
CHCT:125
Sec. 2-404. Public, educational and governmental (PEG) access TV
center; Access Director. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41]
In order to provide all eligible citizens and groups from the City of Biddeford
access to video equipment, training and channel time on a first-come, firstserved
basis, there shall be a Biddeford PEG access TV center. A PEG
Access Director shall manage the daily operations of the facility along
with all related equipment and assets. The Director shall report to the
Chief Operating Officer. The Chief Operating Officer shall review the
qualifications of any finalist for the position of PEG Access Director with the
Cable Committee and shall appoint said person.
Sec. 2-405. Franchise fee.
Any franchise fee paid to the City of Biddeford pursuant to any agreement
with a cable TV franchise shall be dedicated to the operation and facilities
of PEG access.
The terms of office shall be for three years. When a vacancy exists,
the Mayor shall nominate a replacement subject to confirmation by
the Council for the remainder of the term vacated. Four members
shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting business.
(2)
In determining the qualifications of a member of the Committee,
the municipal officers shall take into consideration demonstrated
interest and ability to understand, appreciate and promote the
purpose of this section.
(3)
Duties of the Cable Television Committee:
Recommend terms of negotiation to issuing authority on
nonexclusive cable franchise matters.
(1)
Monitor compliance with the terms of the existing and future
franchise agreements and report noncompliance to the City
Manager.
(2)
Act to collect information and advise issuing authority on matters
of rate regulation as permitted by state and federal laws.
(3)
Promote media literacy by providing the opportunity for local
people to produce their own programming or provide programming
of local interest, and coverage of government meeting and
education programming.
(4)
Develop, establish and approve all changes to the programming
and operating rules. (See Section 2-409, Programming rules.)
(5)
Review and recommend changes to the PEG Access Director's job
description at the request of the City Manager.
(6)
(b)
Sec. 2-403 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-406
CHCT:126
Sec. 2-406. Scheduling.
Scheduling time for use of the public access channel(s) shall be available on
a first-come, first-served basis. Scheduling time for use of the educational
and governmental channel(s) shall be at the discretion of the PEG Access
Director.
Sec. 2-407. Prohibitions.
Sec. 2-408. Liability.
The City of Biddeford, the Cable Committee, and any cable TV franchisee
in the City of Biddeford are not responsible for the final content of any
program and hereby disclaim any liability for the content of any program
which may be shown. Any producer or individual who provides material
for transmission is subject to all legal responsibilities and is personally
liable for the content of the material transmitted. Each producer must agree
in writing to indemnify and hold the City and any franchisee harmless
from any and all claims (including indemnification for the City and any
franchisee's costs incurred in defending such litigation) arising from any
and all claims of any kind whatsoever concerning the failure to comply with
any applicable law, rule, regulation or other requirement as well as any
claim for libel, slander, invasion of privacy, infringement of common law or
statutory copyrights or trademarks, breach of contract or other obligations
owing to third parties, civil rights violations or any other injury or damage
in law or equity which may arise out of the use of the community access
equipment or facilities.
Sec. 2-409. Programming rules.
Protocols and procedures governing the production and operation of the
community access TV center shall be established and all changes approved
by the Cable Committee.
Sec. 2-410. Franchising process.
It is the intent of the Cable Committee to allow free expression and
not restrict the content or message of any program presented on
Biddeford's PEG access channels. Political debates are encouraged.
(a)
The following programming is prohibited: Any material that violates
applicable federal law; any commercial advertising of a product or
service; any form of lottery; any material found to be libelous or
slanderous in a court of law; and any other material which is defined as
indecent; obscene or violent by the courts or any applicable federal law
or regulation.
(b)
Prior to the preparation by the City of requests for proposals for
franchises or renewals thereof, the City shall hold a public hearing with
at least seven days' notice by publication in a newspaper of general
(a)
Sec. 2-406 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-410
CHCT:127
Sec. 2-411. through Sec. 2-412. (Reserved)
Sec. 2-413. Disputes.
A dispute over the use of facilities and/or equipment or any other dispute
over the use of PEG access television should, if possible, be resolved
informally at the staff level or with the Access Director.
If efforts at informal resolution fail, the person or entity who feels aggrieved
by any action or decision of the staff or the Access Director may file a
formal complaint in writing to the Access Director. The complaint must be
as specific as possible, describing the action or decision complained of, the
date of the action or decision and the relief requested. The Access Director
must issue a written decision with reasons within four days after receiving
a complaint. Parties aggrieved by this decision may request a hearing from
the City Manager to be held in consultation with the Cable Committee.
Sec. 2-414. (Reserved)
circulation within the City, to solicit public comment regarding special
local needs and interests with respect to cable television service.
Applications for a franchisee to operate a CATV system in the City and
related documents are public records to be filed with and maintained by
the City Clerk pursuant to the State Freedom of Access Law (1 M.R.S.A.
§ 401 et seq. as amended from time to time). Reasonable notice must be
given to the public of its right to inspect and copy such applications and
documents during the regular business hours of the City Clerk's office.
(b)
Before authorizing the issuance of any such franchise contract or
contracts, the municipal officers shall review the applicant's character
and financial and technical qualifications to operate a CATV system
throughout the City, and shall conduct a public hearing thereon with at
least seven days' advertised notice prior to said public hearing.
(c)
Applicants for a franchise, refranchise or transfer of franchise shall pay
a nonrefundable filing fee to the issuing authority (City of Biddeford)
of $1,000 to defray such legal and other costs as the City may incur in
dealing with such applications.
(d)
Pursuant to 30 M.R.S.A. § 3003(4)(D), the City shall require the
franchise to pay to said issuing authority an amount equal to the
ordinary and reasonable costs which the City may incur in connection
with any transfers, franchise or franchise renewal agreements, or any
amendments to the same required by law or initiated by the franchisee,
or any other modification of said contracts initiated by the franchisee.
(Any such payment by the franchisee shall be within the exclusion to
the term "franchise fee" as defined in Sec. 622(g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act
and shall not be deemed to be a part of the franchisee fee obligation of
the franchisee.
(e)
Sec. 2-410 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 2-414
CHCT:128
Chapter 6
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings — See Ch. 18.
Businesses — See Ch. 22.
Noise — See Ch. 34, Art. III.
Miscellaneous provisions and offenses — See
Ch. 40.
Sec. 2-414 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 2-414
CHCT:129

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. through Sec. 6-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-1
CHCT:131

ARTICLE II
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-26. Definitions. [Code 1975, §§ 4-12, 4-13]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DANCE — Means and includes every dance not held in a private residence
and any class in which instruction in dancing is given for hire, but shall not
include a dance held in a school under the direct supervision of the school
authorities.
PUBLIC DANCE HALL — Any building, room, hall or other place which is
kept or used for public dancing, or in which, for compensation paid directly
or indirectly to the owner, manager or operator thereof, men, women or
children are permitted to engage in dancing.
Sec. 6-27. Termination of dances. [Code 1975, § 4-25]
All dances shall be terminated at 1:00 a.m.; provided, however, that upon
application of a responsible person, organization or society, investigated by
the City, permission may be granted such person, organization or society to
continue a dance until the time specified in the application.
Sec. 6-28. Sale of ticket, admission to dance after midnight. [Code
1975, § 4-26]
No ticket shall be sold or accepted for admission to a dance after midnight.
Sec. 6-29. through Sec. 6-40. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-29
CHCT:133

DIVISION 2
DANCE HALL LICENSE
Sec. 6-41. Required. [Code 1975, § 4-14]
No person shall conduct or maintain a public dance hall, nor shall dancing
be taught or permitted in such dance hall, until a license has been granted
by the City Clerk.
Sec. 6-42. Application. [Code 1975, §§ 4-15, 4-16]
Sec. 6-43. Prerequisites to issuance. [Code 1975, § 4-17]
Before a license to conduct or maintain a public dance hall is granted, the
Building Inspector, the Fire Chief and the Police Chief shall inspect such
dance hall and make a written report to the City Clerk stating that the dance
hall conforms to City ordinances and regulations.
Sec. 6-44. Licensee's duty to maintain hall in sanitary, safe manner.
[Code 1975, § 4-23]
The holder of a dance hall license shall, at all times, keep such dance hall in
a clean, healthful and sanitary condition and have the stairways and other
passages in all rooms and places connecting with such dance hall at all
times open and well lighted.
Sec. 6-45. Requirements for dance halls generally. [Code 1975,
§ 4-24]
Every dance hall shall be well ventilated and supplied with separate
dressing rooms for men and women and shall be a safe and suitable place
for the purpose for which it is to be used.
Sec. 6-46. through Sec. 6-55. (Reserved)
An application for a license to conduct or maintain a dance hall shall be
made to the City Clerk at least 15 days before any dance is to be held
in such hall.
(a)
Applications for dance hall licenses shall contain the following:
(1) The name of the owner or person in control of the building.
(2) The location of the dance hall.
A plan of the dance hall giving in detail the dimensions and a
diagram of the space to be used for dancing, dressing rooms,
cloakrooms, toilet rooms, entrances, exits, stairways and fire
escapes.
(3)
(b)
Sec. 6-41 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-46
CHCT:135

DIVISION 3
DANCE LICENSE
Sec. 6-56. Required. [Code 1975, § 4-18]
No person shall conduct a dance until a license therefor has been granted
by the City Clerk.
Sec. 6-57. Application. [Code 1975, § 4-19]
Sec. 6-58. Number of dances authorized under license restricted.
[Code 1975, § 4-20]
Unless a license to conduct a dance is issued in accordance with Section
6-59, it shall be valid for only one dance at the time and place stated in the
application.
Sec. 6-59. License may authorize several dances. [Code 1975,
§ 4-21]
Where an applicant for a license to conduct a dance proposes to hold dances
at certain stated intervals at the same place, a license may be issued for
such dances provided the application sets forth the exact date and time of
each dance. Such continuous licenses may be issued quarterly.
Sec. 6-60. through Sec. 6-80. (Reserved)
An application for a dance license shall be made to the City Clerk at
least 48 hours before any dance is to be held.
(a)
The application for a dance license shall contain the name of the
applicant and the location of the dance hall.
(b)
Sec. 6-56 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-60
CHCT:137

ARTICLE III
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-81. Admission charge. [Code 1975, § 4-41]
A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt liquor
licensee who has been issued a special amusement permit as provided in
Section 6-96 et seq. may charge admission in designated areas approved by
the municipal special amusement permit.
Sec. 6-82. Penalty for violation of article; notice for noise violation.
[Code 1975, § 4-42]
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this article shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $100 for the first offense, and up to $500 for
subsequent offenses, to be recovered, on complaint, to the use of the City;
except that in the case of an initial violation of the noise levels contained in
this article in Section 6-103(a)(2) the alleged violator will be given written
notice pursuant to Sections 34-60(c) and (d). Subsequent violations will
subject the alleged violator to sanctions set out in Section 6-101 of this
article.
Sec. 6-83. through Sec. 6-95. (Reserved)
Sec. 6-81 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-83
CHCT:139

DIVISION 2
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT PERMIT
Sec. 6-96. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 4-40(c)]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMBIENT NOISE — The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being a composite of sounds from many sources near and far.
COMPLIANCE REPORT — The document prepared quarterly by the
inspection officer recording the findings of quarterly inspections to
determine a licensee's ability to comply with the requirements of this
division.
DECIBEL — A unit of level when the base of logarithm is the 10th root of 10
and the quantities concerned are proportional to power.
ENTERTAINMENT — Any live amusement, performance, exhibition or
diversion for patrons or customers of the licensed premises, whether
provided by professional entertainers or by full or part-time employees of
the licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities with an
entertainment value coincident to any live entertainment.
INSPECTION OFFICER — The law enforcement officer acting in behalf of
the City to ensure proper enforcement of the provisions of this article.
LICENSEE — The holder of a license issued under the alcoholic beverages
statutes of the state or any person, individual, partnership, firm,
association, corporation, or other legal entity, or any agent or employee of
any such licensee acting on behalf of such licensee.
LOT LINE — The boundary separating one parcel of land from another, or
from a public way. In situations involving multiple buildings on the same
lot, or multiple occupancies within the same building, the lot line shall
be deemed to be the exterior wall or the party wall (including floors and
ceilings).
LOUD AND UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which
exceeds the standards set forth in Section 6-103(a)(2) of this article.
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument including a microphone, amplifier,
an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for measurement of
sound levels which satisfies the standards of the American National
Standards Institute for type I or type II meters.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL (NOISE LEVEL) — In decibels db(A) or db(C)
means the sound measured with either the A- or C-weighting and slow
response by a sound level meter.
Sec. 6-96 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-97
CHCT:141
Sec. 6-97. Purpose. [Code 1975, § 4-40(b)]
The purpose of this division is to control the issuance of special permits for
live entertainment in facilities licensed by the state to sell liquor by 28-A
M.R.S.A. § 1054.
Sec. 6-98. Dancing, entertainment in Class A restaurants. [Code
1975, § 4-1]
In any licensed establishment as defined in 28-A M.R.S.A. § 2 in the City,
dancing and entertainment shall be permitted on the premises as provided
in this division.
Sec. 6-99. Required; application; fee; permit conditions. [Code
1975, § 4-41(a)]
No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his licensed
premises shall permit, on his licensed premises, any music, except radio
or other mechanical device, any dancing or entertainment of any sort
unless the licensee shall have first obtained from the City a special
amusement permit signed by at least a majority of the City Council.
(a)
The application for a special amusement permit shall be obtained from
the City Clerk. Applications for all special amusement permits shall
be made in writing to the City Council and shall state the name of
the applicant; his resident address; the name of the business to be
conducted; his business address; the nature of the business; the
location address to be used; as well as all places of residence of the
applicant during the past five years, and all business addresses of
the applicant during the past five years; the hours during which the
business shall be in operation; whether the applicant has ever had
a license to conduct the business therein described either denied or
revoked and, if so, the applicant shall describe those circumstances
specifically; whether the applicant, including all partners or corporate
officers, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the applicant
shall describe specifically those circumstances specifically; and any
additional information as may be needed by the City Council in issuing
the permit, including, but not limited to, a copy of the applicant's liquor
license.
(b)
No permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, or premises, if the
premises or building to be used for such purposes do not fully comply
with any other ordinances which may be applicable, articles, bylaws, or
rules and regulations of the City and the laws of the state.
(c)
The fee for a special amusement permit shall be $40, which will include
advertising fees.
(d)
The City Council shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable
notice to the applicant and interested parties, hold a public hearing,
(e)
Sec. 6-97 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6-99
CHCT:142
Sec. 6-100. Inspections. [Code 1975, § 4-41(b)]
Sec. 6-101. Suspension or revocation of permit. [Code 1975,
§ 4-41(c)]
The City Council may, after public hearing preceded by seven days' notice to
interested parties, suspend or revoke any special amusement permits which
have been issued under this division on the grounds that the activity so
permitted constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare, or
violates this division and any other municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws,
rules or regulations.
at which the testimony of the applicant and that of any interested
members of the public shall be taken.
The City Council shall grant a permit unless they find reasonable cause
to believe issuance of the permit will be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare, or would violate municipal ordinances, rules
or regulations, articles or bylaws, or the peaceful enjoyment of
contiguous properties.
(f)
A permit under this division shall be valid only for the license year of
the applicant's existing liquor license and in no event shall exceed 12
consecutive months.
(g)
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with
the operation of a licensed business which has obtained a special
amusement permit are provided for or required by ordinance or state
law, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any
ordinance provision or state law, it shall be the duty of the licensee,
or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit
any officer, official, or employee of the City authorized to make the
inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
(a)
The City Council shall require an initial inspection of the premises and
licensee for overall ability to comply with the provisions of this division.
Thereafter, quarterly inspections shall be completed not later than the
10th day of the following month after the close of the latest quarter,
and the inspection officer shall record the findings by completing a
compliance report.
(b)
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the City
Council may revoke the special amusement permit of any licensee in
the municipality who refuses to permit any such officer, official or
employee to make an inspection or take sufficient samples pursuant to
Section 34-58 of this Code or who interferes with such officer, official
or employee while in the performance of his duties, provided that no
license or special amusement permit shall be revoked unless written
demand for the inspection or sample is made upon the licensee or
person in charge of the premises at the time it is sought to make the
inspection.
(c)
Sec. 6-99 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-102
CHCT:143
Sec. 6-102. Permit issuance and appeals procedures. [Code 1975,
§ 4-41(e)]
Sec. 6-103. Regulation of noise. [Code 1975, § 4-41(d)]
Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit from the City
Council shall be notified in writing of the Council's decision no later
than 15 days from the date his request was received. If the licensee is
denied a permit, the licensee shall be provided with the reasons for the
denial in writing. The licensee may not reapply for a permit within 30
days after an application for a permit has been denied.
(a)
Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or
whose permit has been revoked or suspended, may, within 30 days of
the denial, suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to the Board
of Appeals in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
(b)
The Board of Appeals may grant or reinstate the permit if it finds that:
The permitted activities would not constitute a detriment to the
public health, safety or welfare, or violate municipal ordinances or
regulations; or
(1)
(2) The denial, revocation or suspension was arbitrary and capricious.
(c)
An applicant for a special amusement permit under this division shall,
as part of his application, list what measures will be taken to contain
noise generated by such amusement within the premises itself.
Sources of noise contemplated by this section shall include, but not
be strictly limited to, musical instruments, sound modification or
amplification devices used in connection with musical instruments,
and/or other similar devices which produce, reproduce or amplify
sound created by musical instruments. Sources of noise shall
further include public address or other voice amplification systems
used in connection with live entertainment.
(1)
The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuous,
regular, frequent, intermittent or periodic source of noise produced
by any activity regulated by this division shall be established by the
type of land use district listed below; sound pressure levels shall
be measured in a manner consistent with the procedure set out in
Section 34-60 of this Code.
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
db(A) db(C) db(A) db(C)
Industrial districts 70 82 60 72
Commercial
districts
60 72 50 62
(2)
(a)
Sec. 6-102 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6-103
CHCT:144
Sec. 6-104. through Sec. 6-139. (Reserved)
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
db(A) db(C) db(A) db(C)
Residential
districts
55 67 45 57
The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 db(A) for a single
period of no longer than 15 minutes in any one day.
For the purpose of this section, the licensee or his authorized
representative shall not permit the use of the premises to result in any
continued, excessive or unreasonable loud noise, or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of individuals; or which results in disturbing the peace
and tranquility of the neighborhood.
(b)
Sec. 6-103 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-104
CHCT:145

ARTICLE IV
[Adopted 4-1S9P-E2C0I1A1LB EyVOErNdT. SNo. 2011.26]
Sec. 6-140. Policy.
The City of Biddeford recognizes that the character of its community can be
enhanced by events that bring its citizens together; provide opportunities
for growth and recreation; and provide Biddeford with cultural and
economic benefits. The City's policy is to encourage and allow events that
meet this description while ensuring that the needs of those affected are
adequately considered during the planning and approval process.
Sec. 6-141. Purpose.
This policy is to establish a standard for a street closure request; provide
for the safety of special function participants and the general public; and to
ensure that all entities, such as City agencies and the general public have
been adequately notified in order to address any of their concerns. This
policy is also to ensure that public input is considered prior to the closing of
any public way to minimize any adverse impact upon the community.
Sec. 6-142. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
BLOCK PARTY — A neighborhood event that is organized by residents of
an individual block, street or neighborhood and intended for the collective
enjoyment of residents living in the designated area. Block parties may
involve the closure of a public way to general traffic for a limited period
of time and are restricted to areas that are predominantly residential in
nature. Block parties shall not involve the closure of primary streets.
COORDINATING COMMITTEE — The following named individuals
comprise the Coordinating Committee: Police Chief, Fire Chief, the Director
of Codes Enforcement, the Director of Public Works, and the Recreation
Director.
DEMONSTRATION or STREET PROTEST — An action by a mass group
or collection of groups of people in favor of a political or other cause; it
normally consists of walking in a mass formation, and either beginning with
or meeting at a designated endpoint or rally to hear speakers.
EVENT COORDINATOR — The person making application to hold a block
party or special event.
PRIMARY STREET — Any United States or state numbered route or other
high-volume City street deemed critical to the movement of a large number
of motor vehicles. Included in Biddeford are Route 1, Route 9, Route 111,
Route 208, Guinea Road, Hill Street, Granite Street, Jefferson Street,
Lincoln Street, South Street, Main Street, and West Street.
Sec. 6-140 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-142
CHCT:147
SPECIAL EVENT — An event or function occurring within the City of
Biddeford that is open to, or intended to attract the general public, and
requires the closure of a public way, or any part thereof, for a period longer
than two hours. Large-scale public events may involve or take place on a
public way or in or on publicly held facilities. Depending on the location and
time of the event, smaller-scale events involving a brief or transitory closure
of a public way, or any event that requires the full or partial closure of a
street for a period of less than two hours, e.g., a parade, shall be reviewed
by the Police Chief, who may choose to refer it to the full Coordinating
Committee for approval. Except for Route No. 1, a special event may involve
the closure of primary streets within the City.
TRAFFIC SAFETY OFFICER — A member of the Police Department
assigned by the Chief of Police as the City's coordinator/contact person for
block parties and/or special events held on or upon public streets.
Sec. 6-143. Permit required. [Amended 6-6-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.54]
Any person who desires to conduct or sponsor an event at a public park,
public ground, or street of the City in which it could reasonably be assumed
that 25 or more persons might gather or participate shall first apply for and
obtain a permit from the Codes Enforcement Office, which after collecting
the fee described below, will process the application in coordination with
the permitting authority as defined under Section 6-144. Special event
permit fees shall not be waived without City Council approval.
Sec. 6-144. Permitting authority; regulations.
Fees required per application or per day:
a. Administrative fee: $25.
b. Parade permit: $50.
c. Block party permit: $75.
d. Mass gathering (over 1,000 people): $100.
(1)
The Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee shall be the
permitting authority for events held in any of the City's parks listed in
Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances, in which it could reasonably be
assumed that 25 or more persons might gather or participate.
(a)
The Chief of Police or his designee shall be the permitting authority
for events in which it could reasonably be assumed that public streets,
public rights-of-way would be blocked so as to prevent the free and
unobstructed movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(b)
The City Council shall be the permitting authority for City of Biddeford
parks, recreation, public buildings, grounds and streets for events in
which it could reasonably be assumed that 1,000 or more persons might
gather or participate; or any event which is proposed to last longer than
(c)
Sec. 6-142 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6-144
CHCT:148
Sec. 6-145. Permit application.
Any person, firm, corporation, business or organization seeking a permit to
hold a special event within the City of Biddeford must file an application
(See Appendix A12) with the permitting authority at least 30 days prior to
the beginning of the event; or in cases related to activities protected by the
First Amendment to the United States or Maine Constitution, other than
commercial speech, two business days. Permit applications are available
through download on the City's website or at the City Clerk's Office.
two consecutive days, regardless of the number of persons anticipated
to gather or participate.
The application must include a site plan or a detailed map showing:
a. The location of the special event.
The location of any grandstand, stage, viewing area, rest room
facilities, vendor's parking/assembly areas (if necessary) and any
other equipment or material brought in for use during the special
event.
b.
A written description and the location of any traffic control devices,
barricades, or other signage necessitated by the event.
c.
(1)
The application must describe how the event coordinator will notify the
residents and/or businesses in the area that could be affected by the
special event. At the least, this shall include a public notification in a
local newspaper, and a mass mailing to the residents and/or business in
the area.
(2)
The application shall be accompanied by an indemnification agreement
(Appendix B)13 which releases the City of Biddeford and its officers
and employees from any liability arising from, or in connection with
the special event, and a certificate of insurance with minimum liability
coverage in the amount of $400,000.
(3)
The applicant and/or organization is responsible for the full cleanup
of the area immediately following the special event, and the applicant
agrees to reimburse the City for costs to repair any City facility or
property damaged during the event, including during the time of setup
and tear down. The City shall invoice the applicant upon completion
of the repairs with net thirty-day terms. Only water-soluble,
nonpermanent markings or chalk may be used on City rights-of-way.
(4)
Depending upon the size and nature of the event, the City may require
that City employees, including Police, Fire, Public Works, Code
Enforcement and/or Parks and Recreation, are present at or assist with
the event. The City shall determine the number of personnel necessary
(5)
12.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
13.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 6-144 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-145
CHCT:149
Sec. 6-146. Exemptions.
The following are exempted from the provisions of this policy:
to ensure the safety of the public and participants, and to minimize the
inconvenience to residents, and to reduce public liability exposure to
the event sponsor and the City. The cost associated with the use of any
such personnel, including City equipment, is the responsibility of the
event sponsor. The City shall invoice the applicant for the applicable fee
with terms net 30 days. Fees may be waived in whole or in part by the
City Council prior to the special event.
Upon receipt of a completed application, the Chief of Police will hold
a meeting of the Coordinating Committee to discuss logistics for the
special event. The meeting shall be scheduled at the earliest
opportunity, but shall take into account the notification requirement
mandated by this policy, and shall allow sufficient time to permit the
event coordination to advise the public of the special event and of the
Coordinating Committee meeting.
(6)
The Coordinating Committee shall review the application with the event
coordinator to clarify the nature and circumstances of the event and
may establish conditions under which the special event may be held.
The purpose of the Coordinating Committee review shall be to
determine whether the event can be conducted without any adverse
impact upon public safety, or that the proposed event or activity shall
not endanger the health and safety of all persons who visit the area to
be impacted.
(7)
The Coordinating Committee shall consider the following factors prior
to granting authority for a street closure under this policy:
The special event must enhance the cultural, recreational or
economic potential for the City of Biddeford.
a.
Adequate plans for the detouring of local traffic have been made by
the event coordinators.
b.
Reasonable access for business and residents working and living
within the affected area has been provided.
c.
Proper notification of persons living and residing within the
affected areas has occurred.
d.
Traffic flaggers are the responsibility of the event coordinator,
and must be approved for use by the Committee. Safety training
requirements and age of the flaggers will be factors.
e.
(8)
A special event that is sponsored and already being coordinated by the
City of Biddeford.
(1)
Athletic events regulated by the Recreation Department or School
Department of the City.
(2)
Sec. 6-145 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6-146
CHCT:150
Sec. 6-147. Duties of permittee; exemption.
Utility or maintenance work governed by other provisions of the City
ordinances.
(3)
The fees established by this policy shall not apply to activities protected
by the First Amendment to the United States or Maine Constitution,
other than commercial speech, if the permit for the activity allows the
activity to use park space for eight hours or less in one calendar day.
The foregoing exemption shall not apply to an event or activity intended
or scheduled to occur more than 14 cumulative hours in a period of
seven consecutive days during which its permit allows exclusive use of
park space. For the purpose of this subsection, an event or activity shall
be considered to be using park space during the time in which a permit
allows the event or activity exclusive use of the space, whether or not
the activity is actually occurring during that entire time, and whether
or not the applicant allows other uses to occur during that time. The
City's determination of the need for exclusive use shall be final.
(4)
The fees established under this policy shall not apply to a
demonstration or protest that is protected by the First Amendment to
the United States or Maine Constitution, nor is a permit required if
the demonstration is conducted so as not to interfere with the free and
unobstructed passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Otherwise, a
permit is required, but no fee shall be imposed.
(5)
Duties.
The permittee is responsible for designating a person who shall be
in charge of the conduct of the event or activity and who shall be
on the park grounds while the event or activity is being conducted.
(1)
The permittee is responsible for keeping the park clean and free
from debris.
(2)
Where structures are to be erected in the park, the permittee shall
be responsible for complying with building code requirements,
including, but not limited to, the section of the building code
dealing with temporary structures.
(3)
For events where more than 2,000 individuals are anticipated to
gather or participate in the event or activity in the park, the
permittee shall provide a bond in the form of cash, certified check
or surety bond from a surety company qualified to do business in
the State of Maine in an amount of not less than $2,000. Such
bond shall be utilized to guarantee cleanup of the area and shall be
applied against claims by the City for excessive damage to real or
personal property in the park.
(4)
(a)
(b) Exemption.
Sec. 6-146 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-147
CHCT:151
Sec. 6-148. Appeals.
Any person firm or organization who has been denied a special event permit
may appeal to the City Manager for reconsideration.
Activities protected by the first amendment to the United States
or Maine Constitution, other than commercial speech, are exempt
from Subsection (a)(4) if the permit for the activity allows the
activity to use park space for eight hours or less in one calendar
day.
(1)
The foregoing exemption shall not apply to an event or activity
intended or scheduled to occur more than 14 cumulative hours in
a period of seven consecutive days during which its permit allows
exclusive use of park space. For the purpose of this subsection an
event or activity shall be considered to be using park space during
the time in which a permit allows the exclusive use of the space,
whether or not the event or activity is actually occurring during
that entire time, and whether or not the applicant allows other uses
to occur during that time.
(2)
Sec. 6-147 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6-148
CHCT:152
ARTICLE V
SALES, POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF LIQUOR AT AND
DURING[A SdPoEpCteIdAL5 -E1V6E-2N0T1S7 OBNy OCrIdT.Y N PoU. B2L0I1C7 .P3R6]OPERTY
Sec. 6-149. Application; term defined.
Sec. 6-150. Purpose.
This policy sets forth the procedures, requirements, and limitations on the
use of City property for the service and/or sale of liquor at and during
permitted special events. Special events do not include gatherings of family
and friends in public parks, listed under Chapter 46, Section 46-5. This
policy is subject to and supplements any applicable provisions in the Code
of Ordinances for special events on and other uses of City property.
Sec. 6-151. Properties authorized for special events.
Whenever a special event has been specifically authorized by the City
Council for the service and/or sale of liquor, this authorization shall be
limited to income tax exempt organizations or governmental entities, and
restricted to the following properties:
Facility Address
Mechanics Park Corner of Water and Main Streets
Shevenell Park 147 Main Street
St. Louis Field 284 Hill Street
Sec. 6-152. Reviewing authority.
Applications for liquor on City property for sale, possession, and/or
consumption of liquor at special events shall be submitted along with the
event application to the Biddeford Codes Department not less than 30 days
prior to the special event, although the Codes Enforcement Officer may
accept late applications in exigent or special circumstances.
Sec. 6-153. Restrictions and permissions.
In addition to the requirements set forth under Article IV of this
chapter, applications for the sale, possession and consumption of liquor
at special events which are held on City public property, that fall within
the jurisdiction of the City Council, must be completed on a form that
has been approved by the City Clerk.
(a)
As used herein, "liquor" means spirits, wine, malt liquor or hard cider,
or any substance containing liquor, intended for human consumption,
that contains more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume.
(b)
An applicant who has received permission to sell or serve liquor during
a special event must agree to the following restrictions in order to gain
permission to serve liquor:
(a)
Sec. 6-149 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-153
CHCT:153
Liquor is limited to malt liquor and wine only. No other spirits are
permitted.
(1)
Liquor may be sold and served for on-premises consumption only
by a licensed caterer, or a nonprofit organization registered with
the Secretary of State, and licensed to sell alcoholic beverages
through the Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages. Prior to the special
event, the caterer, or other the qualified nonprofit organization,
shall provide proof that the caterer has received all state and local
licenses and permits necessary for the sale and service of liquor at
the event, and shall provide a certificate of liquor liability insurance
in an amount to be determined by the City, which certificate names
both the City of Biddeford and the applicant as additional insureds.
(2)
At least 30 days prior to the event, the applicant must provide to
the City the following:
Copies of all required permits, licenses and insurance
certificates;
a.
The name(s) and complete and accurate contact information
for the state-licensed caterer, or qualified nonprofit
organization, who will be staffing the event;
b.
The names and addresses of the trained servers who are
expected to be staffing the event, together with evidence of
their training; and
c.
The name of a responsible party or parties (which may also
be the applicant or caterer) designated by the applicant to
supervise the sale and/or service of liquor at and during the
special event.
d.
(3)
The responsible party listed on the event application shall serve as
the contact person during the event, and one or more responsible
party must be present on the site for the entire duration of the sale
or service of liquor at the special event.
(4)
The Security and Fees Chart below specifies the number of security
personnel to be present, and the arrangements and expense for the
same shall be borne by the applicant.
(5)
All liquor servers at the special event must have received TIPS
training (Training for Intervention Procedures) approved by the
State of Maine.
(6)
Liquor may be served only in area(s) specifically laid out and
identified as such in the special events application, reviewed by
the City, and approved by the State of Maine Bureau of Alcoholic
Beverages. The applicant shall assure that signs are prominently
posted that identify liquor restrictions at all entrance and exit
points.
(7)
Sec. 6-153 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6-153
CHCT:154
The applicant must designate TIPS-trained servers (number
specified in chart below) to serve and oversee the area that is
licensed for the sale and consumption of liquor at all times. This
person is responsible for verifying the legal age of each person
consuming or possessing liquor.
(8)
The applicant or its caterer is responsible for the purchase and
transportation of all liquor to be sold or served at the special event.
(9)
Patrons attending the event are strictly prohibited from bringing in
their own beverages.
(10)
Only a caterer or TIPS-trained server may dispense beer from
kegs or barrels. Proper recycling of empty liquor containers is the
responsibility of the applicant. No person less than 21 years of age
may serve, possess and/or consume liquor.
(11)
Oversized drinks, contests, volume discounts, or similar incentives
are not permitted.
(12)
The serving of all liquor must cease at least 30 minutes prior to the
specified and approved closing time of the special event.
(13)
All liquor and related containers must be removed from the
premises immediately after the event. The applicant must provide
appropriate cleaning of the area sufficient to eliminate any liquor
residue or smell on the premises.
(14)
An adequate supply of food must be served and available to persons
attending the special event. It is recommended that all event
organizers take steps to encourage food consumption to help
reduce the risk of intoxication. Nonliquor must be made available
and at a lower cost than any liquor.
Security and Fees Chart
Number of
People 1 to 100 101 to 200 201 to 300*
Security
Personnel
Minimum 1
security
personnel
Minimum 2
security
personnel
Minimum 3
security
personnel
Liquor Permit
Fee
$150 $150 $150
Servers/
Caterer (TIPS
training)
Minimum 1
TIPS-trained
server
Minimum 2
TIPS-trained
servers
Minimum 3
TIPS-trained
servers
NOTES:
* Requisite levels of staffing for special events with over 300
participants shall be determined by the reviewing authority on
a case-by-case basis.
(15)
Sec. 6-153 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-153
CHCT:155
Sec. 6-154. Termination of activity.
The Code Enforcement Officer, Chief of Police, or their designee may order
the immediate termination of the special event if the applicant is found
to be in violation of any term or condition of applicant's permit, or any
state statute or local ordinance or regulation. Upon such termination, all
activities shall cease and all equipment, furnishings and other material shall
be removed from the premises, and the premises cleaned and restored to
its original condition forthwith.
Sec. 6-155. Assignment.
Permits issued pursuant to these regulations are for the specific event, with
a specific date, time and place listed on the application. Permits are not
transferable or assignable to any other person, group or other entity.
Sec. 6-156. Prohibited acts.
Except as authorized herein, liquor may not be sold, served or consumed at
any of the City's athletic fields or playgrounds.
The City reserves the right to amend and/or impose additional policies,
requirements, deposits and restrictions by order of the City Council
and/or as conditions imposed on one or more special events applicants.
(b)
Sec. 6-153 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 6-156
CHCT:156
Chapter 10
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 46.
Sec. 6-156 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 6-156
CHCT:157

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1. Permitting grazing animals to run at large. [Code 1975,
§ 5-1]
No owner or person having the care of any sheep, swine, horse, mule, ox,
cow or other grazing animal shall permit or suffer such animal to go at
large on any street, wharf, lane, alley, common, square or other public place
within this City.
Sec. 10-2. Rabid animals. [Code 1975, §§ 5-2—5-5]
Sec. 10-3. Impoundment. [Code 1975, §§ 5-6—5-10; Ord. No.
2002.40, 4-16-2002]
The Health Officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be
infected with rabies.
(a)
During the period of a rabies quarantine, every animal bitten by an
animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed or, at the
owner's expense and option, shall be treated for rabies infection by a
licensed veterinarian, or held 30 days under quarantine by the owner
in the same manner as other animals are quarantined.
(b)
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand,
be surrendered to the Health Officer.
(c)
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or
destruction as required in this section when demand is made therefor
by the Health Officer.
(d)
A police officer or person performing duties as animal control officer
shall have the authority to impound animals found in violation of this
chapter.
(a)
An animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be
reclaimed by the owner upon payment of the impoundment fee set forth
in Subsection (c) of this section.
(b)
An animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter may be
reclaimed as provided in Subsection (b) upon payment by the owner of
the following fees to the City:
(1) First impoundment for each animal: $15.
(2) Second impoundment for each animal: $30.
(3) Third and subsequent impoundments for each animal: $50.
(c)
The City may transfer title of all animals held by it at its animal shelter
after the legal detention period of six days has expired, and the animal
has not been claimed by its owner.
(d)
Sec. 10-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 10-3
CHCT:159
Sec. 10-4. through Sec. 10-25. (Reserved)
An animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter and not
reclaimed by its owner within six days may be humanely destroyed.
After six days impoundment, such animal may be placed in the custody
of some person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will
agree to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(e)
Sec. 10-3 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 10-4
CHCT:160
ARTICLE II
DOGS
Sec. 10-26. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 5-21]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the
owner or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
DANGEROUS DOG — A dog which shall cause reasonable fear of bodily
injury to any person by attacking or threatening to attack such person.
DOG — Both male and female canines.
KENNEL — One pack or collection of dogs kept under one ownership in
a single premises for breeding, hunting, show, training, field trials and
exhibition purposes.
OWNER — Any person owning, keeping or harboring a dog.
Sec. 10-27. Number of dogs limited. [Code 1975, § 5-22]
Sec. 10-28. License, record and tag requirements. [Code 1975,
§ 5-23]
Dog license, record and tag requirements shall be as prescribed and
required by 7 M.R.S.A. § 3942 et seq.
Sec. 10-29. Impoundment authorized; disposal of unclaimed dogs.
[Code 1975, § 5-24; Ord. No. 2002.40, 4-16-2002]
An unlicensed dog, or a dog whose owner is unknown, which is found
running at large shall be taken up and impounded in the shelter designated
by the City as the City animal shelter, and there confined in a humane
manner for a period of not less than eight days, and may thereafter be
disposed of in a humane manner if not claimed by its owner.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor within the City
more than three dogs over four months old on January 1 in or about
the premises, house, barn or other building, or in or about all buildings
on any one premises occupied by any one family, and the keeping or
harboring of dogs as aforesaid is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(a)
The payment of a license or licenses on dogs shall not be construed to
allow the keeping of more than three dogs, as aforesaid, on any one
premises.
(b)
The limitation provided for in this section shall not apply to licensed
kennels.
(c)
Sec. 10-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 10-30
CHCT:161
Sec. 10-30. Reclaiming after impoundment. [Code 1975, § 5-25]
The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded dog
upon compliance with the license provisions set forth in the state statutes
and the payment of impoundment fees as set forth in Sections 10-3(c) and
10-31.
Sec. 10-31. Impoundment, boarding fees. [Code 1975, § 5-26; Ord.
No. 2002.40, 4-16-2002]
In addition to the impoundment fees imposed under the provisions of
Section 10-3(c), a boarding fee of $12 per day for each dog shall be paid by
the owner prior to the release of a dog.
Sec. 10-32. Notifying owner as alternative to impoundment. [Code
1975, § 5-27]
When dogs are found running at large and their ownership is known, such
dogs need not be impounded, but the City through its duly authorized
agents may, at its discretion, cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court
to answer charges of violation of this article.
Sec. 10-33. Disposition of vicious dogs, dogs that are bitten. [Code
1975, § 5-28]
Sec. 10-34. Authority to proclaim rabies quarantine. [Code 1975,
§ 5-29]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person keeping or harboring any
dog, when notified that such dog has bitten any person or has so injured
any person as to cause abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away such
dog or to permit or allow such dog to be taken beyond the limits of the
City, except under the care of a licensed veterinarian.
(a)
It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of a dog, upon receiving
notice as provided in Subsection (a) of this section, to immediately
place such dog under confinement for a period of at least 10 days.
(b)
Any dog which has been bitten by another dog having or suspected
of having rabies shall be immediately impounded for observation as
provided in this section.
(c)
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person keeping or harboring any
dog when notified that such dog has bitten any person or has so injured
any person as to cause abrasion of the skin to destroy such animal
without permission of the Health Officer.
(d)
Upon positive diagnosis of rabies in any animal within the City, the
Mayor shall proclaim and invoke a Citywide quarantine for a period of
30 days, and upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be
taken into the streets, or be permitted to be on the streets, during such
period of quarantine.
(a)
Sec. 10-30 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 10-34
CHCT:162
Sec. 10-35. Running at large on public ways prohibited; restraint
required. [Code 1975, § 5-30; amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
2014.109]
Dogs on a public way or place shall be under restraint. For a dog to be
"under restraint" as required in this section, it must be controlled by a
leash, which shall not be more than eight feet long, on or within a vehicle
being driven or parked on the streets, or within the property limits of its
owner or keeper, or in specially defined "off leash" areas.
Off-leash areas: All dogs must be within 50 feet of owner or keeper and be
under voice control. "Voice control" is defined as being able to immediately
call the dog back with one call.
Off-leash areas within the City include:
Sec. 10-36. Leashing dogs on private property not required. [Code
1975, § 5-31]
Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted as requiring the
leashing of any dog while on private premises.
Sec. 10-37. Female dogs in heat. [Code 1975, § 5-32]
If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the
period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended by the
Mayor for an additional six months from the time of the last positive
report.
(b)
Rotary Park: The river bank along the boat launch side of the park.
This shall be defined as the area bordered by and including the boat
launch, up the river bank to where the access road and the river split.
The "river bank," for this purpose, is defined as up to but not including
the dirt road in the park. Dogs may not use any part of the Rotary
Park beach between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. from May
25 to September 15 of each year. [Amended 5-16-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.37]
(1)
Clifford Park: Dogs may be off leash and under voice command on
designated trails in the wooded section of the park. This section is
defined as the wooded area of the public park and 100 yards from all
trail heads and parking areas.
(2)
City beaches: Unleashed dogs under voice command are allowed on
the City's public beaches all day from September 16 to March 14. This
subsection does not apply to the beach at Rotary Park. See Chapter 46,
Section 46-13(d). [Added 5-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.37]
(3)
The owner of any female dog in heat shall keep such dog confined or on
a leash at all times and shall not permit such dog to be at large within
the City or on any premises other than those of the owner.
(a)
Sec. 10-34 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 10-37
CHCT:163
Sec. 10-38. Dangerous dogs declared nuisance; owner's
responsibility. [Code 1975, § 5-35]
Sec. 10-39. Disposal of canine feces. [Ord. of 4-16-1991, § 5-37;
Ord. of 2-16-1999(2)]
Sec. 10-40. through Sec. 10-54. (Reserved)
Every female dog found running at large in violation of this section is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be impounded. The
owner, keeper or person harboring such female dog in heat running at
large shall be in violation of this section.
(b)
(a) A dangerous dog is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
The owner of any dangerous dog shall keep such dog confined in a
secure enclosure or on a chain or leash controlled by the owner at all
times and shall not permit such dog to be at large within the City.
(b)
Owner's responsibility. It shall be a violation of this section for any
person who owns, possesses, or controls a dog to fail to remove and
dispose of any feces left by his dog on any sidewalk, street, publicly
owned property or privately owned property unless authorized from the
owner.
(a)
Duty to possess means of removal.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person who owns,
possesses or controls a dog to appear with such dog on any
sidewalk, street or publicly owned property without the means of
removal of canine feces left by such dog.
(1)
For the purpose of this section, the means of removal shall be any
tool, implement, or other device carried for the purpose of picking
up and containing such feces. Disposal shall be accomplished by
transporting such feces to a toilet designed for the disposal of
human feces.
(2)
(b)
Exemption. This section shall not apply to a dog accompanying any
handicapped person who, by reason of his handicap, is physically
unable to comply with the requirements of this section.
(c)
Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by any
designated representative of the Health Officer or of the Chief of Police.
(d)
Penalties for violation. Violation of this section shall be punished by a
civil forfeiture not to exceed $50 for each occurrence.
(e)
Sec. 10-37 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 10-40
CHCT:164
ARTICLE III
DOMESTICATED CHICKENS
[Adopted 6-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.33]
Sec. 10-55. Purpose.
Sec. 10-56. Permit required. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2012.111]
A permit is required from the Code Enforcement Office for the keeping
of domesticated chickens. Additionally, a building permit is required for
the construction of a henhouse and chicken pen, or the conversion of any
existing structure or portion of structure. A building permit shall not be
required for a pre-built chicken coup that is less than 80 square feet. The
permit is specific to the permittee and may not be assigned. In the event
that the keeping of chickens is discontinued for longer than six months, the
permit shall become void. Any fees related to domesticated chickens shall
be set by City Council after a public hearing.
Sec. 10-57. Fencing and screening.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards for the keeping
of domesticated chickens within the City of Biddeford. This article is
intended to reduce the potential for conflicts between neighbors that
may arise if the keeping of domesticated chickens creates a nuisance.
A nuisance may be created when the keeping of domesticated chickens
is not done in a way that maintains the health, safety and welfare of the
community. This includes, but is not limited to, noise, odor, unsanitary
animal living conditions, unsanitary waste storage and removal, the
attraction of rodents and parasites/insects, nonconfined animals
leaving the owner's property.
(a)
It is the responsibility of all owners of these animals to maintain
conditions that will improve, rather than detract from, the quality of life
outside of the RF Zone.
(b)
Fencing shall be erected to confine animals to an established area
of the property. The fencing shall be of a height that does not allow
the animals to leave the fenced-in area without human assistance.
Fencing shall take into account existing conditions in the neighborhood.
Appropriate types of fencing include chicken wire, stockade, and
picket. The use of chain-link fencing for the enclosure of domesticated
chickens is prohibited in the City.
(a)
Vegetative buffering must be used to completely screen the area from
abutting properties when non-solid fencing is used. Free ranging shall
be permissible in the RF Zone. Upon receiving more than one
complaint, the owner of the chickens shall meet the fencing and
screening requirements. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2012.111]
(b)
Sec. 10-55 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 10-58
CHCT:165
Sec. 10-58. Waste storage and removal.
Provision must be made for the storage and removal of chicken manure
to the satisfaction of the Animal Control Officer. All stored manure shall
be covered by a fully enclosed structure with a roof or lid over the entire
structure, except for a properly maintained compost pile. No more than
three cubic feet of manure shall be stored at one time. In addition, the
henhouse, chicken pen and surrounding area must be kept free from trash
and accumulated droppings. Odors from chickens or chicken manure shall
not be perceptible at the property.
Sec. 10-59. Lighting.
Lighting to protect domesticated chickens from predators and intruders
shall be a ninety-degree cut-off luminaire. All lighting must be set to a
motion detector so that the lighting is turned off when no motion is
detected.
Sec. 10-60. Proximity to bodies of water.
In cases where the domesticated chickens are kept on a property within
100 feet of a body of water or drainageway, provisions must be made to
control the runoff of pollution to the body of water. To accomplish this goal,
all manure must be kept within a roofed enclosure.
Sec. 10-61. Insects and parasites; rodents.
Sec. 10-62. Number of animals per lot. [Amended 11-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012.111]
The maximum number of chickens allowed is six per lot regardless of the
number of dwelling units on the lot. In the RF and SR-1 Zones, a maximum
number of chickens shall be 12 per lot. Only female chickens are allowed.
There is no restriction on chicken species. Chickens must be kept in a clean,
dry and odor-free enclosure or fenced area at all times. During daylight
hours, chickens may be allowed outside of the chicken pen in a securely
fenced yard in a manner that will not disturb the use or enjoyment of
The property owner shall take necessary action to reduce the
infestation of insects and parasites. Domesticated chickens found to
be infested with insects and parasites that may result in unhealthy
conditions to human habitation shall be removed by the Animal Control
Officer. The Animal Control Officer may delay the removal of the
animals through the establishment and completion of a plan of action.
(a)
The property owner shall take necessary action to prevent the entry
of rodents and/or predators into the domesticated chickens living area.
Domesticated chickens that are not housed in an environment that
prevents the infestation of rodents may be removed by the Animal
Control Office.
(b)
Sec. 10-58 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 10-62
CHCT:166
neighboring lots due to noise, odor or other adverse impact. Chickens shall
be secured within the henhouse during non-daylight hours.
Henhouses and chicken pens shall only be located in rear yards, and are
subject to a ten-foot setback from all property lines. For a corner lot or other
property where no rear yard exists, a side yard may be used as long as the
ten-foot setback is met. A henhouse shall not be placed in a front yard.
Sec. 10-63. Prohibit acts.
No person shall sell eggs or engage in chicken breeding or fertilizer
production for commercial purposes. The slaughtering of chickens is
prohibited.
Sec. 10-62 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 10-63
CHCT:167
Chapter 14
AVIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1. Administration — See Ch. 2.
Sec. 10-63 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 10-63
CHCT:168
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 3-1]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AIRPORT — The Biddeford Municipal Airport, inclusive of the land used for,
or intended to be used for, the landing and taking off of aircraft. "Airport"
also includes any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended to be used,
for airport buildings, other airport facilities, rights-of-way and access roads
together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon.
AIRPORT MANAGER — The duly appointed Airport Manager of the
Biddeford Municipal Airport.
COMMISSION — The Biddeford Airport Commission. 14
Sec. 14-2. Violations. [Code 1975, § 3-2]
No person shall be intoxicated, disorderly, engage in any form of
gambling or commit any act constituting a nuisance on the airport.
(a)
No person, except those duly authorized by law, shall carry any weapon,
firearm or explosive in the airport, except encased sporting guns for air
shipment.
(b)
No person shall enter upon the airport field area, runways, taxiways,
apron, service area or any area designated as restricted except persons
assigned to duty therein and persons authorized by the Airport
Manager, or by proper agencies, or passengers under appropriate
supervision. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.8]
(c)
Whoever, with the intent to destroy or disturb, in any manner, any
building, equipment or flora of the airport or its users; alter or erect any
building or sign; abandon any personal property in the airport; use or
confiscate any material or property without the consent of the Airport
Manager; or whoever shall, individually or in association with one or
more others, willfully break, injure, tamper with or remove any parts
of any vehicle or aircraft or temporarily or permanently prevent the
useful operation thereof for any purpose against the will or without the
consent of the owner of such vehicle or aircraft, or who shall in any
manner willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running or
operation of such vehicle or aircraft; or whoever willfully takes and uses
any vehicle, airplane or other aircraft or takes, drives, rides or uses the
property of another, without the consent of the owner or person having
legal custody, care and control thereof shall be subject to the penalty
(d)
14.Editor's Note: The definition of "Municipal Airport Supervisor," added 2-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014.8, which immediately followed, was repealed 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41.
Sec. 14-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 14-2
CHCT:169
Sec. 14-3. through Sec. 14-25. (Reserved)
provisions of Section 1-12 of this Code. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014.8]
Sec. 14-2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 14-3
CHCT:170
ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 14-26. through Sec. 14-35. (Reserved)
Sec. 14-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 14-26
CHCT:171

DIVISION 2
AIRPORT COMMISSION
Sec. 14-36. Established. [Code 1975, § 3-18]
The Biddeford Airport Commission is hereby established.
Sec. 14-37. Purposes. [Code 1975, § 3-17]
The purposes of the Airport Commission shall be as follows:
Sec. 14-38. Composition; qualification of Commissioners;
appointment; terms of office. [Code 1975, § 3-19; Ord. No. 99.69,
8-17-1999; Ord. No. 2006.17, 3-7-2006; 2-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014.8]
The Airport Commission shall consist of seven Commissioners, with not
more than three of the members holding a valid and current airplane pilot's
license. Commissioners shall be residents of the City. The Commissioners
shall be nominated by the Mayor, subject to confirmation of the Council.
Commissioners shall serve staggered terms of three years. On initial setup,
two of the Commissioners shall be appointed for one-year terms; three
of the Commissioners for two-year terms; and two Commissioners for three
years.
Sec. 14-39. Filling vacancies. [Code 1975, § 3-20]
Vacancies on the Airport Commission shall be filled for the remainder of the
term in the same manner as original appointments are made.
To encourage and promote the maintenance of the existing facilities
and services of the airport to ensure it meets industry standards and
laws. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.8]
(1)
To formulate long-range and short-range plans for the operation,
maintenance and improvement of the municipal airport.
(2)
To gather, correlate, preserve and maintain records, statistics, surveys,
maps and other pertinent data relating to land classifications and uses,
buildings, federal and state affiliations and other matters that will
enable the Commission to perform its functions and purposes.
(3)
To serve as an informational and coordinating agency for other
municipal departments relating to such functions and purposes.
(4)
To perform such other functions as may be required to effectuate the
purposes of this article.
(5)
To make certain that the airport is operated for the use and benefit of
the public and to make it available to all types, kinds, and classes of
aeronautical activity on fair and reasonable terms and without unjust
discrimination.
(6)
Sec. 14-36 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 14-40
CHCT:173
Sec. 14-40. Election of officers. [Code 1975, § 3-21; amended
2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.8]
At the beginning of each fiscal year, the Mayor shall appoint a Chairman,
and the Commission shall elect a Vice Chairman and a Secretary.
Sec. 14-41. Chairman to call meetings and preside. [Code 1975,
§ 3-22]
The Chairman of the Commission shall call all Commission meetings on
three days' notice, unless waived, and shall preside at such meetings.
Sec. 14-42. Quorum at meetings. [Code 1975, § 3-23]
A quorum shall be necessary at all meetings of the Commission.
Sec. 14-43. Majority vote required. [Code 1975, § 3-24]
A majority vote of the Commissioners is required for any official action.
Sec. 14-44. Vice Chairman's power in absence of Chairman. [Code
1975, § 3-25]
The Vice Chairman of the Commission shall be vested with all of the powers
of the Chairman in case of his absence or incapacity.
Sec. 14-45. Secretary's duties. [Code 1975, § 3-26]
The Secretary of the Commission shall record all proceedings of the
Commission and shall give notices of all Commission meetings.
Sec. 14-46. Administration by Commissioners. [Code 1975, § 3-27]
The Commission shall be administered by the Commissioners appointed and
confirmed pursuant to Section 14-38.
Sec. 14-47. Authority to establish committees; membership
restricted. [Code 1975, § 3-28]
The Commission may, from time to time, establish such committees as
it feels necessary. Members of the Commission shall not be eligible for
membership on such committees.
Sec. 14-48. Designation as agent for City. [Code 1975, § 3-29]
The Council may, from time to time, designate the Commission to serve as
agent for the City in matters relating to the federal government, the state,
other cities and towns or persons and corporations.
Sec. 14-49. through Sec. 14-60. (Reserved)
Sec. 14-40 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 14-49
CHCT:174
DIVISION 3
AIRPORT MANAGER
Sec. 14-61. Nomination. [Code 1975, § 3-36; Ord. No. 99.69,
8-17-1999]
An Airport Manager shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to
confirmation of the Council.
Sec. 14-62. Tenure. [Code 1975, § 3-37]
The tenure of office of the Airport Manager shall be the same as any
subordinate officer of the City.
Sec. 14-63. Duties. [Code 1975, § 3-40; amended 2-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014.8; 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41]
The Airport Manager shall report to the Facilities Manager and shall
perform such duties as are assigned.
The Airport Manager shall notify public access and the City Clerk of all
meetings held by the Airport Commission for scheduling and televising.
Minutes shall be provided to the City Clerk.
Sec. 14-64. Supervision of airport operations. [Code 1975, § 3-41]
The day-to-day operation of the airport shall be under the supervision of the
Airport Manager.
Sec. 14-65. Attendance at Commission meetings. [Code 1975,
§ 3-42]
The Airport Manager shall attend all meetings of the Airport Commission as
requested by the Commission, but shall have no vote.
Sec. 14-66. Duty to submit budget, report. [Code 1975, § 3-43;
amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41]
The Airport Manager and Facilities Manager shall prepare and submit to
the Commission a proposed operational budget and capital improvement
recommendations for the ensuing year.
Sec. 14-67. Duty to obtain licenses for operation of airport. [Code
1975, § 3-44]
The Airport Manager shall obtain the necessary licenses for the operation
of the airport.
Sec. 14-68. Salary. [Code 1975, § 3-45; amended 6-7-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.41]
The salary of the Airport Manager shall be determined by the City Manager.
Sec. 14-61 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 14-69
CHCT:175
Sec. 14-69. Removal. [Code 1975, § 3-38]
The Airport Manager may be removed from office pursuant to the Charter.
Sec. 14-69 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 14-69
CHCT:176
Chapter 18
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and protection — See Ch. 38.
Solid waste — See Ch. 58.
Subdivisions — See Ch. 66.
Utilities — See Ch. 70.
Land development — See Part III.
Sec. 14-69 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 14-69
CHCT:177

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Bedbugs. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.92]
Purpose. All property owners and or tenants of any building shall take
appropriate actions to prevent and or eliminate any bedbug complaints.
(a)
Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PEST CONTROL AGENT — A commercial applicator of pesticides
certified pursuant to Title 22, § 1471-D.
(b)
Landlord duties. A landlord has the following duties:
Upon written or oral notice from a tenant that a dwelling unit
may have a bedbug infestation, the landlord shall, within five days,
conduct an inspection of the unit for bedbugs.
(1)
Upon a determination that an infestation of bedbugs does exist in
a dwelling unit, the landlord shall, within 10 days, contact a pest
control agent pursuant to Subsection (c)(3).
(2)
A landlord shall take reasonable measures to effectively identify
and treat the bedbug infestation as determined by a pest control
agent. The landlord shall employ a pest control agent that carries
current liability insurance to promptly treat the bedbug infestation.
(3)
Before renting a dwelling unit, a landlord shall disclose to a
prospective tenant if an adjacent unit or units are currently
infested with or are being treated for bedbugs. Upon request from
a tenant or prospective tenant, a landlord shall disclose the last
date that the dwelling unit the landlord seeks to rent or an adjacent
unit or units were inspected for a bedbug infestation and found to
be free of a bedbug infestation.
(4)
A landlord may not offer for rent a dwelling unit that the landlord
knows or suspects is infested with bedbugs.
(5)
A landlord shall offer to make reasonable assistance available to a
tenant who is not able to comply with requested bedbug inspection
or control measures under Subsection (d)(3). The landlord shall
disclose to the tenant what the cost may be for the tenant's
compliance with the requested bedbug inspection or control
measure. After making this disclosure, the landlord may provide
financial assistance to the tenant to prepare the unit for bedbug
treatment. A landlord may charge the tenant a reasonable amount
for any such assistance, subject to a reasonable repayment
schedule, not to exceed six months, unless an extension is
otherwise agreed to by the landlord and the tenant. This subsection
may not be construed to require the landlord to provide the tenant
(6)
(c)
Sec. 18-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-1
CHCT:179
Sec. 18-2. through Sec. 18-21. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-22. Notices and orders. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
Notice to owner or to person or persons responsible. In order to maintain
unilateral requirements in notifying property owners of violations observed
or alleged, this section supersedes any other notice requirement listed in
the City of Biddeford Revised Code of Ordinances or any supplemental
code adopted by the City. Except as provided in Chapter 18, Section 18-25,
when an employee of the City of Biddeford determines that there has been
a violation of the City of Biddeford Revised Code of Ordinances or any
supplemental code adopted by the City or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred or is occurring, notice shall be given to the owner
or the person or persons responsible therefor in the manner prescribed in
Sections 18-23 and 18-24.
with alternate lodging or to pay to replace the tenant's personal
property.
Tenant duties. A tenant has the following duties:
A tenant shall promptly notify a landlord when the tenant knows of
or suspects an infestation of bedbugs in the tenant's dwelling unit.
(1)
Upon receiving twenty-four-hour notice including reasons for and
scope of the request for access to the premises, a tenant shall
grant the landlord of the dwelling unit, the landlord's agent or the
landlord's pest control agent and its employees access to the unit
for purposes of an inspection for or control of the infestation of
bedbugs. The initial inspection may include only a visual inspection
and manual inspection of the tenant's bedding and upholstered
furniture. Employees of the pest control agent may inspect items
other than bedding and upholstered furniture when such an
inspection is considered reasonable by the pest control agent. If
the pest control agent finds bedbugs in the dwelling unit or in an
adjoining unit, the pest control agent may have additional access to
the tenant's personal belongings as determined reasonable by the
pest control agent.
(2)
Upon receiving twenty-four-hour notice, a tenant shall comply with
reasonable measures to eliminate and control a bedbug infestation
as set forth by the landlord and the pest control agent. The tenant's
unreasonable failure to completely comply with the pest control
measures results in the tenant's being financially responsible for
all pest control treatments of the dwelling unit arising from the
tenant's failure to comply.
(3)
(d)
General penalty. Whenever a tenant and/or property owners fails to
meet any requirements in this section, The City of Biddeford may
impose a fine pursuant to Biddeford Code of Ordinances Chapter 1,
General Provisions, § 1-12.
(e)
Sec. 18-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-23
CHCT:180
Sec. 18-23. Form. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
Such notice prescribed in Section 18-22 shall be in accordance with all of
the following:
Sec. 18-24. Method of service. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
Sec. 18-25. Notice and service by other means. [Ord. No. 2002.10,
2-5-2002]
An employee of the City of Biddeford, whose purpose and duties are to
enforce the laws of the State of Maine and the ordinances of the City of
Biddeford, are not required to follow the provisions as outlined in Chapter
18, Sections 18-23 and 18-24 provided:
(1) Be in writing.
Reference the real estate in question by using City Tax Map No. Lot
and Sublot No. if applicable, and the most accurate street address
according to the City of Biddeford Tax Assessor's records.
(2)
Include a description of the violation or violations and the adopted code
such violations are referenced from.
(3)
Include a statement requiring the owner or violator to contact the
Code Enforcement Office within five business days to schedule a full
inspection of the real estate referenced and to file a detailed time line of
when repairs will be made and completed, to be approved by the Code
Enforcement Office.
(4)
If a violation or violations create a substantial risk of serious bodily
injury, then the owner or violator must be advised of this and informed
that criminal charges may be referred over to the Police Department
and the building may be posted unfit for occupancy. If a building is
posted unfit for occupancy, the cost related to moving and housing
tenants will be the sole responsibility of the property owner.
(5)
(1) Delivered personally;
A copy sent by regular mail, to the property owner, at the last known
address as maintained by the City of Biddeford Tax Assessor's Office; or
(2)
If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a
copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure referenced in such notice.
(3)
A summons is issued to the property owner or person or persons
responsible for violating any code adopted by the City of Biddeford;
(1)
The summons used is authorized and accepted by the District Court of
the State of Maine;
(2)
Sec. 18-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-25
CHCT:181
Service of the summons is made upon the violator by a person
authorized under law to make such service;
(3)
An attested or certified copy of the ordinance or ordinances so violated
are attached to the original summons; and
(4)
The completed summons is properly recorded in the District Court of
the State of Maine having jurisdiction over the violation.
(5)
Sec. 18-25 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-25
CHCT:182
ARTICLE II
BUILDINGS
DIVISION 1
Registrations and Inspections
[Added 1-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2018.145]
Sec. 18-26. Purpose.
The City intends to hold owners of multifamily dwellings accountable and
responsible for the maintenance of safe living conditions by establishing
a multifamily dwelling unit registration and inspections program. Many
owners form limited-liability companies and other various forms of
proprietorships in order to have undisclosed and unidentifiable principals.
Many individuals no longer have landlines and communicate mainly with
cell phones which are mostly unlisted. This makes the effort to locate
the person(s) who owns the property extremely difficult and very time
consuming. By requiring the disclosure of ownership, it provides a
transparency to the citizens of Biddeford and enables City officials to
perform their duties. The City intends to improve safety and sanitary living
conditions for the residents of multifamily dwellings by establishing a
program of regular inspections of such properties through its Code
Enforcement Office. The City seeks to assure properties come into
compliance with current life safety codes and standards, and that owners
are alerted to any detrimental conditions that could place tenants at risk.
The City intends to work cooperatively and proactively with owners of such
properties by setting a protocol for regular inspections, as well as providing
owners with clear standards for maintenance of their properties.
Sec. 18-27. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
LIFE SAFETY INSPECTION — An inspection performed by the Code
Enforcement Office to evaluate the building for compliance with current
life safety standards and compliance with the International Property
Maintenance Code.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units located all within the same structure and under the same ownership.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT FIRM — Any company responsible for the
management of a multifamily dwelling unit and which has access and
control over the entire premises.
Sec. 18-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-27
CHCT:183
PROPERTY MANAGER — Any individual responsible for the management of
a multifamily dwelling unit and who has access and control over the entire
premises.
Sec. 18-28. Multifamily dwelling unit ownership/registration.
Sec. 18-29. Inspections.
Sec. 18-30. Violations and enforcement.
Owner(s) of a multifamily dwelling building shall register their
ownership with the City. Registrations are due annually or within 30
days of purchase of the property. If a new owner registers mid-year,
they will not be charged as long as the annual fee has already been paid
for the building. The registration is valid through the calendar year.
A.
Registrations will be done through the Code Enforcement Office. All
fees shall be made payable to the City of Biddeford and shall be
processed at the submission of the registration.
B.
In the event the owner uses a property management firm or has a
property manager, the owner shall provide the property manager's
or property management firm's contact information at the time of
registration. If the property management changes during the twelvemonth
registration period, the owner shall notify the City within 30
days of the date of the change.
C.
D. The annual registration and inspection fee is $25 per dwelling unit.
Newly constructed multifamily dwelling units/buildings requiring a
certificate of occupancy for the entire building shall be exempt from
inspection requirements for 10 years from the date of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy.
E.
Should the inspection program come to an end, the annual fee will no
longer be charged.
F.
Life safety inspections for all multifamilies shall be completed every
five years. The owner will be notified at the time of registration if the
inspection will be completed that year or a later year. Once a property
has been inspected, it will not be reinspected for five years thereafter,
unless there is just cause.
A.
Upon two weeks of notice, the owner shall grant the Code Enforcement
Office full access to the property during the life safety inspection. This
shall include, but not be limited to, each dwelling unit, all common
areas, all basements, all outbuildings, and any other area of the
property the Code Enforcement Officer deems necessary to inspect.
B.
The Code Enforcement Office shall have the primary responsibility for
enforcement of this article. If the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her
designee(s), determines that a violation of this article has occurred, he
A.
Sec. 18-27 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-30
CHCT:184
Sec. 18-31. through Sec. 18-35. (Reserved)
or she shall send a notice to the property owner indicating a violation
exists, and a time frame for remediation shall be established.
Subsequent violations of this article shall be subject to the penalties set
forth below.
Violations are as follows:
Failure to register shall result in a penalty fee of $250 assessed for
each 10 calendar days which elapse after that date until such time
the registration fee and all penalty fees are paid in full.
(1)
Failure to update property management/owner contact information
shall result in a penalty fee of $250 for each 10 calendar days which
elsapse after the date the owner was required to notify the City
until such a notice is given and all penalty fees are paid in full.
(2)
Providing false information shall result in a penalty fee of $1,000
for each 10 calendar days which elapse after such information was
provided until such time as the information is corrected and all
penalty fees are paid in full.
(3)
Refusal to allow the Code Office to conduct the inspection shall
result in a fee of $1,000 for each calendar day until the inspection
is complete.
(4)
Renting a unit that has not been registered shall result in a fee of
$250 for each 10 calendar days which elapse after the unit was
rented until such time the registration fee and all penalty fees are
paid in full.
(5)
B.
Sec. 18-30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-31
CHCT:185

DIVISION 2
BUILDING INSPECTOR
Sec. 18-36. Nomination. [Ord. No. 2002.10,15 2-5-2002]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall appoint, and the City Manager shall
confirm, a Building Inspector.
Sec. 18-37. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
To be eligible for appointment to the office of Building Inspector, the
candidate for the position shall meet the requirements of the approved job
description.
Sec. 18-38. Records to be available for public inspection. [Ord. No.
2002.10, 2-5-2002]
All records required by the Code Enforcement Department shall be open to
public inspection for good and sufficient reasons at the stated office hours,
but shall not be removed from the office of the Building Official without his
written consent.
Sec. 18-39. through Sec. 18-41. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-42. Accounting, disposition of funds. [Ord. No. 2002.10,
2-5-2002]
All fees designated as payable to the Building Inspector by statute, charter
or ordinance and received by him in his official capacity shall be accounted
for by him and paid into the City Treasury and credited to the general fund
monthly.
Sec. 18-43. Monthly report to Council; contents of report. [Ord. No.
2002.10, 2-5-2002]
The Building Inspector shall prepare and present to the Council at the
regular monthly meeting a written report for the preceding month. Such
report shall show all fees received by him in his official capacity as Building
Inspector and the amounts he has paid thereon to the City Treasury.
Sec. 18-44. Keeping reports on file. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
The monthly reports required by Section 18-43 shall be recorded and kept
on file in the office of the Building Inspector for a period of three years
following their presentation to the Council and shall be available for public
examination on demand.
Sec. 18-45. through Sec. 18-59. (Reserved)
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, which contained provisions on
buildings.
Sec. 18-36 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-45
CHCT:187

DIVISION 3
PERMITS; FEE SCHEDULE
Sec. 18-60. Permit regulations. [Added 6-1-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-44]
Sec. 18-61. Permit fee schedule. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002;
amended 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.44; 7-5-2011 by Ord. No.
2011.32; 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.40; 6-6-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.52]
Effective July 1, 2017, Building Permit Fee Schedule.
A fee shall be charged for every permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Office, and no permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed in this
section have been collected by the Code Enforcement Office.
(a)
Professional consultant review fees are to be paid for by the applicant
prior to issuance of permits. An increase of 20% will be added to this
fee by the City for handling cost.
(b)
Belated permits. For permits applied for after work has been started
(penalty), the amount of the fee shall be doubled.
(c)
(d) Refund of fees. All permit fees are nonrefundable.
Expiration of permits. All building and electrical permits expire after
one year from date of issuance. Per state statute, 30-A.M.R.S.A. § 4215,
plumbing permits are valid for work commenced within 24 months after
the permit is issued.
(e)
(1) Building permit application fee: $60.
(2) Minimum building permit fee: $40.
Construction permits, per thousand dollars of value (after square
footage is calculated): $14.35.
For projects of $5,000 or less, permit fees shall be waived. This
does not include the application fee for processing.
a.
Exception: Projects started without proper permits shall pay double
permit fees. The application fee shall not be doubled.
b.
(3)
(4) Reinspection fee: $50.
Swimming pools:
a. Aboveground: $50.
b. Inground: $100.
(5)
(6) Demolition permit: $50.
Sec. 18-60 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-61
CHCT:189
Sec. 18-62. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-63. Issuance of occupancy permits subject to adequate
access to premises. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
Sec. 18-64. through Sec. 18-75. (Reserved)
Renewal permits, per thousand dollars of value prorated to remaining
value of structure: $14; minimum fee of $40.
(7)
(8) Certificate of occupancy (not related to building permit): $50.
(9) Letters to attorneys, realtors, brokers, etc.: $25.
(10)Sign permits: $50 per sign.
Zoning Board of Appeals: application fee of $100, plus first class
postage per abutter with 200 feet, plus publication costs.
(11)
In reviewing applications for occupancy permits for new residential
structures, the Building Inspector shall consider the adequacy of access
to the subject premises; and should he have any uncertainties as to
whether or not such access is adequate, he shall request an inspection
by the City Engineer and the Director of Public Works jointly, who
shall make a written report to the Building Inspector. If the report
is affirmative, the Building Inspector may then issue the requested
occupancy permit. If the report is negative, the Building Inspector may
not issue the permit without further authorization by the City Council.
(a)
In making a determination as to the adequacy of access to any house
lot, the inspector (Building Inspector, City Engineer or Director of
Public Works) will consider the width, grades, condition of surface,
drainage features, and any other condition which may result in future
deterioration of the adequacy of access to the subject lot.
(b)
Sec. 18-61 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-64
CHCT:190
DIVISION 4
STANDARDS
Sec. 18-76. Building Code — adopted. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002;
Ord. No. 2004.35, 6-1-2004]
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and
structures, including permits, that certain building code known as the
International Building Code 2003, and International Residential Code 2003,
of which not less than one copy is on file in the office of the City Clerk. Such
code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in
this article. The provisions thereof shall be controlling in the construction
of all buildings and structures therein contained within the corporate limits
of the City.
Sec. 18-76.1. Same — Amendments. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002;
Ord. No. 2004.35, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 2005.67, 8-2-2005]
The building code adopted in Section 18-76 shall be amended as
follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title (page 1): Insert "City of Biddeford."
Section 101.4.1, Electrical (page 1): Delete "ICC Electrical Code"
and insert "Electric Code as adopted by Chapter 18, Article III, of
the Code of the City of Biddeford."
(2)
Section 101.4.4, Plumbing (page 1): "International Plumbing Code"
and "State of Maine Internal Plumbing Code, Chapter 238."
(3)
Section 105.1, Required (page 3): Delete the words "gas,
mechanical" without replacement.
(4)
Section 105.1.1, Annual permit (page 3): Delete entire section
without replacement.
(5)
Section 105.1.2, Annual permit records (page 3): Delete entire
section without replacement.
(6)
Section 105.2, Work exempt from permit (page 3): Delete the
following items 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9 under the heading "Building" without
replacement. Delete all items under the heading "Gas" and insert
"No local permit required for Gas Installations." Delete all items
under the heading "Mechanical" and insert "No local permit
required for Mechanical Installations."
(7)
Section 105.5, Expiration (page 4): Delete entire section and
replace as follows:
(8)
A.
Sec. 18-76 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-76.1
CHCT:191
"Time limitation of permits: A building permit issued under the
provisions of this code shall become void if work has not
commenced within six months of the date of approval and shall
expire one year from the date of issue. A building permit may
be renewed once for a one-year period upon submission of an
application and payment of the prescribed fee. All codes,
ordinances and statutes in effect at the time of the renewal
application must be complied with before said permit is issued."
Section 107.3, Temporary power (page 6): Delete "ICC Electrical
Code" and insert "Electric Code as adopted by Chapter 18, Article
III of the Code of the City of Biddeford."
(9)
Section 112.1, Board of Appeals, General (page 8): Insert "The
Biddeford Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as the Board of
Appeals." after the first sentence.
(10)
Section 1025.2, Minimum size (page 223): Delete exception
without replacement.
(11)
Section 1612.3, Establishment of flood hazard areas (page 300):
Insert "City of Biddeford" and "November 20, 1990."
(12)
Section 1612.4, Design and construction (page 301): Delete the
period at the end of the section and insert "and Article XII of the
Code of the City of Biddeford."
(13)
Section 2111, Masonry Fireplaces (page 427): Delete entire section
and insert "Masonry Fireplaces shall be constructed to the
standards found in NFPA 211, Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces,
Vents and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances, 2002 Edition."
(14)
Section 2112, Masonry Heaters (page 431): Delete entire section
and insert "Masonry Heaters shall be constructed to the standards
found in NFPA 211, Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and
Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances, 2002 Edition."
(15)
Section 2113, Masonry Chimneys (page 431): Delete entire section
and insert "Masonry chimneys shall be constructed to the
standards found in NFPA 211, Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces,
Vents and Solid Fuel-Burning Appliances, 2002 Edition."
(16)
Section 2701.1, Scope (page 543): Delete "ICC Electrical Code" and
insert "Electric Code as adopted by Chapter 18, Article III of the
Code of the City of Biddeford."
(17)
Section 2702.1, Installation (page 543): Delete "the ICC Electric
Code" insert "NFPA 70 National Electrical Code (NEC)."
(18)
Section 2702.2.8, Membrane structures, Section 2702.10, Highly
toxic and toxic materials, Section 2702.11, Organic peroxides,
(19)
Sec. 18-76.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-76.1
CHCT:192
Section 2702.12, Pyrophoric materials (page 543): Delete
"International Fire Code" and insert "NFPA 1."
Section 2702.3, Maintenance (page 543): Delete "the International
Fire Code" and insert "NFPA 110, Standard for Emergency and
Standby Power."
(20)
Section 2801.1, Scope (page 545): Delete "International Fuel Gas
Code" and insert "NFPA 54 National Fuel Gas Code."
(21)
Section 2901.1, Scope (page 547): Insert "State of Maine Internal
Plumbing Code, Chapter 238." Delete International Private Sewage
Disposal Code" and replace with "Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules, Chapter 241."
(22)
Section 2902.1.1, Unisex toilet and bath fixtures (page 549): Insert
"the State of Maine Internal Plumbing Code, Chapter 238."
(23)
Chapter 30, Elevator and Conveying Systems (page 551 through
553); Delete the entire chapter and insert "All Elevator and
Conveying Systems installed shall comply with the Maine State
Elevator Regulations found in Title 32, Chapter 133 of the Maine
Revised Statutes, Annotated."
(24)
Chapter 32, Encroachments into the Public Way (page 561): Delete
the entire section without replacement.
(25)
Section 3305.1, Facilities required (page 563): Delete "the
International Plumbing Code" and insert "Federal and State OSHA
requirements."
(26)
Section 3309.2, Fire hazards (page 565): Delete "International Fire
Code" and insert "NFPA 1."
(27)
Section 3401.3, Compliance with other codes (page 567): Delete "in
the International Fire Code" insert "NFPA 1," insert "State of Maine
Internal Plumbing Code Chapter 238, International Private Sewage
Disposal Code," insert "State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Code, and ICC Electric Code insert City of Biddeford's
Electrical."
(28)
Section 3410.2, Applicability (page 570): Insert "the effective date
of adoption of the International Building Code, 2003 Edition."
(29)
The following IRC sections are hereby revised or adopted:
(1) Section R101.1 (page 1): Insert "City of Biddeford."
Section [EB] R102.7 (page 1): Insert "NFPA 1" in place of
"International Fire Code."
(2)
Section R107.4 (page 5): Delete "ICC Electrical Code" and insert
"Electric Code as adopted by Chapter 18, Article III, of the Code of
the City of Biddeford."
(3)
B.
Sec. 18-76.1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-76.1
CHCT:193
Section R112.1 (page 7), Board of Appeals, General: Insert
"Biddeford's Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as the Board of
Appeals." after the first sentence.
(4)
Table R301.2(1) (page 24): Insert the following:
Under "Ground Snow Load (pounds per square foot)" insert
"60."
a.
b. Under "Wind Pressure (pounds per square foot)" insert "100."
c. Under "Seismic Condition by Zone" insert "C."
d. Under "Weathering" insert "severe."
e. Under "Front Line Depth" insert "48 inches."
f. Under "Termite" insert "none to slight".
g. Under "Decay" insert "none to slight."
Under "Winter Design Temperature for Heating Facilities"
insert "to –5° F."
h.
i. Under "Ice Shield Underlayment Required" insert "Yes."
Under "Flood Hazards" insert "November 20, 1990" date of
adoption of the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City
of Biddeford.
j.
k. Under "Air Freezing Index" insert "1500."
l. Under "Mean Annual Temperature" insert "45° F."
(5)
Section R309.3 (page 49): Add the following to the end of the
section: "The sills of all door openings between garages and
adjacent interior spaces shall be raised not less than four inches
above the garage floor."
(6)
(7) Section R310.1.1 (page 50): Delete the exception.
(8) Section R311.6, Ramps: Add non ADA Accessible Ramps.
Section R311.6.1 (page 52): Change "eight units horizontal" to "12
units horizontal."
(9)
Section R323 (page 58): Delete entire section and insert "For Flood
Resistant Construction, refer to Article III of the Code of the City of
Biddeford, Maine."
(10)
Section M1301.1.1 (page 291): Delete "Section 323.1.5" and
replace with "Article III of the Code of the City of Biddeford,
Maine."
(11)
Sec. 18-76.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-76.1
CHCT:194
Sec. 18-77. Violations. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
A person who shall violate a provision of the code adopted by this article
or fails to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or
who shall erect, construct, add to or alter, move or demolish, or who has
erected, constructed, added to or altered, moved or demolished a building
or structure or portion thereof, in violation of a detailed statement or plan
submitted and approved there under, or of a permit or certificate issued
there under, shall be guilty of a violation of this section; also, the owner of a
building or structure, or portion thereof, or of the premises where anything
in violation of such code shall be placed or shall exist, and an architect,
engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person or corporation employed in
connection therewith and who assisted in the commission of such violation
shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
Sec. 18-78. Definitions of terms used in code adopted in Section
18-76. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the code adopted
in Section 18-76, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The Inspector of Buildings or the Building
Inspector of the City.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The City Solicitor of the City.
MUNICIPALITY — The City.
Section M1401.5 (page 297): Delete "Section R323.1.5" and
replace with "Article III of the Code of the City of Biddeford,
Maine."
(12)
Section M2001.4 (page 321): Delete "Section R323.1.5" and
replace with "Article III of the Code of the City of Biddeford,
Maine."
(13)
Chapter 24, Fuel Gas (pages 331 to 386): Delete chapter and refer
to applicable NFPA Standards as adopted by the State of Maine.
Chapters 26 through 32 (pages 389 through 434): "All Plumbing
may be installed in accordance with the State of Maine Internal
Plumbing Code, Chapter 238."
(14)
Appendix A is deleted.
Appendix I (page 573): Delete "International Private Sewage
Disposal Code" and insert the words "Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules, Chapter 241."
(15)
Sec. 18-76.1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-79
CHCT:195
Sec. 18-79. Conflicting provisions. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the building code
adopted by this division and any express provision of this code or other
ordinance of the City, the stricter provision of the code or other ordinance
shall prevail.
Sec. 18-80. Erecting, altering external walls. [Ord. No. 2002.10,
2-5-2002]
Sec. 18-81. Director of Public Works duty upon receiving notice of
external wall construction. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works whenever notice has
been given as required by Section 18-80 to proceed forthwith and mark out
and define the lines and bounds of the public streets or alleys adjoining
the estate of any person giving such notice; provided, that in case any
uncertainty exists as to the location of such line, arising from the absence
of original, established or accepted bounds, or any other cause whatsoever,
the Director of Public Works shall report such fact to the Council in order
that such action as may be necessary to the best interests of the City may
be taken.
Sec. 18-82. through 18-95. (Reserved)
All persons intending to erect or to make any alteration in the external
walls of any building of any description, any part of which is to be
placed upon or within 10 feet of any of the public streets or alleys of
the City, shall, before they proceed to erect the same, or to lay the
foundation thereof, or to make such alteration, give notice in writing
of such intention with the precise location and the name of the owner
of the land to the Director of Public Works. Such notice shall be given
15 days at least before doing any act for carrying such intention into
execution, in order that any encroachment or any other injury or
inconvenience to such streets or alleys may be thereby prevented;
and in default thereof the City shall be discharged from all damages
of any nature whatsoever resulting from the failure to give notice as
aforesaid, particularly from all such damages as have been enhanced
or occasioned by reason of anything done previously to or without such
notice.
(a)
If any person neglects to give the notice required by this section, he
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 1-12, and every
12 hours that he neglects to give notice after he begins building or
erecting the same, or laying the foundation thereof or making such
alteration, shall constitute a separate violation of this section. Such
penalty shall be recovered by complaint and warrant before any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(b)
Sec. 18-79 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-82
CHCT:196
DIVISION 5
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Sec. 18-96. Order for disposal; notice; abatement by City; recovery
of costs. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
Sec. 18-97. through 18-105. (Reserved)
When the City Council, after personal notice in writing to the owner of
any burned, dilapidated or dangerous building, or by publication in a
newspaper in the county, if any, three weeks successively, otherwise in
the state paper, and after a hearing of the matter, adjudge such building
to be a nuisance or dangerous, they may make and record an order
prescribing what disposal shall be made thereof. The City Clerk shall
deliver a copy of such order to a constable, who shall serve such owner,
if the owner is a resident of the state, with an attested copy thereof, and
make return of his actions thereon to the Clerk forthwith. If the owner
or part owner is unknown or resides without the state, such notice shall
be given by publication in the state paper, or in a paper published in the
county, for three successive weeks.
(a)
If no application is made to the superior court, as is provided in this
section, the City Council shall cause such nuisance to be abated,
removed or altered in compliance with their order, and all expenses
thereof shall be repaid to the City within 30 days after demand, or may
be recovered of such person by an action for money paid.
(b)
Any owner aggrieved by an order made pursuant to this section may,
within 30 days after such order is so made and filed, apply to the
superior court which shall forthwith, after notice and hearing, affirm,
annul or alter such order.
(c)
If the court affirms an order made pursuant to this section, costs shall
be recovered by the City; if it wholly annuls such order, costs shall be
recovered by the applicant; and if it alters it in part, the court may
render such judgment as to costs as justice requires.
(d)
This section is adopted in accordance with 17 M.R.S.A. § 2851 et seq.,
and all ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent with this
section are hereby repealed.
(e)
Sec. 18-96 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-97
CHCT:197

DIVISION 6
MOVING BUILDINGS
Sec. 18-106. Permission required. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
No person shall obstruct any street in the City, or any part thereof, by
placing therein any house, barn, shop or other building, for the purpose of
moving from one location to another or for any other purpose whatsoever,
without the permission of the Code Enforcement Officer and Police
Department.
Sec. 18-107. Penalty for violation of division; continuing violations.
[Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division, and any person
who shall aid and assist in such violation, shall be subject to the provisions
of Section 1-12, and every 12 hours that the obstruction shall continue, or
that the house, barn, shop or other building shall remain, in or upon the
street, shall constitute a separate violation.
Sec. 18-108. Bond. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
No permit required by this division shall be granted until the applicant
executes a bond to the City Treasurer, conditioned that any damage to any
property of the City shall be forthwith repaired and placed in its original
condition.
Sec. 18-109. through Sec. 18-115. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-106 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-109
CHCT:199

DIVISION 7
(Reserved)16
Sec. 18-116. through Sec. 18-120. (Reserved)
16.Editor's Note: Former Division 7, Disclosure of Building Ownership, was repealed 1-3-2019
by Ord. No. 2018.145.
Sec. 18-116 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-116
CHCT:201

DIVISION 8
DISORDERLY HOUSING
[Added 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.56; amended 3-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014.14]
Sec. 18-121. Purpose; severability; exclusions.
Sec. 18-122. Definitions.
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any building which:
The purpose of this division is to provide City officials with legal tools
and procedures to discourage, abate, and punish nuisance/disorderly
use of private residential, public or commercial property by eliminating
the proliferation of properties harboring occupants who disturb the
peace and tranquility of their neighborhoods.
(a)
Severability. If any section, clause, provision or portion of this division
is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or competent
jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the remainder of this
division.
(b)
Exclusions. This division shall not apply to active and operating
industrial, manufacturing, and agricultural and food processing
facilities. This exclusion does not prevent the applicability of other
zoning, nuisance, or other ordinances and statutes to such facilities and
activities.
(c)
The police have visited a minimum number of times in any thirty-day
period, as set forth below, in response to situations which are created
by the owner, tenants, or owner's or tenants' cohabitees, guests or
invitees and which would have a tendency to unreasonably disturb the
community, the neighborhood or an ordinary individual in the vicinity
of said building, including, but not limited to: loud music; boisterous
parties; underage drinking parties; underage drinking; sounds
emanating from within the structure which are audible outside the
building; loud noise or fights within the building or in its vicinity
involving tenants of the building or their invitees (excluding incidents
involving domestic violence); tenants or invitees of tenants being
intoxicated on public ways in the vicinity of the building; other similar
activities in the building or outside the building itself; or
(1)
The police have visited three or more times in any thirty-day period
in response to situations which are created by the owner, tenants, or
owner's or tenants' cohabitees, guests or invitees and involve the arrest
of owners or tenants or their invitees for activities which constitute
either a crime or civil infraction under either state or local law, or
create a reasonable suspicion that illegal drug use or sales under 17-A
(2)
Sec. 18-121 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-122
CHCT:203
EVENT or GATHERING — Any group of two or more persons who have
assembled or gathered for a social function or other activity on public or
private property whether indoors or outdoors.
HOST — To aid, conduct, allow, entertain, control or overtly permit a
gathering or event. Mere knowledge that an event or gathering is occurring
is insufficient to constitute host status; but presence at the gathering or
event combined with right of possession or control of the premises upon
which the event or gathering is occurring is presumed to satisfy host status.
NUISANCE PROPERTY — Conditions of record such as waste disposal
violations, health or safety violations or repeated parking or traffic
violations on or in the vicinity of premises and caused by tenants, guest,
persons patronizing or employed by the premises and/or property, other
such conditions caused by tenants, guests, persons patronizing or employed
by the premises and/or property that unreasonably disturb, interfere with or
affect the ability of persons or businesses residing or located in the vicinity
of the premises to use their property in a reasonable manner; repeated
incidents of record of breaches of the peace, disorderly conduct, vandalism
or other violations of law on or in the vicinity of the premises and caused by
persons patronizing or employed by the premises [28-A M.R.S.A. 653(2)(C)
and (D)].
Sec. 18-123. Disorderly/nuisance property.
Sec. 18-124. Notice of hot spot designation.
Whenever a property has been visited by the police in response to a
disturbance two or more times in a thirty-day period as cited in Subsection
M.R.S.A., Chapter 45 or prostitution or public indecency under 17-A
M.R.S.A., Chapter 35 has occurred.
The following table delineates the number of police visits per dwelling
size which create a disorderly house/nuisance property under
Subsection (1) of the definition of "disorderly house" above:
Units per Building
Number of Visits by Police in
Any 30-Day Period
5 or fewer 3
6 to 10 4
11 or more or commercial
properties
5
(a)
Multiple calls for service to the same location within a twenty-four-hour
period shall be considered one event.
(b)
The situation to which the visit pertains shall be documented by the
Police Department. Such documentation may include sworn affidavits
by named citizens which may be sufficient to create a reasonable
suspicion said illegal activity has occurred.
(c)
Sec. 18-122 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-124
CHCT:204
(1) of the definition of "disorderly house," the Police Department or any
other agent designated by the City shall notify the property owner and, if
applicable, the licensee of the said visits, as long as the property owner has
registered with the City in accordance with local ordinance.
Sec. 18-125. Notice of disorderly house/nuisance property
designation.
Whenever a property has been identified as a disorderly house/nuisance
property by the City, it shall cause written notification of the events
which form the basis for that designation to be given to the property
owner, and if applicable, to the licensee. If the property owner has
not registered with the City in accordance with local ordinance, the
police may send notice to the address listed on the City's Tax Assessor
records. Such notice shall be sufficient for all legal purposes. The notice
shall require the owner, and if applicable, the licensee to meet with
representatives of the City (including the Police Department) within five
business days from the date of the written notification, or such other
time as is agreed upon by the Police Chief or his or her designee, to
identify ways in which the problems which have been identified will be
eliminated.
(a)
At the time of said meeting, the owner and, if applicable, the licensee
shall be obligated to provide to the City the following documentation:
A copy of the names of all tenants or other persons authorized to
reside or occupy, or presently residing in the building and the units
they occupy.
(1)
(2) Copies of all leases with tenants residing in the building.
Contracts with any property manager or other person responsible
for the orderly operation of the building.
(3)
Accurate and up-to-date disclosure of documentation of building
ownership.
(4)
(b)
In addition, the owner and, if applicable, the licensee will agree to take
effective abatement measures to address the disorderly house/nuisance
property, which measures shall be memorialized in a written agreement
at the conclusion of the meeting with the City and shall be implemented
within one week of said meeting unless another date is agreed upon
by the Police Department (or Committee). Failure to enter into such an
abatement agreement at the conclusion of the meeting will be deemed a
violation of this division, and the City may file a complaint in the district
court seeking all compensatory and equitable relief permitted by law.
(c)
Designation as a disorderly house/nuisance property shall remain in
effect for 90 days from the date of the qualifying incident. If no
qualifying incidents occur during this period, the designation shall be
removed.
(d)
Sec. 18-124 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-126
CHCT:205
Sec. 18-126. Cost of service for responses to disorderly houses/
nuisance properties.
Sec. 18-127. Violations; enforcement; penalties; expenses.
Upon designation of a property as a disorderly house/nuisance property,
the owner of the disorderly house/nuisance property shall pay the cost
of service for each such response as follows:
For each such response for service the owner shall pay a service
fee of $75, which shall be in addition to any penalty to which the
owner may be subject.
(1)
(a)
Failure to pay the cost of service within 30 days after demand therefor
shall subject the owner to the penalties provided by state and local
laws.
(b)
Charges which become payable hereunder shall be referred to a
collection agency as contracted by the City of Biddeford.
(c)
Violation.
The creation or maintenance of a nuisance property, nuisance
gathering or disorderly house as defined in this division is
prohibited, and the City of Biddeford may take actions to abate any
nuisance as defined in this division by the procedures set out below.
(1)
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division or failing
or neglecting or refusing to obey any order or notice of the Police
Department issued hereunder shall be subject to penalties as
provided by state and local laws.
(2)
(a)
Enforcement. If the owner a) refuses to agree to take effective
measures to address the disorderly house/nuisance property, b) takes
ineffective measures to abate the disorderly house/nuisance property
as determined by the City, or c) fails to implement the abatement
agreement reached with the City to address the disorderly house/
nuisance property, the City may file a legal action against the owner
seeking any and all damages, expenses and remedies to which it is
entitled pursuant to state and local laws.
(b)
Penalties.
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor,
or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $2,500. All fines shall be recovered on
complaint to the use of the City.
(1)
(c)
Sec. 18-126 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-127
CHCT:206
Sec. 18-128. Inspection of premises.
Upon designation as a disorderly house/nuisance property the Code
Enforcement Office may inspect the property to the extent reasonably
necessary for the purpose of investigating reports of disorderly house/
nuisance property activities.
Sec. 18-129. Emergency.
If it is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer that an emergency
exists by reason of the continuing presence of a nuisance that constitutes
a threat to one or more individuals or to the public, the City may perform
any action reasonably designed to abate such nuisance without prior notice
or hearing. The City shall assess the costs as necessary, after notice to
the property owner under the applicable provisions, and opportunity for
hearing.
Sec. 18-130. Expenses; hearing.
Any person who objects to the amount of expense demanded from him/her
may have a hearing before the Finance Committee of the City Council or
such other person or hearing body as it may designate. The hearing shall
be limited to the question of the reasonability of the amount of expense
demanded. A request for hearing must be in writing and filed with the Code
Enforcement Office within 10 days after the date of the finance.
A violation of this article may result in penalties that may include
revocation or suspension of any license or permit affecting the
subject property, issued by the City of Biddeford or by City staff,
in the discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer and with the
approval of the City Council.
(2)
(3) Each day a violation persists shall constitute a separate offense.
Expenses; collection. The Finance Director shall mail a statement of
the total expense incurred, minus any salvage value, to the person or
persons who have failed to abide by the notice to abate, demanding
payment of the expense. If the amount shown on the statement has
not been paid within 30 days, it shall then be collected by a collection
agency contracted by the City of Biddeford.
(d)
Sec. 18-127 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-130
CHCT:207

ARTICLE III
ELECTRICAL CODE
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 18-131. Penalty for violation of article. [Ord. No. 2002.10,17
2-5-2002]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article commits a
civil violation for which a forfeiture of not less than $100 or more than
$2,500 for each offense may be adjudged. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which such violation occurs or
continues as per 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Sec. 18-132. through Sec. 18-140. (Reserved)
17.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. III, which contained provisions on
the electrical code.
Sec. 18-131 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-132
CHCT:209

DIVISION 2
INSPECTIONS
Sec. 18-141. Office of Electrical Inspector created; qualifications;
compensation. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall appoint, subject to confirmation by
the City Manager, an Electrical Inspector as per job description, who will
receive such compensation as the City Council shall determine.
Sec. 18-142. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-143. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
The Electrical Inspector shall make all inspections necessary to the
enforcement of the City ordinances, and no electric wiring shall be covered
until it has been inspected and approved.
Sec. 18-144. Stop order. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
Whenever the Electrical Inspector shall find electrical work being done in
violation of City ordinances, he shall have the power to order the work
stopped until such ordinances are complied with. It shall be unlawful to
continue any such work after such a stop order has been issued except upon
written permission of the Electrical Inspector.
Sec. 18-145. Certificate of approval. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
The Electrical Inspector shall give a certificate of approval to the owner or
person in charge of the premises which he has inspected where he finds that
the electric apparatus and wiring therein fully comply with the ordinances
of the City.
Sec. 18-146. through Sec. 18-155. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-141 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-146
CHCT:211

DIVISION 3
PERMITS
Sec. 18-156. Required; posting. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
All persons shall, before beginning any installation, alteration or change of
electrical wiring or equipment in the City, obtain a permit for such work.
Permits for installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment shall be
issued upon receipt of an application made out on a printed form furnished
by the Electrical Inspector. The fee is to be paid in advance as provided for
in this division. Permits shall be posted in plain view, inside the building
near the entrance switch or inside the service switch when installed.
Sec. 18-157. Application. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002]
The application for an electrical permit shall contain the name of the owner
or user of the electrical equipment to be installed, altered or changed, and
the location of such work by correct address, street and number, and the
name and address of the person making the installation.
Sec. 18-158. Fees. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002; Ord. No. 2003.68,
7-1-2003; Ord. No. 2004.35, 6-1-2004; amended 6-1-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.44; 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.52]
Effective July 1, 2017, Electrical Permit Fee Schedule.
New Residential Electrical Permit Fee Schedule. All permits for
residential installations shall be charged an administrative fee of
$25.
One- and two-family dwelling:
1. Less than 2,000 square feet: $100 per unit.
Greater than 2,000 square feet: $100 plus $0.55 for
additional square feet.
2.
a.
Three-or-more-family dwelling:
1. Less than 2,000 square feet: $75 per unit.
b.
c. Garage (per bay), under, attached, unattached: $20.
Service entrance, including meter and disconnect:
1. One hundred amps: $45.
2. Two hundred amps: $50.
3. Four hundred amps: $55.
4. Sub-panel: $25.
5. Temporary: $50.
d.
(1)
(a)
Sec. 18-156 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-158
CHCT:213
General wiring, outlets:
1. One to 10 outlets: $10.
2. Eleven to 30 outlets: $15.
3. Thirty-one to 60 outlets: $20.
Sixty-one or more outlets: $20 plus $0.50 per additional
outlet.
4.
e.
Dedicated circuit:
1. One hundred twenty volts: $5.
2. Two hundred forty volts: $10.
f.
Swimming pool:
1. Above ground: $40.
2. Inground: $50.
g.
h. Central heating/cooling: $1 per BTU.
i. Electrical heating: $1 per kilowatt.
j. Exhaust fan: $5.
k. Pump(s), water, sewage, other: $10, each.
l. Low voltage wiring (i.e., fire, security, voice, data): $50.
Smoke/carbon monoxide/heat detectors (not part of a system):
$10 each.
m.
n. GFCI/AFCI: $5 each.
Alternate energy source:
1. Geothermal, solar, wind: $1 per kilowatt.
2. Generator (fixed): $1 per kilowatt.
3. Transfer switch: $1 per kilowatt.
o.
p. Permit not specified: $50.
q. Minimum fee: $50.
NOTE: For fee purposes, outlets will be classified as lights,
lighting and small appliance receptacles and lighting switches.
Unless otherwise stated, each permit issued under this
Subsection (a)(1) will be valid for one year from date of
issuance.
r.
Sec. 18-158 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-158
CHCT:214
New Commercial-Industrial Electrical Permit Fee Schedule. All
permits for commercial-industrial installations shall be charged an
administrative fee of $50.
New building (does not include electrical service): $0.055 per
square foot.
a.
Service entrance:
1. Up to 100 amps: $55.
2. One hundred one to 200 amps: $60.
3. Each additional 100 amps: $20 per 100 amps.
4. Three-phase meter with C.T. cabinet: $125.
5. Additional panel: $35 each.
b.
c. Temporary service: $60.
General wiring, outlets:
1. One to 10 outlets: $10.
2. Eleven to 30 outlets: $15.
3. Thirty-one to 60 outlets: $20.
Sixty-one or more outlets: $20 plus $0.50 per additional
outlet.
4.
d.
Dedicated circuit:
1. One hundred twenty volts: $5.
2. Two hundred forty volts: $10.
e.
f. Illuminated sign(s): $20 each.
g. Area light pole(s): $5 each.
Air conditioning:
1. Up to 12,000 BTUs: $10.
2. Over 12,000 BTUs: $10 plus $2 per BTU.
h.
i. Central heating/cooling: $1 per BTU.
j. Electrical heating: $1 per kilowatt.
k. Exhaust fan: $5.
l. Pump(s), water, sewage, other: $10 each.
m. Low voltage wiring (i.e., fire, security, voice, data): $50.
(2)
Sec. 18-158 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-158
CHCT:215
Smoke/carbon monoxide/heat detectors (not part of a system):
$10.
n.
o. GFCI/AFCI: $5 each.
Alternate energy source:
1. Geothermal, solar, wind: $1 per kilowatt.
2. Generator (fixed): $1 per kilowatt.
3. Transfer switch: $1 per kilowatt.
p.
Motor(s):
1. Up to one horsepower: $5.
2. Additional horsepower: $0.50 per horsepower.
q.
r. Permit not specified: $50.
s. Minimum fee: $50.
NOTE: For fee purposes, outlets will be classified as lights,
lighting and small appliance receptacles and lighting switches.
Unless otherwise stated, each permit issued under this
Subsection (a)(2) will be valid for one year from date of
issuance.
t.
Each commercial permit is entitled to eight inspections
without additional fees. A fee of $25 will be charged for each
additional inspection.
u.
Plumbing; septic systems.
Plumbing permit fee schedule:
a. Per fixture, no maximum: $10 with a minimum of $40.
b. Reinspection fee, including septic system reinspections: $50.
(1)
Septic system permit fee schedule:
Complete systems:
1. Nonengineered system: $200.
2. Engineered system: $200.
3. Separate laundry system: $50.
4. Seasonal conversion system: $50.
5. Variance: additional $40.
a.
b. Separate parts:
(2)
(b)
Sec. 18-158 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-158
CHCT:216
Sec. 18-159. through Sec. 18-170. (Reserved)
1. Disposal field (nonengineered): $100.
2. Disposal field (engineered): $150.
3. Treatment tank (nonengineered): $75.
4. Treatment tank (engineered): $80.
5. Variance (state or local for septic systems): Add $40.
NOTE: Unless otherwise stated, each permit issued under this
Subsection (b) will be valid for work commenced within 24 months
after the permit is issued.
(3)
Sec. 18-158 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-159
CHCT:217

DIVISION 4
STANDARDS
Sec. 18-171. Rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002;
Ord. No. 2005.67, 8-2-2005]
The following rules and regulations are hereby made a part of this chapter:
The rules and regulations of the NFPA 70 National Electrical Code
latest edition adopted by the State of Maine.
(1)
The rules and regulations regarding the installation, alteration and use
of electrical equipment as filed by the supply companies in the office of
the Electrical Inspector; and
(2)
(3) Rules and regulations as promulgated in 32 M.R.S.A. § 1101 et seq.; and
Article 680.26(C) be revised as follows: 680.26. Bonding.
Performance. The bonding required by this section shall be
installed to eliminate voltage gradients in the pool area as
prescribed.
FPN: This section does not require that the 8 AWG or larger solid
copper bonding conductor be extended or attached to any remote
panelboard, service equipment, or any electrode.
(A)
Bonded parts. The parts in 680.26(B)(1) shall be bonded together.
Metallic structural components. All metallic parts of the pool
structure, including the reinforcing metal of the pool shell,
coping stones, and deck, shall be bonded. The usual steel tie
wires shall be considered suitable for bonding the reinforcing
steel together, and welding or special clamping shall not be
required. These tie wires shall be made tight. If reinforcing
steel is effectively insulated by an encapsulating
nonconductive compound, at the time of manufacture and
installation, it shall not be required to be bonded. Where
reinforcing steel is encapsulated with a nonconductive
compound, provisions shall be made for an alternate means to
eliminate voltage gradients that would otherwise be provided
by unencapsulated, bonded reinforced steel.
FPN: For this purpose, an 8 AWG or larger bare solid copper
conductors run in the pour around the perimeter of the pool
below water line, and through the pour at other locations such
that no point, measured through the pour, is more than 4.5 m
(15 ft.) from a bonding conductor.
(1)
Underwater lighting. All forming shells and mounting brackets
of no-niche luminaries (fixtures) shall be bonded unless a listed
(2)
(B)
(4)
Sec. 18-171 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-171
CHCT:219
low-voltage lighting system with nonmetallic forming shells not
requiring bonding is used.
Metal fittings. All metal fittings within or attached to the pool
structure shall be bonded. Isolated parts that are not over 100
mm (four inches) in any dimension and do not penetrate into
the pool structure more than 25 mm one inch shall not require
bonding.
(3)
Electrical equipment. Metal parts of electrical equipment
associated with the pool water circulating system, including
pump motors and metal parts of equipment associated with
pool covers, including electric motors, shall be bonded. Metal
parts of listed equipment incorporating an approved system of
double insulation and providing a means for grounding internal
nonaccessible, non-current-carrying metal parts shall not be
bonded.
Where a double-insulated water-pump motor is installed
under the provisions of this rule, a solid 8 AWG copper
conductor that is of sufficient length to make a binding
connection to a replacement motor shall be extended from
the bonding grid to an accessible point in the motor vicinity.
Where there is no connection between the swimming pool
bonding grid and the equipment grounding system for the
premises, this bonding conductor shall be connected to the
equipment grounding conductor of the motor circuit.
(4)
Metal wiring methods and equipment. Metal-sheathed cables
and raceways, metal piping, and all fixed metal parts except
those separated from the pool by a permanent barrier, shall be
bonded that are within the following distances of the pool:
Within 1.5 m (five feet) horizontally of the inside walls of
the pool.
(1)
Within 3.7 m (12 feet) measured vertically above the
maximum water level of the pool, or any observation
stands, towers, or platforms, or any diving structures.
(2)
(5)
Common bond grid. The parts specified in 680.26(B) shall be
connected to a common bonding grid with a solid copper conductor,
insulated, covered, or bare, not smaller that 8 AWG. Connection
shall be made by exothermic welding or by pressure connectors or
clamps that are labels as being suitable for the purpose and are of:
stainless steel, brass, copper, or copper alloy. The common bonding
grid shall be permitted to be any of the following:
The structural reinforcing steel of a concrete pool where the
reinforcing rods are bonded together by the usual steel tie
wires or the equivalent.
(1)
(C)
Sec. 18-171 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-171
CHCT:220
Sec. 18-172. Alarm systems. [Ord. No. 2002.10, 2-5-2002; Ord. No.
2004.35, 6-1-2004]
Sec. 18-173. Periodic inspections. [Ord. No. 2001.37, 5-1-2001]
(2) The wall of a bolted or welded metal pool.
A solid copper conductor, insulated, covered, or bare, not
smaller than 8 AWG.
(3)
Rigid metal conduit or intermediate metal conduit of brass or
other identified corrosion-resistant metal conduit.
(4)
Connections. Where structural reinforcing steel or the walls of
bolted or welded metal pool structures are used as a common
bonding grid for nonelectrical parts, the connections shall be made
in accordance with 250.8.
(D)
Pool water heaters. For pool water heaters rated at more 50
amperes that have specific instructions regarding bonding and
grounding, only those parts designated to be bonded shall be
bonded, and only those parts designated to be grounded shall be
grounded.
(E)
It shall be unlawful to manufacture or assemble any electrical control
board designed to be used as a burglar alarm system unless such
manufacture or assembly is supervised by the City Electrical Inspector.
Any such board not manufactured or assembled in the City shall be
inspected and approved by the Electrical Inspector and the Chief of
Police as a prerequisite to granting a permit.
(a)
No electric board or control system covering fire and burglar alarm
devices connected with the Police Department shall be installed without
the permission of the City Council.
(b)
Any corporation, person or individual servicing any commercial or
industrial establishment with an alarm system shall submit such plan to
the Chief of Police, and such system shall be controlled and operated
through the central control board owned and operated by the City.
(c)
The installation of any alarm system as described in this section on any
premises in the City shall be installed under the supervision of the Chief
of Police.
(d)
Before permission is granted to any person for the installation of a
burglar or fire alarm system, or a combination of both, an installation
fee to be paid to the City shall be assessed as follows:
The sum of $50 for the installation of a burglar alarm system, for
each account.
(1)
The sum of $50 for the installation of a fire alarm system, for each
account.
(2)
(e)
Sec. 18-171 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-173
CHCT:221
Sec. 18-174. International Property Maintenance Code 2009 —
adopted. [Ord. No. 2001.36, 5-1-2001; Ord. No. 2004.35, 6-1-2004;
amended 12-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.124]
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and
structures, including permits, that certain building code known as the,
International Property Maintenance Code 2009, of which not less than one
copy is on file in the office of the City Clerk. Such code is hereby adopted
and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this article. The provisions
hereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and structures
therein contained within the corporate limits of the City.
Sec. 18-174.1. Same—Amendments. [Ord. No. 2001.36, 5-1-2001;
Ord. No. 2004.35, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 2005.67, 8-2-2005; amended
12-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.124]
The International Property Maintenance Code 2009 adopted in Section
18-174 shall be amended as follows:
To further the public goal of ensuring the provisions of this article, the
City will conduct periodic inspections of rental units for which the code
enforcement and inspections office receives complaints from two or
more individuals within a three-month period, and/or finds a condition
creating a health and safety problem. This periodic inspection period
will continue for a period of two years, or until the office finds that the
conditions are satisfactorily resolved. The inspection will be conducted
to ensure the safety conditions of the property.
(a)
These inspections will be coordinated by the Building Inspections
Office. Notice may be oral at first, but written notice shall be given
as well. The owner of the property and the tenant will be notified by
certified mail of the pending inspection no less than five days prior to
the actual inspection.
(b)
Failure to allow the inspectors to conduct the required inspection may
result in the City seeking an administrative search warrant or other
appropriate court order to enter the property for the express purpose
of a health or safety inspection.
(c)
Failure to pass the safety inspection will result in the rental unit being
declared unfit for occupancy. The unit will not be occupied until such
time as the conditions have been corrected.
(d)
Occupancy of a rental unit declared by the City as "unfit for occupancy"
will result in enforcement action by the City. The fine for violation of
this section will be $100 per day that the violation continues, plus any
associated legal and court costs. Each day will be considered a separate
violation.
(e)
Sec. 18-173 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-174.1
CHCT:222
Sec. 18-175. International Existing Building Code 2003 — Adopted
and National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 73 Electrical
Inspection Code for existing buildings. [Ord. No. 2004.35, 6-1-2004]
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of establishing rules
and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and
structures, including permits, that certain building code known as the,
International Existing Building Code Edition 2003, including appendix
chapters, of which not less than one copy is on file in the office of the City
Clerk. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out
at length in this article. The provisions hereof shall be controlling in the
construction of all buildings and structures therein contained within the
corporate limits of the City.
Sec. 18-175.1. Same—Amendments. [Ord. No. 2004.35, 6-1-2004;
Ord. No. 2005.67, 8-2-2005]
The International Existing Building Code Edition 2003 adopted in Section
18-175 shall be amended as follows:
(1) Section 101.1, Title (page 1): Insert "City of Biddeford."
Section 103.5, Fees (page 2): Insert "as per City of Biddeford's Fee
Schedule."
(2)
Section 111: Delete entirely and replace with "As per Article IX of the
City of Biddeford's Code of Ordinance Board of Appeals."
(3)
Sections 303.14 and 304.14, Insect screens (page 1014): Insert "May
15" after" . . . the period from" and insert "October 1" after ". . . to."
(4)
Section 602.3, Heat supply (page 1721): Insert "September 1" after ". .
. the period from" and insert "May 15" after" . . . to."
Failure of owner to provide fuel: In the event of the failure of the
owner of his designated agent to comply with Section 602.3, upon
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer that an emergency
exists, the City shall be entitled to supply the necessary maintenance
or fuel. The City shall, in such case, in addition to the penalties
provided for herein for violation of this code, be entitled to recover
amounts expended hereunder in an action against the owner or agent,
together with costs, including reasonable attorney fees."
(5)
Section 602.4, Occupiable work spaces: Insert "September 1" after ". .
. the period from" and insert "May 15" after ". . . to."
(6)
Chapter 8, Referenced Standards (page 2127): and insert "may use
the following reference: 'State of Maine Internal Plumbing Rules, 144A
CMR 238' Delete "IZC-03 ICC International Zoning Code" without
replacement. Insert "NFPA 73 National Electric Code for Existing
Dwellings 2011" in last line.
(7)
Sec. 18-174.1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-175.1
CHCT:223
Section 101.1, Title (page 1): Insert "City of Biddeford".
Section 104.2.1, Preliminary Meeting: Delete "shall" and change to "may."
Section 105.1.1, Annual Permits: Delete entirely.
Section 105.1.2, Annual permit records: Delete entirely.
Section 105.2.3, Public service agencies: Delete entirely.
Section 109.3, Require inspections: Delete "shall" and change to "may."
Section 112.3, Qualification: Delete entirely.
Section 202, General Definitions Substantial Damage and Substantial
Improvement: Delete the word "market" and replace with "Assessed."
Section 410, Plumbing: Insert "State of Maine Internal Plumbing Rules
Chapter 238 and Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules 144A CMR
241."
Section 605.3.1.1(8): Delete "5 square feet" and insert "5.7 square feet."
Section 608, Electrical: Delete entirely and replace with NFPA 70 (NEC)
latest adopted version by the State of Maine's.
Section 808: Delete entirely and replace with NFPA 70 (NEC) latest version
adopted by the State of Maine.
Section 810: Insert may use State of Maine Internal Plumbing Rules
Chapter 238 and Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules 144A CMR
241.
Section 1201.2, Applicability: Insert The Acceptance of this Ordinance.
Sec. 18-176. through Sec. 18-195. (Reserved)
Sec. 18-175.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-176
CHCT:224
ARTICLE IV
(RESERVED)18
Sec. 18-196. through Sec. 18-410. (Reserved)
18.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Which Contained Provisions On Housing, Was Repealed
8-17-1999 By Ord. No. 99.66.
Sec. 18-196 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 18-196
CHCT:225
Chapter 22
BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1.
Amusements — See Ch. 6.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 46.
Solid waste — See Ch. 58.
Streets, sidewalks and other public
places — See Ch. 62.
Waterways — See Ch. 74.
Land development regulations — See Part III.
Sec. 18-196 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 18-196
CHCT:226
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Purpose. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4);19 amended 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.42]
The purpose of this chapter is:
Sec. 22-2. Definitions. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); Ord. No. 2003.45,
4-1-2003; amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Words used in this chapter shall have their common meanings except
that, as used in this chapter or in chapters related to this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the
particular licensing provision, or the context in which the term appears,
clearly establishes that a different meaning was intended:
ADULT AREA — An area in a business establishment clearly marked and
posted by the business establishment as an adult area where there are
contained photographs, covers of magazines, newspapers, periodicals or
other printed matter which is offensive to children and may be offensive to
adults unwilling to view such materials.
ADULT BUSINESS — A business, a substantial or significant portion of
which consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying or
otherwise dealing in materials or devices of any kind which appeal to
prurient interests and which depict or describe specified sexual activities.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — A business, a substantial or significant portion
of which consists of selling, renting, leasing, displaying, or exhibiting live
participants or otherwise dealing in materials or devices of any kind which
appeal to prurient interests and which depict or describe specified sexual
activities.
ADULT READING MATERIAL — A magazine, newspaper, periodical or other
printed matter which is labeled "for adults only."20
ANTIQUE DEALER — Any individual, group of individuals or entity engaged
in dealing (purchasing, selling or exchanging / bartering) so-called
"antiques" that are defined as a relic or object of ancient times; a work of
To protect the public health, welfare and safety of the general public,
and to assure public confidence in the sale of food, food stuff, and
food products by local merchants; as well as to the sale of wares and
other products for sale; and to regulate the rendering of services to the
general public.
(1)
To establish a procedure for the licensing and issuance of permits for
those businesses that are required to be licensed.
(2)
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 22, which contained provisions on
businesses, and was adopted as portions of Ch. 13 of the 1975 Code, as amended.
20.Editor's Note: The definition of "automobile graveyard," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.14.
Sec. 22-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-2
CHCT:227
art, piece of furniture, or decorative object made at an earlier period, to
include but not limited to, furniture, glassware, photographs and art work,
jewelry, including but not limited to watches, rings, earrings, brooches,
hairpins, stick pins, tie clasp, clothing and footwear; architectural features
and attachments from homes and other buildings, including but not limited
to mirrors, shutters, brackets, mantels, windows and doors; automobiles,
motorcycles, motor scooters, motor-driven cycles and any other motorized
means of transportation that are deemed to be antiques and in the case of
automobiles are twenty-five or more years old, provided that the antique
dealer does not hold a new or used car dealer license; tools, including but
not limited to, saws, hammers, measures, chisels, clamps and toolboxes;
toys and games as well as any and all other items from an earlier
period.[Added 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
BONA FIDE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Means and includes a bona
fide nonprofit, charitable, educational, political, civic, recreational, patriotic
or religious organization which is organized under the provisions of 13
M.R.S.A. § 901, or 13-B M.R.S.A. § 201, or which is recognized as such by
the Internal Revenue Service under 26 U.S.C.A. § 501 (C) (3).
BOTTLE CLUB — Persons operating, on a regular, profit or nonprofit basis,
facilities for social activities in which members or guests provide their own
liquor, where no liquor is sold on the bottle club premises, which maintain
suitable facilities for the use of members on a regular basis or charge an
admission fee to members or the general public and where members, guests
or others are regularly permitted to consume liquor.
CONCESSION STAND, SNACK KIOSK or SNACK BAR — A place where
patrons can purchase snacks or food at a cinema, fair, stadium, or other
entertainment venue. Food sold at concession stands is typically foods such
as: french fries, ice cream, popcorn, pizza, hot dogs, soft drinks, candy, snow
cones, cotton candy, pretzels, and potato chips.[Added 4-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.27]
DISQUALIFYING CRIME or CRIMINAL CONVICTION —
Conviction under any of the crimes set out at the following provisions of
the state criminal code, or refers to the crimes set out at the following
provisions of the criminal code:
a. 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 9 (Offenses Against the Person).
b. 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 11 (Sex Offenses).
c. 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 19 (Falsification in Official Matters).
d. 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 23 (Offenses Against the Family).
e. 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 35 (Prostitution and Public Indecency).
f. 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 37 (Fraud).
g. 17-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 45 (Drugs).
(1)
Sec. 22-2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-2
CHCT:228
EXPOSE or EXPOSED — Unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by a fully
opaque material.
FLEA MARKET — Means and includes any individual, group of four or
more unrelated individuals or entity selling tangible used or secondhand
personal property or collectors' items to the public at a location, indoors or
outside.[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
FLEA MARKET DEALER — Means and includes any single person or entity
that is engaged in selling goods at a flea market.[Amended 5-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012.33]
GOODS — Includes wares, merchandise, food and other items intended to
be sold at retail.
ICE CREAM TRUCK — A commercial vehicle which serves as a traveling
retail outlet for the sale of ice cream and similar products to the public,
usually during the summer.[Added 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.3]
JUNK — Means and includes old iron, steel, chain, aluminum, brass, copper,
tin, lead, or other base metals, belting, wastepaper, old rope, old bags,
bagging, barrels, piping, rubber, glass, empty bottles and jugs of all kinds
and quantities, and all other articles discarded or no longer used as
manufactured articles composed of any one or more of the materials
hereinbefore mentioned and of monetary value, and having no other useful
purpose.[Added 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
JUNK COLLECTOR — Means and includes any person acting alone, or as
a group or entity operating at a business location in the City of Biddeford,
or traveling to and from place to place within the City of Biddeford for the
purpose of collecting or purchasing junk, or collecting junk from persons
and/or businesses who desire to dispose of it, or traveling from place to
place within the City of Biddeford for the purpose of purchasing junk, or
making a business of purchasing junk from a person who carries it away
after purchase.[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
JUNK DEALER — Means and includes any person, group of persons, or
entity engaged in the purchase, sale or bartering of/for items, including but
not limited to, old iron, steel, chain, aluminum, brass, copper, tin, lead, or
other base metals, including scraps from the manufacture of those items;
belting, wastepaper, old rope, old bags, bagging, barrels, piping, rubber,
glass, empty bottles and jugs of all kinds and quantities, and all other
articles discarded or no longer used as manufactured articles composed of
any one or more of the materials hereinbefore mentioned and of monetary
value, but having no other useful purpose.[Amended 4-19-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011.14; 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT or THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE
ESTABLISHMENTS — Used interchangeably to mean any business,
h. Any crime defined or classified as a Class B or A crime.
This also includes any prior activity which is found to demonstrate a
lack of good moral character.
(2)
Sec. 22-2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-2
CHCT:229
including but not limited to a sole proprietorship, in which the business
operations consist of providing or making available massage in the City
for consideration or with the expectation of receiving consideration or any
gratuity, whether or not the business has a fixed place of business within
the City limits.
MASSAGE THERAPIST OR PRACTITIONER — A person who provides or
offers to provide massage therapy for a fee, monetary or otherwise. This
definition includes the use of different forms of the term "massage
therapist" or "massage practitioner," such as "masseuse" or "masseur."
MASSAGE THERAPY — A scientific or skillful manipulation of soft tissue
for therapeutic or remedial purposes, specifically for improving muscle tone
and circulation and promoting health and physical well-being. The term
includes, but is not limited to, manual and mechanical procedures for the
purpose of treating soft tissue only, the use of supplementary aids such as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, oils, antiseptics, powders, herbal preparations,
creams or lotions, procedures such as oil rubs, salt glows and hot or
cold packs or other similar procedures or preparations commonly used in
this practice. This term specifically excludes manipulation of the spine or
articulations and excludes sexual contact as defined in 17-A M.R.S.A. § 251,
Subsection 1D.
OFFICER — Any officer, director, stockholder, owner, manager or person
who either has a financial interest of any nature in a bottle club or directs
any policy of a bottle club.
ORGANIZATION — A corporation, partnership or unincorporated
association.
PAWNBROKER — Means and includes any person or group of persons
acting individually or as a group or entity whose business or occupation is
to take or receive, by way of pledges, pawn, or exchange/barter, any goods,
wares, or merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatsoever, as
security for the repayment of money loaned thereon at a stipulated rate of
interest or at a stipulated amount of repayment; any person whose business
or occupation is to purchase any such property on condition of selling
the same back again to the seller thereof or his assignee at a stipulated
price; provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to banking
institutions, brokerage houses, members of the stock exchanges, or persons
who make loans exclusively upon stocks, bonds, bills of lading, warehouse
receipts, mortgages, contracts, commercial paper, or other written or
printed evidence of ownership of property or of indebtedness to the holder
or owner of any such security.[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
PERMANENT PLACE OF BUSINESS — Any building or other permanently
affixed structure, including a home residence, which is owned or held
under a twelve-month lease or rental agreement at the time business is
commenced, and is used in whole or in part for the purpose of engaging in
the sale of secondhand goods.
PERSON — A human being or a firm, business, corporation, or an
organization.
Sec. 22-2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-2
CHCT:230
PERSON AGGRIEVED — Means and includes any person whose license is
suspended or revoked or whose license application is denied by the Clerk or
any other administrative official charged with responsibility for the granting
or supervision of any license.
PRINCIPAL OFFICERS — Means and includes the applicant and any officer,
director, partner, owner, manager, or person who either has an actual
ownership interest in the entity or directs any policy of the entity.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL (MASSAGE) — Any school or institution of learning
which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession and
work of massage therapy and is recognized or certified by Maine or any
other state. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring actual
attendance of class shall not be deemed a recognized school.
RESTAURANT — A public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and
held out to the public as a place where meals are served, without sleeping
accommodations, such space being provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and having employed
therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and
serve suitable food for its guests; provided, further, that no restaurant
licensed as such shall sell alcoholic beverages except when meals are
available.
SALESPERSON, WAITER, WAITRESS, ENTERTAINER — A person shall be
deemed a salesperson, waiter, waitress or entertainer if such person acts
in that capacity without regard to whether or not such person is paid any
compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity
is performed.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, group of individuals or entity
predominantly engaged in the business of dealing in, by purchasing, selling,
exchanging or bartering, used or otherwise secondhand articles, including
but not limited to computer hardware and other electronic equipment,
firearms, watches, diamonds or any other precious stones, gold, silver,
platinum or other precious metals, and jewelry; also includes used motor
vehicles, motorized equipment, boats, motorcycles, motor scooters, motordriven
cycles, aircraft, construction equipment and any other similar items
if the dealer does not hold a valid State of Maine license or permit to deal in
those specific items.[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33; 4-2-2013
by Ord. No. 2013.19]
TRANSIENT SELLER OF SECONDHAND GOODS — Any person who
engages in the business of selling, but not purchasing, secondhand
merchandise and who does not have for the purpose of carrying on such
business any permanent place of business within the City. Such term does
not include persons who sell at public fairs or expositions or members
selling on behalf of public service organizations.[Amended 5-1-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012.33]
VENDOR ON A PUBLIC PLACE — A person who sells or vends wares,
goods or services in a public place from a movable conveyance or temporary
structure or other enclosure.[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
Sec. 22-2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-2
CHCT:231
VICTUALER — A person who serves food or drink prepared on site for
consumption by the public.
WAYS — Any municipally controlled way or public easement as defined
in 23 M.R.S.A. §3021, and includes sidewalks along such ways and public
easements.[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
Sec. 22-3. License required. [Added 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Sec. 22-4. through Sec. 22-8. (Reserved)
No person shall engage in, operate any business or activity, or use
or permit the use of any device for which one or more licenses are
required by this chapter or permit others operating under such licenses
to act, without having obtained such and every such license required
therein and shall not operate or use such license or device during any
time that the applicable license has been suspended or after revocation
as provided herein.
(a)
A license may be issued pending receipt of the criminal history report
from the State Bureau of Identification for pawnbrokers, junk dealers,
secondhand dealers and flea markets, and taxi cab drivers as defined
herein, provided that the City Clerk has received all other
documentation required for the issuance of such license and a copy
of the applicant's criminal history record for the Biddeford Police
Department, which criminal history record does not contain a
disqualifying criminal conviction. If, after issuance of the license, the
City Clerk receives a criminal history report from the State Bureau
of Identification that contains disqualifying information, the City Clerk
shall immediately move to suspend or revoke the license in accordance
with this Code.
(b)
Any person engaged in or operating any business or activity, or who
uses or permits the use of any device for which a license is required,
shall procure a license for each and every such business activity, device
or location of each activity or device unless this Code specifically
provides to the contrary.
(c)
Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises,
device or vehicle at all times that the premises, device or vehicle is open
to the public.
(d)
Sec. 22-2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-4
CHCT:232
ARTICLE II
LICENSES AND PERMITS GENERALLY
Sec. 22-9. Licensing authority. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); Ord. No.
2000.54, 7-5-2000; amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Sec. 22-10. Application and procedures. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4);
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
This chapter is adopted under the authority of 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3001,
3009 and is also intended to be enforced as a land use regulation within
the meaning of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(a)
All licenses shall be issued or denied by the City Clerk; and all licenses
may be suspended or revoked after a hearing, which shall be held by
the City Council except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this chapter.
(b)
No license shall be issued to a person, corporation or other legal entity
unless all buildings, structures, vessels and platforms are in compliance
with zoning, building and fire safety codes, where applicable.
(c)
All applications shall be made in writing on a form provided by the City
Clerk. Each application submitted to the Clerk shall state the name and
business address of each applicant, the license desired, location to be
used, if any, the date of the application, and such additional information
as may be deemed necessary or useful by the Clerk in determining
whether such permit or license applied for should be issued.
(a)
Other papers:
Any application for a license for which a criminal conviction is a
disqualification under this Code shall be accompanied by a written
waiver of the applicant's right to privacy or confidentiality under
the State Criminal History Records Act (16 M.R.S.A. § 611 et seq.)
and otherwise to the extent necessary for the City Clerk, acting
through the Chief of Police, to determine whether or not such
disqualification exists.
(1)
If the applicant is other than a natural person, the names of all
principal officers shall accompany the original application.
(2)
A statement to the fact that no employee or officer of the City is
beneficially interested in the license or licenses, or in lieu thereof,
a statement of the names of such employees or officers as are
beneficially interested.
(3)
In the case of a renewal, the licensee shall submit to the Clerk on
a form provided by the Clerk, a certified ownership report for the
previous twelve-month period. Such report, among other things,
shall list the names of all persons or groups of persons acting in
concert who at any time during the period had an actual ownership
interest.
(4)
(b)
Sec. 22-9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-10
CHCT:233
Sec. 22-11. Fees. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); Ord. No. 99.97, 11-16-1999;
Ord. No. 2000.54, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 2001.49, 5-16-2001; Ord. No.
2002.34, 4-2-2002; Ord. No. 2003.114, 11-18-2003; Ord. No.
2003.131, 12-16-2003; amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42;
5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
Any organization claiming status as a bona fide nonprofit
organization shall furnish sufficient evidence of such status.
(5)
The City Clerk, upon receipt of a completed application, all applicable
fees/taxes, and appropriate state licenses, will forward the application
to the following departments for inspections/approval:
(1) Life and Safety Inspector.
(2) Police.
(3) Health/welfare.
(4) Tax Collectors.
(5) City Clerk.
(c)
The Tax Collector will verify that the following taxes have been paid,
and or payment arrangements made:
Tenant only businesses: personal property and sewer fees in the
name of the tenant.
(1)
Property owner/operator businesses: personal property, sewer and
real estate taxes.
(2)
(d)
Upon completion of the above inspections/approvals, the City Clerk will
issue the license.
(e)
Liquor licenses. All liquor license renewals will follow the process as
stipulated in state law.
(f)
Application fees. Except as expressly provided, all applications for
original licenses or for the consent of the City Council other than a
flea market or auction, shall be accompanied by an administrative fee
of $10 to defray the cost of processing the application. All applications
for renewal of licenses shall be accompanied by the fees for issuance
and an administrative fee of $10 to defray the cost of processing
the application. The latter shall be refundable if the application is
denied. In any case where notice by publication or mail is required, the
applicant shall pay the cost of publication and postage in advance.
(a)
Appeals fee. Appeals from determinations of the City Clerk shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of $25, and the appellant shall also pay
the full cost of publication and postage in advance, if such notice is
required. For the purposes of this subsection, notice by publication
(b)
Sec. 22-10 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-11
CHCT:234
shall be deemed to apply to the hearing on appeal whenever the
requirement of publication would exist in the first instance.
Fees for issuance.
(1) Fees for issuance of licenses shall be as provided in Section 22-11.
The City Clerk will use the following fee structure to develop
the appropriate license fees. [Amended 2-1-2011 by Ord. No.
2011.3; 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.14; 5-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012.33; 4-2-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.19; 4-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013.28]
Type of License or Service Fee
Places of amusement/entertainment $150 (single/multiple
events)
Concerts
Exhibitions (including live
performances)/shows
Playhouses/plays
Circuses
Carnivals
Air shows
Indoor skating rinks $150 (annual)
Theater/moving-picture houses Plus $25 per screen
Bottle clubs
Billiard rooms
Public firing ranges
Bowling lanes
Automobile service/repair; automobile
graveyards, automobile recycling
businesses, and junkyards
Automobile graveyard $200
Automobile recycler business $250
Junkyard without hazardous materials $100
Junkyard with hazardous materials $250
Recycling facilities $200
Recycling facilities with hazardous
materials
$500
Automobile service/repair $75
Places/dealers in products $200
Antique dealers
(2)
(c)
Sec. 22-11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-11
CHCT:235
Type of License or Service Fee
Dealers in gold jewelry, etc.
Flea markets
For 20 tables
For each additional table $5
Junk dealers
Secondhand dealers Required to pay a
one-time licensing
fee of $200 when the
business is first
established; not
required to go
through the annual
license renewal
process
Pawnbrokers $200
Operating license
Taxicabs, motorbuses, public
automobiles
$50 (plus $20 per
sticker)
Victualers $75
If serving beer and/or wine $100
Serving liquor $150
Massage establishments $100
Massage therapists $100
Combined massage establishment/
massage therapist
$150
Ice cream truck, per truck $75
Miscellaneous $10
Newspaper vending machines (per
machine)
Video game devices (per 5 machines to
a maximum of $50)
Other
Advertising/liquor license (See state
law.)
At cost plus 10%
Vendors on public places (See
appropriate section.)
$50
Wastehaulers
Per business $150
Per truck $150
Sec. 22-11 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-11
CHCT:236
Sec. 22-12. Late fees. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.42]
A late charge of $10 shall be added to each license fee for each license
that has expired more than 30 days, and an additional fee of $10 shall be
charged for each month thereafter that the license has not been renewed.
Type of License or Service Fee
Sludge disposal $50
Adult businesses, per annum $2,000
City Clerk fees
Notary attesting for residents $2
Notary attesting for nonresidents $5
Dedimus justice services $10
Marriage ceremony $100
Motor vehicle agent fee
Renewal $3
New $4
Sale of Zoning Ordinances $50
Sale of Subdivision Ordinances $10
Vital records research $10 per hour
Sale of voter I.D. card $5
21Prorated license fees. On any initial application for a business license
received by the City Clerk during the last four months of the licensing
year, the licensing fee is 1/2 of the annual licensing fee. All fees are
due at the time of business license application submittal. Proration of
licensing fees does not apply for business license renewals. [Added
5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
(d)
Waiver of fee. No fee for a victualer's license shall be charged to
any organization that operates a concession stand at a school-aged
sporting event whose proceeds are used exclusively for the purchase of
team uniforms, equipment, operating supplies, or for the improvement
of the sports fields and facilities. For the purpose of this subsection,
"school-aged sporting event" shall mean and include all sponsored
sporting events that are organized and operated within the structure of
a league, or under the auspices of the Biddeford School Department or
a Biddeford private school, or under a program that is sanctioned by
the City's Recreation Department and whose participants are enrolled
in school and not older than 19 years of age. [Added 4-6-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.27]
(e)
21.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (d) was redesignated as Subsection (e) to accommodate
the addition of this new Subsection (d).
Sec. 22-11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-12
CHCT:237
The City Clerk may waive any part or all of the late fee upon good cause
being shown.
Sec. 22-13. Expiration. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.42]
All annual licenses and permits, except victualers licenses, issued under
this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year of
issuance, unless otherwise indicated. A victualers license issued under this
chapter expires annually on May 31 of the year of issuance.
Sec. 22-14. Investigation of applicant. [Added 9-1-2009 by Ord. No.
2009.42]
Sec. 22-15. Standards for denial, suspension or revocation. [Added
9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Upon receipt of an application for any license or permit, other than a
renewal application substantially identical to the original application,
the Clerk shall inquire of other City departments, as appropriate, for
comments as to whether a license may be granted consistent with the
provisions of the laws and ordinances enforced by such departments.
In all appropriate cases, the building authority shall verify that the
premises to be used for the proposed facility comply with the Building
Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code and Zoning Ordinance, and if
applicable, state Junkyard Screening Law; the Health Authority shall
cause inspections to be made of the proposed location of any premises
dispensing food or liquor; the Fire Chief shall cause inspection to be
made for the purpose of determining if City ordinances, a state law or
state regulations concerning fire and safety have been complied with;
and if the license is not issuable to any class of persons, the Police
Chief shall cause an investigation to be made of the principal officers
or persons to be licensed. All such persons shall report to the Clerk in
writing, and copies of any such report shall be deemed a public record.
(a)
Whenever a criminal background check is done prior to issuance of a
license, any cost of such background check which is charged to the City
by another agency shall be added to the fees to be paid by the applicant.
(b)
Grounds In addition to any other specific provision of this Code
authorizing such action, a license or permit may be denied, suspended
or revoked upon a determination of the existence of one or more of the
following grounds:
Failure to fully complete the application forms; knowingly making
an incorrect statement of a material nature on such form; or failure
to supply any additional documentation required or reasonably
necessary to determine whether such license is issuable, or failure
to pay any fee required hereunder;
(1)
(a)
Sec. 22-12 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-15
CHCT:238
Sec. 22-16. Grievance. [Amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
The licensed activity, or persons on the premises for the purpose
of participating in the licensed activity, or persons patronizing the
licensed device have caused one or more breaches of the peace; or
(2)
There is clear danger that a breach of the peace will occur if the
licensed activity is permitted; or practicable thereafter.
(3)
At any hearing, the licensee shall be given the opportunity to answer
the complaint and to present evidence. The complainant shall also be
notified of the hearing and given the opportunity to be heard.
(b)
All suspensions or revocations shall be upon substantial evidence, and
all hearings shall be conducted with substantial fairness and strict
adherence to the rules of evidence shall not be required.
(c)
All hearings on suspension or revocation of licenses shall be held
within 30 days of delivery to licensee of the generalized statement of
complaint.
(d)
Grounds for denial. The City Clerk may deny a license application under
this article upon a finding that the applicant:
Does not have the financial capacity and technical ability to
conduct the activity described in the application; or
(1)
Has a history of complaints and problems resulting from the
proposed business; or
(2)
(3) Has failed to comply with any other provisions of this article; or
For other reasons that would support the position that approval of
the license would be adverse to the public health, safety or welfare
of the citizens of the City.
(4)
(a)
Hearing following denial of license. If the City Clerk denies a license
application under this article, the Clerk shall notify the applicant in
writing, stating the reasons for the denial. An appeal to the City Council
may be taken by any person aggrieved by the denial, suspension or
revocation of a license by the Clerk by filing a notice of appeal and
the prescribed fee with the City Council within 30 days of the decision
appealed from, and not thereafter. Every appeal should be in writing
and shall state the basis for the appeal. The City Council shall hear
the appeal within 10 business days after the filing of the appeal and
may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed from. The taking
of an appeal shall not stay a decision appealed from, except that at
the request of the licensee, the Clerk may stay the effective date of a
suspension, revocation or denial of a renewal license upon a finding
that the public is not likely to suffer any harm during the pendency of
the appeal. In such case, the Clerk shall make a written finding of his or
her decision in this regard and shall notify the appellant. The applicant
(b)
Sec. 22-15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-16
CHCT:239
may seek review of the denial in superior court pursuant to Maine Rules
of Civil Procedure 80B, within 30 days after the denial.
Suspension or revocation of license. Any license issued under this
article may be suspended or revoked by order of the municipal officers
after notice and hearing in accordance with the procedures in Section
22-16(d), for the following causes:
(1) Violation of this article.
Violation of any provision of any state or local law, ordinance, code
or regulation which relates directly to the provisions of this article.
(2)
(3) Violation of any license condition.
Falsehoods, misrepresentations or omissions in the license
application.
(4)
(c)
Hearings.
After investigation which results in a determination that the
municipal officers should consider revocation or suspension of a
license, the City Clerk shall serve notice of a hearing on the
licensee or leave it at the licensed premises at least three days
before the time set for hearing.
(1)
After the hearing the licensee must be given an opportunity to
hear the evidence in support of the charge(s) against the licensee,
to cross-examine, alone or through counsel, the witnesses, and be
heard in the licensee's own defense.
(2)
After considering all information presented, the municipal officers
may suspend or revoke a license if they find that the licensee is no
longer fit to hold a license or for any cause which the municipal
officers deem satisfactory, they may suspend a license for any
period of time they consider proper.
(3)
(d)
Appeal. The licensee may seek review of the denial in superior court
pursuant to Maine Rules of Civil Procedure 80B, within 30 days after
the denial.
(e)
Sec. 22-16 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-16
CHCT:240
ARTICLE III
CRITERIA
Sec. 22-17. Purpose. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.17]
The purpose of Sections 22-17 through 22-21.2 is to regulate mobile food
vending on property owned or under the control of the City of Biddeford
and mobile food vending on private property in order to create a desirable
situation where mobile food apparatuses may conduct business.
Sec. 22-18. Definitions. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.17]
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the following meanings.
EDIBLE GOODS — May include, but are not limited to:
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — Any business which sells edible goods from a
nonstationary location within the City. The terms shall include, but not be
limited to:
NONREFRIGERATED — Edible goods that are not required to be kept at a
temperature below 41° F.
Sec. 22-19. Application and permit. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.17]
Prepackaged food, including, but not limited to, candy, beverages,
chips, popsicles and ice cream.
(1)
Prepared food, including, but not limited to, hot dogs, desserts,
sandwiches and pizza.
(2)
On-site prepared food, including, but not limited to, shaved ice,
sandwiches and tacos.
(3)
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK— A self-contained motorized unit selling items
defined as "edible goods."
(1)
CONCESSION TRAILER— A vending unit which is pulled by a
motorized unit and has no power to move on its own.
(2)
Permit. Every mobile food vendor shall have a permit issued by the City
to conduct business in the City.
(a)
Application. Every mobile food vendor shall apply for a permit on a form
promulgated by the City. Each vending unit requires a separate permit.
Applications for permits meeting the requirements for mobile vendors
shall be processed within 10 business days.
(b)
Mobile food vendor application form. A complete application shall
require the following information from the applicant to be considered:
(c)
Sec. 22-17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-19
CHCT:241
Sec. 22-20. Permit regulations. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.17]
Name of applicant, as well as physical street address, mailing
address, telephone number(s), and e-mail address.
(1)
(2) Legal name of business or entity.
Signed permission form, or provide notarized affidavit from the
private property owner granting permission for unit placement.
(3)
Name, phone number and driver's license number of business
owner and all employees operating within the mobile food vendor
unit.
(4)
(5) Proposed itinerary with route, vending locations and times.
Contact name and phone number for mobile food vending unit
while in route.
(6)
(7) Description of product being sold.
Site plan where the mobile food vending unit will be located on the
property.
(8)
(9) Valid and current vehicle/trailer registration of mobile food unit.
The application fee for a mobile food vendor permit shall be $200. Each
mobile food vendor unit shall be permitted separately.
(a)
(b) Mobile food vendor permits shall expire on December 31 of each year.
Mobile food vendors shall provide, at their expense, and keep in force
during the term of their contract, with a responsible insurance company
or companies authorized to do business in the state, commercial
general liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000. The
mobile food vendor shall deliver certificates of such insurance to the
City at the time of application.
(c)
Mobile food vendors shall provide proof of a State of Maine health
certificate at the time of application.
(d)
Upon renewal the applicant shall pay the renewal fee of $200 and
update any changes in the permitting documentation upon permit
renewal. The applicant must submit the application and the renewal fee
within 30 days before expiration of the permit or must reapply as a new
applicant.
(e)
The City Manager is authorized to make reasonable rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with this section, governing the design,
construction and location of pushcarts or food trucks.
(f)
Display of permit. Every permit, including those from the City, shall be
displayed at all times in a conspicuous place where they can be read
(g)
Sec. 22-19 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-20
CHCT:242
Sec. 22-21. Denial of permit. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.17]
A permit may be denied where:
Sec. 22-21.1. Prohibited conduct. [Added 3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.17]
by the general public on the mobile food vendor's truck or concession
trailer.
The required information is incomplete or incorrect or shows that a
person is not otherwise entitled to conduct business as a mobile food
vendor.
(1)
The opportunity to issue a permit has been denied due to previous
violations as described in this section.
(2)
Distance regulations:
No mobile food vendor shall conduct business within any singlefamily
residential or agricultural zoning district unless otherwise
approved in writing by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(1)
A mobile food vendor may not be located within 100 feet of the
primary entrance of an open and operating fixed-location food
service or eating establishment except during City-sponsored or
other community events.
(2)
A mobile food vendor shall not be located within 40 feet from
another mobile food vendor except during City-sponsored or other
community events.
(3)
(a)
A mobile food vendor shall not conduct sales at a stationary location:
For a duration exceeding 60 minutes on any public street or public
streets adjacent to public parks and recreational facilities, next to
fire lanes and no-parking designated areas. Mobile vendors parking
on public streets may not move to a new location without prior
approval from the City.
(1)
In congested areas where the operation impedes vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(2)
(3) Between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(b)
Offenses and regulations.
It shall be unlawful for any individual as the agent or employee of
another regulated under this section to sell edible goods in the City
unless its principal or employer has received a permit under this
section.
(1)
(2) A permit issued under this section is not transferable.
(c)
Sec. 22-20 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-21.1
CHCT:243
Sec. 22-21.2. Mobile food vendor requirements. [Added 3-20-2018
by Ord. No. 2018.17]
The following regulations shall apply to mobile food vendors:
It shall be unlawful for an individual to sell edible goods while
displaying a valid permit issued by the City in the name of another
individual, organization, or entity.
(3)
It shall be unlawful for any individual, directly or through an agent
or employee, to sell goods within the corporate limits of the City
after the expiration of the permit issued by the City under this
section.
(4)
It shall be unlawful for an individual, directly or through an agent
or employee, to misrepresent on the permit affidavit any acts that
are regulated under this section.
(5)
It shall be unlawful for any individual, directly or through his
agents or employees, to represent that the issuance of a permit
by the City constitutes the City's endorsement or approval of the
product for sale.
(6)
Each unit shall be equipped with a portable trash receptacle and shall
be responsible for proper disposal of solid waste and wastewater in the
sanitation facility legally accessed by the food service establishment.
All disturbed areas must be cleaned following each stop to a minimum
20 feet of the sales location.
(1)
(2) Mobile food vendors may not have a drive-through.
Continuous music or repetitive sounds shall not project from the mobile
unit.
(3)
A five-foot clear space shall be maintained around the mobile food
vending unit.
(4)
(5) All mobile units shall have a gray water holding tank.
The mobile unit will be subject to inspection upon permit application
through the Code Enforcement Department, the Health Department
and the Fire Department, and may be subject to random inspection and
upon reissuance of the permit.
(6)
No sales are allowed within public park facilities while park concession
units are operating. Mobile units operating in public parks and on
streets adjacent to public parks or recreational facilities require
approval by the City's Recreation Director.
(7)
Sec. 22-21.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-22
CHCT:244
Sec. 22-22. Places of amusement/entertainment. [Ord. of
4-21-1998(4); Ord. No. 2003.114, 11-18-2003; amended 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.42]
Places of assembly for the purpose of entertainment must obtain a license
from the City in accordance with these provisions. The preparation of food
for sale to the public on premises will require a separate victualers license
under the provisions of Section 22-27.
Concerts, exhibitions, playhouses, plays, circuses, carnivals, indoor
skating rinks, theaters/moving-picture houses, billiard rooms. A person,
firm or corporation operating, or sponsoring, a concert, exhibition,
playhouse, play, circus, carnival or indoor skating rink on a scheduled
regular basis will obtain a license from the City Clerk's office.
A request for a license under this section will be conditioned on
the satisfactory inspection of the facility by all appropriate
departments to insure structural safety issues.
a.
The application will include:
1. The name and address of the operator and sponsor.
2. Location of the event.
3. Dates and times of the event.
b.
The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the following
conditions:
The structure where the event is to be held is found to be
unsatisfactory;
1.
2. There is inadequate parking; or
Other issues raised to the City Clerk and determined to be
adverse to the public health or safety or welfare.
3.
c.
The operator will be responsible for all security and cleanup
associated with the event.
d.
(1)
Bottle clubs.
License. No person shall keep, maintain, operate, lease, or
otherwise furnish, either to its members and guests or to the
general public, any premises, building, or place for use as a bottle
club without first having obtained a license and paying the fee
therefor. A separate license must be obtained for each branch
or separate establishment of a bottle club. Each license shall
authorize the operation of such establishment only at the location
described in such license and in conformity with all applicable
ordinances and law. No license shall be transferred to another
person or to any other location, except that a licensed bottle club
may change its name upon approval of the City Council if its
a.
(2)
Sec. 22-22 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-22
CHCT:245
location remains the same. Every bottle club shall exhibit its
license at all times in a conspicuous place on its premises.
Application.
Every applicant for a bottle club license shall:
Complete and file an application on a form prescribed by
the City Clerk;
[a]
[b] Deposit the prescribed license fee with the City Clerk;
Submit the completed application to the City Clerk,
together with attested copies of the articles of
incorporation and bylaws, if the applicant is a corporation,
or articles of association and bylaws if the applicant is an
association, as well as a list of all officers of the bottle club;
[c]
File an affidavit which will identify all officers and their
places of residency at the present time and for the
immediately preceding three years.
[d]
1.
Submission of false information in an application for a license
is a violation of this article and such act shall be grounds for
the denial of the application.
2.
b.
Fees. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a bona
fide nonprofit, charitable, educational, political, civic, recreational,
fraternal, patriotic or religious organization is not subject to
Section 22-11 of this article pertaining to fees.
c.
Qualification of officers. All officers of a bottle club shall meet the
following qualifications: Never have been convicted of a Class A, B
or C crime nor of violating any of the gambling or prohibitive liquor
laws either of the United States or of Maine or any other state,
within five years immediately preceding the date of application.
Each such officer shall file the release authorized by 16 M.R.S.A.
§ 620(6) Subsection 6, Criminal History Record Information Act,
with the application. Failure to provide such a release shall be
grounds for denial of the application.
d.
Description of the premises. Every applicant for a bottle club
license shall include in the application a description of the premises
for which a license is desired and shall set forth such other material
information, description, or plan of that part of the premises where
it is proposed to consume or keep liquor.
e.
Articles and bylaws. Applicants for bottle club licenses shall
possess written articles of incorporation or association and bylaws.
The articles or bylaws shall provide for regular election of officers
or directors. Membership shall be regulated by such articles or
bylaws.
f.
Sec. 22-22 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-22
CHCT:246
Inspections of premises.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall verify that the premises of
the proposed bottle club comply with the applicable ordinances
of the City, including, but not by way of limitation, the Building
Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, and Zoning Ordinance,
and shall report his findings in writing to the City Clerk.
1.
The Fire Chief shall cause an inspection to be made of the
proposed location of the bottle club for the purpose of
determining if City ordinances concerning fire and safety have
been complied with. He shall submit a report of his findings in
writing to the City Clerk.
2.
g.
Notice of hearing.
After receipt of the written reports required by Section
22-22(2)g, the City Clerk shall give notice of the public
hearings on applications for bottle clubs in the form and
manner and to the persons specified in this section. The notice
shall include the time and place of such hearing, the nature
of the matter to be heard, and the address or location of the
property involved. Where notice by mail is required, it shall be
mailed at least seven days in advance of the hearing date by
regular United States mail.
1.
Notices for hearings under this section may be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City
at the applicant's prepaid expense at least three consecutive
days before the date of hearing in a daily newspaper. Notice to
the owners of all the property within 500 feet of such parcel or
tract shall be by mail.
2.
For the purpose of this section the "owners of property" shall
be considered to be the parties listed by the Tax Collector of
the City as those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of
any property owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall
not necessitate another hearing and shall not invalidate any
action of the municipal officers.
3.
h.
Proximity to schools and churches. No new bottle club license shall
be granted under this article to premises located within 300 feet of
any school, church or area designated primarily for use by minors.
i.
Permitted. No person under the age of 21 years is permitted in or
on that part of the premises subject to the control of a bottle club
where persons are permitted to drink alcoholic beverages; except
that persons under the age 21 years may be permitted admittance
to the bottle club for the purpose of employment or when the
person under 21 years of age is accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
j.
Sec. 22-22 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-22
CHCT:247
Hours. The premises used as a bottle club shall be closed and
vacated by members and guests each day from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m., except that on January 1 the premises may remain open
until 2:00 a.m. During the hours that a bottle club must remain
closed, no members, guests or other persons, other than regular
employees, may be on or remain therein, and the use by anyone
of the premises or facilities of the bottle club for the drinking of
alcoholic beverages during such hours when a bottle club must
remain closed is prohibited.
k.
Entrance to be marked. The entrance to any bottle club shall be
plainly marked "Bottle Club, Members and Guests Only."
l.
Illegal activities. No license under this article shall knowingly
permit any illegal activities to take place on the licensed premises.
m.
Right of inspection. The applicant or licensee, his agents and
employees shall allow access to the bottle club by the Code
Enforcement Officer or his or her designated assistants or agents
for the purposes of inspecting the premises and ensuring that no
violation of this article or any law is taking place.
n.
Suspension or revocation of license. A license to operate a bottle
club, as provided for by this article, may be denied, suspended or
revoked by the municipal officers for either violation of or failure to
comply with any of the provisions of this article. Determination of
the severity of the violation and whether or not a denial, suspension
or revocation is warranted shall be made by the municipal officers,
after notice and hearing.
o.
Appeals. An appeal from any final decision of the municipal officers
may be taken by the applicant to the State Liquor Commission
pursuant to 28-A M.R.S.A. § 161-B(5) or to the superior court in
accordance with the provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure.
p.
Sport shooting ranges. A person or firm operating a facility, open to
the public, used principally or primarily for archery, skeet and/or trap
shooting, other shooting sports, shooting of rifles, shotguns and pistols
or other projectiles, must obtain a license under the provisions of this
chapter.
A request for a license under this section will be conditioned on
the satisfactory inspection of the facility by the City Inspections
Department and the Fire Department to insure structural safety
issues, and Police Department in regards to range clearance and
other safety factors associated with firearms or other projectile
hurtling devices.
a.
The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the following
conditions:
b.
(3)
Sec. 22-22 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-22
CHCT:248
The structure or facility is found to be unsatisfactory. (See
appropriate section in Firearms Ordinance).
1.
2. There is inadequate parking.
The noise level of the facility will adversely affect the
surrounding area.
3.
Other issues raised to the City Clerk and determined to be
adverse to the public health or safety or welfare.
4.
Bowling lanes. A person or persons operating a facility principally or
primarily for bowling, to include candle pin, must obtain a license under
the provisions of this chapter.
A request for a license under this section will be conditioned on
the satisfactory inspection of the facility by the City Inspections
Department and the Fire Department to insure structural safety
issues.
a.
The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the following
conditions:
The structure where the event is to be held is found to be
unsatisfactory;
1.
2. There is inadequate parking; or
Other issues raised to the City Clerk and determined to be
adverse to the public health or safety or welfare.
3.
b.
(4)
Air shows. A person, firm or corporation operating or sponsoring an air
show, aeronautical display or exhibition will obtain a license from the
City Clerk's office.
A request for a license under this section will be conditioned on
the satisfactory inspection of the facility by all appropriate
departments including the Airport Manager to ensure structural
and operational safety issues.
a.
The application will include:
1. The name and address of the operator and sponsor.
2. Location of the event.
Dates and times of the event, including a rain date, if
applicable.
3.
b.
The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the following
conditions:
The location where the event is to be held is found to be
unsatisfactory;
1.
c.
(5)
Sec. 22-22 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-22
CHCT:249
Sec. 22-23. Automobile service/repair garages; automobile
graveyards; automobile recycling business; junkyards. [Ord. of
4-21-1998(4); Ord. No. 2003.131, 12-16-2003; amended 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.42; 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.14]
2. There is inadequate parking; or
The event will adversely infringe on the use of municipal
airport facilities.
3.
Other issues raised to the City Clerk and determined to be
adverse to the public health or safety or welfare.
4.
The operator will be responsible for all security and cleanup
associated with the event.
d.
Automobile service/repair garages.
Purpose. The City of Biddeford has identified that to further the
City's goal to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City, certain uses should be licensed by the City of Biddeford.
(1)
Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the following terms have the following meanings.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE/REPAIR GARAGE — A business
establishment engaged in general repair, engine rebuilding, and/or
parts replacement. Automotive repair shall not mean "automotive
body shop," nor the sale of gasoline, other motor fuels or motor oil.
(2)
License required.
Each person owning and/or operating an automobile service/
repair garage for the general public shall annually obtain a
license to conduct such business from the City Clerk and pay
the fee prescribed in Section 22-11.
a.
The City Clerk may issue a license for a facility only after the
facility has been inspected by all appropriate departments and
all other required approvals have been obtained.
b.
Licenses under this section may not be issued/renewed, and
may be voided by the municipal officers if there are other
issues raised to the municipal officers and determined to be
adverse to the public health or safety or welfare that cannot
otherwise be mitigated in a reasonable amount of time as
determined by the municipal officers.
c.
(3)
(a)
Automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses, and
junkyards.
(1) Purpose.
(b)
Sec. 22-22 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:250
The City of Biddeford recognizes that a need exists for the safe
operation and maintenance of junkyards and so-called "auto
graveyards." Such operations have had and continue to have
the potential to encroach upon highways. These operations
have become a nuisance and a menace to safe travel on public
ways, often distracting the attention of drivers of motor
vehicles because it appears cars are parked on the highway
or that an accident has occurred. It is declared that such
operations are a nuisance and are properly subject to
regulation and control.
a.
It is recognized that recycling of automobiles is a business
enterprise that, when conducted in accordance with certain
standards, differs from the enterprise of an automobile
graveyard and that adoption of uniform state standards for this
type of business enterprise would assist in development and
regulation of that business.
b.
Automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses, and
junkyards pose potential risks to the environment, particularly
to groundwater and surface water quality if gasoline, oil or
other fluids are not managed and disposed of properly. Proper
location and operation of these facilities are critical to ensure
protection of groundwater and surface water quality, other
natural resources and the health and welfare of Maine citizens.
These facilities may create nuisance conditions potentially
affecting abutting landowners and others if not located and
operated properly. For these reasons, it is declared that these
facilities are appropriately subject to certain environmental
and operational standards and to appropriate municipal and
state regulation.
c.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the following terms have the following meanings.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD —
A yard, field or other outdoor area used to store three or
more unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles as defined in
29-A M.R.S.A § 101, Subsection 42, or parts of such vehicles.
"Automobile graveyard" includes an area used for automobile
dismantling, salvage, and recycling operations.
a.
"Automobile graveyard" does not include:
An area used for temporary storage of vehicles or vehicle
parts by an establishment or place of business that is
primarily engaged in doing vehicle repair work to make
repairs to render a motor vehicle serviceable. In order for
a vehicle's storage to be considered temporary, it must
be removed from the site within 180 calendar days of its
receipt;
1.
b.
(2)
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:251
An area used by an automobile hobbyist to store, organize,
restore, or display antique autos, antique motorcycles,
classic vehicles, horseless carriages, reconstructed
vehicles, street rods or parts of these vehicles as these
vehicles are defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101 as long as
the hobbyist's activities comply with all applicable federal
and state statutes and rules and municipal ordinances,
other than ordinances that are more restrictive than this
subsection regarding the storage of vehicles or vehicle
parts that are collected by a hobbyist. For the purposes
of the subparagraph, an "automobile hobbyist" is a person
who is not primarily engaged in the business of selling any
of those vehicles or parts from those vehicles;
2.
An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles, vehicle
parts or equipment intended for use by a municipality,
quasi-municipality entity or state or federal agency;
3.
An area used for the storage of operational farm tractors
and related farm equipment, log skidders, logging tractors
or other vehicles exempted from registration under 29-A
M.R.S.A. Chapter 5;
4.
An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles or
equipment being offered for sale by a dealer, equipment
dealer, trailer dealer or vehicle auction business as defined
in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 851;
5.
An area used for the storage of vehicles by an
establishment or place of business that is primarily
engaged in business as a new vehicle dealer as defined in
29-A M.R.S.A. § 851;
6.
An area used for temporary storage of vehicles by an
establishment or place of business that is primarily
engaged in business as an insurance salvage pool. In order
for a vehicle's storage to be considered temporary under
this subparagraph, the vehicle must be removed from the
site within 180 calendar days of receipt of title by the
business; or
7.
An area used for the parking or storage of operational
commercial motor vehicles, special equipment or special
mobile equipment as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101 that is
temporarily out of service but is expected to be used by the
vehicle or equipment owner or by an operator designated
by the owner. This subsection does not exempt an area
used for the parking or storage of equipment or vehicles
that are not operational while stored or parked in the area.
8.
Sec. 22-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:252
AUTOMOBILE RECYCLING BUSINESS —
HIGHWAY — Any public way.
INTERSTATE SYSTEM — Those portions of the Maine Turnpike
and the state highway system incorporated in the National System
of Interstate and Defense Highways, as officially designated by the
Department of Transportation.
JUNKYARD — A yard, field or other outside area used to store,
dismantle, or otherwise handle:
LOCAL ARTERIALS — A major roadway serving long-distance
traffic through and between municipalities and carrying traffic to
major centers of activity or critical locations within the City (roads
having an annual average daily traffic in excess of 2,000 vehicles
per day, or critical facilities reside on this road as defined by the
Public Works Director).
The business premises of a dealer or a recycler licensed under
29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 851 to 1112 who purchases or acquires
salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the vehicles for
the purpose of resale or for selling the basic materials in the
salvage vehicles, as long as 80% of the business premises
specified is used for automobile recycling operations.
a.
"Automobile recycling business" does not include:
Financial institutions as defined in 9-B M.R.S.A. § 131,
Subsections 17 and 17-A;
1.
2. Insurance companies licensed to do business in the state;
New vehicle dealers, as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 851,
licensed to do business in the state; or
3.
That portion of the business premises that is used for
temporary storage of vehicles by an establishment or place
of business that is primarily engaged in business as an
insurance salvage pool. In order for a vehicle's storage
to be considered temporary under this subparagraph, the
vehicle must be removed from the site within 180 days of
receipt of title by the business.
4.
b.
Discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing, heating supplies,
electronic or industrial equipment, household appliances or
furniture;
a.
b. Discarded, scrap and junked lumber; and
Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash,
rubber debris, waste and all scrap iron, steel, other scrap
ferrous or nonferrous material.
c.
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:253
LOCAL COLLECTORS — A principal roadway which conveys traffic
between arterial streets. (Roads having an annual average daily
traffic between 250 and 2,000 vehicles per day.)
PRIMARY SYSTEM — That portion of the state highway system
which the Department of Transportation has by official designation
incorporated into the Federal-Aid Primary System.
PUBLIC WAY — Any way owned and/or maintained by the state,
county or a municipality, over which the general public has right to
pass.
Permit required. No person, corporation or entity may establish,
operate or maintain an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business or junkyard without first obtaining a nontransferable
permit from the municipal officers. Permits issued to an automobile
graveyard, automobile recycling business, and junkyards under
this section are valid until the first day of January the following
year. A person operating a business that involves the recycling
of automobiles may operate under a permit for an automobile
graveyard or a permit for an automobile recycling business.
(3)
Hearings. The municipal officers shall hold a public hearing before
granting a new or renewal permit to establish, operate or maintain
an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business, or
junkyard. The municipal officers shall require an applicant to
provide proof of mailing a notice of the application to all abutting
property owners. They shall post a notice of the hearing at least
seven and not more than 14 days before the hearing in at least
two public places in the municipality and publish a notice in one
newspaper having general circulation in the municipality in which
the automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business, or
junkyard is to be located. The municipal officers shall give written
or electronic notice of the application to the Department of the
Secretary of State, Bureau of Motor Vehicles, by mailing a copy of
the application at least seven and not more than 30 days before
the hearing. The municipal officers shall give written notice of the
application to a public water supplier if the application is for an
automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business, or junkyard
located within the supplier's source water supply area. The notice
may be given by mailing a copy of the application at least seven and
not more than 14 days before the hearing.
(4)
Limitations on new automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business and junkyard permits. All new automobile graveyards,
automobile recycling businesses, and junkyards shall receive all
required approvals, including from the Planning Board, prior to
being granted a permit from the municipal officers. The Planning
Board shall review all new automobile graveyards, automobile
recycling businesses, and junkyards as conditional uses (Part III,
Land Development Regulations, Article VII, Conditional Uses), and
(5)
Sec. 22-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:254
no permit shall be granted by the municipal officers prior to
receiving written notice that the proposed new business has been
approved by the Planning Board and that it complies with all of the
applicable requirements in this section.
Rules. No permit may be granted for an automobile graveyard,
automobile recycling business or junkyard that does not comply
with the specific operating standards as defined in Subsection (8)c
and/or d below.
(6)
Setbacks for new automobile graveyards, automobile recycling
businesses and/or junkyard permits. All new automobile
graveyards, automobile recycling businesses, and junkyards shall
comply with the following requirements:
State highways, local arterials and local collectors. All new
automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses and
junkyards operations shall be set back 1,000 feet of the rightof-
way of any highway incorporated in the interstate system,
primary system, or are local arterials and collectors or within
600 feet of the right-of-way of any other public way, except for:
Those automobile graveyards, automobile recycling
businesses or junkyards that are kept entirely screened to
ordinary view from any public way at all times by natural
objects, plantings, fences, or other screening:
At a height, density and depth sufficient to accomplish
complete screening from ordinary view;
[a]
Well-constructed and will be properly maintained at a
minimum height of six feet;
[b]
[c] Placed outside of the highway right-of-way; and
[d] Acceptable to the Planning Board.
1.
Those automobile graveyards or junkyards located within
areas that have been zoned for industrial use and located
more than 600 feet but less than 1,000 feet from the rightof-
way of any highway incorporated in both the interstate
system, primary system, or are local arterials and
collectors.
2.
a.
Public facilities. No new business permits may be granted
for an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business or
junkyard that is:
Located within 300 feet of any public park, public
playground, public bathing beach, school, church or
cemetery.
1.
b.
(7)
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:255
Within ordinary view from a public facility under
Subparagraph 1.
2.
Public and private water supplies.
No permit may be granted for an automobile graveyard,
automobile recycling business, or junkyard that handles
junk, scrap metal, vehicles, or other solid waste within
300 feet of a well that serves as a public or private water
supply. This prohibition does not include a private well
that serves only the automobile graveyard, automobile
recycling business or junkyard or the owner's or operator's
abutting residence. This prohibition does not apply to
wells installed after the effective date of this subsection if
the automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business,
or junkyard already has already received a permit.
1.
Automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses
and junkyards operating under the terms of permits issued
prior to the effective date of this subsection and handling
junk, scrap metal, vehicles or other solid waste within
300 feet of wells that serve as public or private water
supplies may continue to operate in those locations under
the terms of those permits. The municipal officers may
renew a permit allowing the continued handling of junk,
scrap metal, vehicles or other solid waste within 300 feet
of a well serving as a public or private water supply as
long as no further encroachment toward the well occurs.
The municipal officers may not renew a permit if there is
substantial, credible evidence that the permitted activities
have caused contamination of the well.
2.
c.
Application requirements and operating standards.
An application for an automobile graveyard, automobile
recycling business or junkyard permit must include the
following information:
1. The name and address of the property owner;
The name and address of the person or entity who will
operate the site;
2.
A site plan, including:
[a] Tax map, block and lot of the parcel;
[b] The current zone designation;
[c] Property boundary lines;
[d] A description of the soils on the property;
3.
a.
(8)
Sec. 22-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:256
The location of any sand and gravel aquifer recharge
areas;
[e]
The location of any residence or school within 500 feet
of the property lines or on the property;
[f]
The location of any body of water within 200 feet of
the property lines or on the property;
[g]
The boundaries of the one-hundred-year floodplain, if
applicable; and
[h]
The location of all public ways within 1,000 feet of the
site.
[i]
A permit application filed as an automobile recycling
business must also include:
A plan for the containment of fluids, containment and
disposal of batteries, and the storage or disposal of
tires; and
[a]
The location within the property boundary lines where
vehicles are to be drained, dismantled and stored.
[b]
4.
Standards for permit. The municipality may issue a permit
to an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business,
or junkyard only if the site demonstrates that it meets the
operation standards set forth in Subsection (8)c and/or d.
b.
Operating standards for automobile graveyards and junkyards.
An automobile graveyard and junkyard must meet the
following standards.
All fluids, including, but not limited to, engine lubricant,
transmission fluid, brake fluid, power steering fluid,
hydraulic fluid, engine coolant, gasoline, diesel fuel and
oil, must be properly handled in such a manner that they
do not leak, flow or discharge into or onto the ground or
into a body of water;
1.
A vehicle containing fluids may not be stored or
dismantled:
Within 100 feet of any body of water or freshwater
wetland, as defined by 38 M.R.S.A. § 436-A,
Subsection 5;
[a]
[b] Within the one-hundred-year floodplain; or
[c] Over a mapped sand and gravel aquifer.
2.
Junk, scrap metal, vehicles or other solid wastes may not
be placed or deposited, directly or indirectly, into the
3.
c.
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:257
inland waters or tidal waters of the state or on the ice of
inland waters or tidal waters or on the banks of inland
waters or tidal waters in such a manner that they may fall
or be washed into these waters;
Junkyard and automobile graveyard owners must
demonstrate at the time of licensing that the facility or
facilities for which they seek permits are, or part of, a
viable business entity and the facility or facilities are
actively engaged in the business of salvaging, recycling,
dismantling, processing, repairing or rebuilding junk or
vehicles for the purpose of sale or trade;
4.
A log must be maintained of all motor vehicles handled
that includes the date each vehicle was acquired, a copy
of the vehicle's title or bill of sale and the date or dates
upon which all fluids, refrigerant, batteries and mercury
switches were removed;
5.
All fluids, refrigerant, batteries and mercury switches
must be removed from motor vehicles that lack engines
or other parts that render the vehicles incapable of being
driven under their own motor power or that are otherwise
incapable of being driven under their own motor power,
appliances and other items within 180 days of acquisition.
Motor vehicles, appliances and other items acquired by
and on the premises of a junkyard or automobile graveyard
prior to October 1, 2005, must have all fluids, refrigerant,
batteries and mercury switches removed by January 1,
2007. Fluids required to be removed under this paragraph
must be removed to the greatest extent practicable;
6.
Storage, recycling or disposal of all fluids, refrigerant,
batteries and mercury switches must comply with all
applicable federal and state laws, rules and regulations;
and
7.
All fluids, refrigerant, batteries and mercury switches
must be removed from motor vehicles, appliances and
other items before crushing or shredding. Fluids required
to be removed under this paragraph must be removed to
the greatest extent practicable.
8.
Operating standards for automobile recycling businesses. An
automobile recycling business must meet the following
standards.
The site of the yard must be enclosed by a visual screen
that complies with the screening requirements of Part III,
Land Development Regulations, Article VI, Performance
Standards, § 7, Automobile graveyards, automobile
recycling businesses, and junkyards.
1.
d.
Sec. 22-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:258
A vehicle containing fluids may not be stored within 100
feet of any body of water or freshwater wetland, as defined
by 38 M.R.S.A. § 436-A, Subsection 5.
2.
A vehicle may not be dismantled or stored within 500 feet
of a school, church, cemetery or public playground or park
that existed on the date the permit was issued.
3.
A vehicle may not be dismantled or stored over a sand and
gravel aquifer or aquifer recharge area.
4.
A vehicle containing fluids may not be dismantled or
stored within the one-hundred-year floodplain.
5.
Except as provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3754-A, Subsection
4, a vehicle may not be dismantled or stored within 300
feet of a well that serves as a public or private water
supply, excluding a private well that serves only the
automobile recycling business or the owner or operator's
abutting residence.
6.
A vehicle may not be located or dismantled closer than 20
feet from any lot line, unless the operator has notarized
written permission from the abutting property owner.
7.
Dismantling of a vehicle must be performed in accordance
with the following standards:
[a] Batteries must be removed.
All fluids, including but not limited to engine
lubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid, power
steering fluid, hydraulic fluid, engine coolant,
gasoline, diesel fuel and oil, must be drained into
watertight, covered containers and must be recycled
or disposed of in accordance with applicable federal
and state laws, rules and regulations.
[b]
Fluids from a vehicle may not be permitted to flow or
be discharged into or onto the ground.
[c]
Storage, recycling or disposal of all fluids, refrigerant,
batteries and mercury switches must comply with all
applicable federal and state laws, rules and
regulations.
[d]
A log must be maintained of all motor vehicles handled
that includes the date each vehicle was acquired, a
copy of the vehicle's title or bill of sale and the date or
dates upon which all fluids, refrigerant, batteries and
mercury switches were removed.
[e]
8.
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:259
All fluids, refrigerant, batteries and mercury switches
must be removed from motor vehicles that lack
engines or other parts that render the vehicles
incapable of being driven under their own motor
power or that are otherwise incapable of being driven
under their own motor power within 180 days of
acquisition. Motor vehicles acquired by and on the
premises of an automobile recycling business prior
to October 1, 2005, must have all fluids, refrigerant,
batteries and mercury switches removed by January
1, 2007. Fluids required to be removed under this
subparagraph must be removed to the greatest extent
practicable.
[f]
All fluids, refrigerant, batteries and mercury switches
must be removed from vehicles before crushing or
shredding. Fluids required to be removed under this
subparagraph must be removed to the greatest extent
practicable.
[g]
Relationship to state stormwater requirements. The municipal
officers may reject an application for an automobile graveyard,
automobile recycling business, or junkyard if the applicant has
not demonstrated that:
A notice of intent has been filed with the Department
of Environmental Protection to comply with the general
permit provisions for stormwater discharges; or
1.
The Department of Environmental Protection has
determined that a stormwater discharge permit is not
required.
2.
e.
Right of entry.
Municipal officers or their designees may, to carry out
the provisions of this section or to determine compliance
with any laws, ordinances, license or permit approvals,
decisions or conditions:
Enter any automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business, or junkyard property and inspect all outside
areas, equipment and activities at reasonable hours
for compliance with the laws or ordinances set forth in
accordance with this section; and
[a]
Enter any building on the property with the consent of
the owner, occupant or agent to inspect the building
and activities within the building for compliance with
the laws or ordinances set forth in accordance with
this section.
[b]
1.
f.
Sec. 22-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:260
A municipal officer's or designee's entry onto property
under this subsection is not a trespass.
2.
Revocation or suspension of permit. For the purposes of
revocation and/or suspensions of permits, the operating
standards contained in Subsections c and/or d above shall
be conditions of the permit and will follow the guidelines as
established in Subsection (10)d.
g.
Relationship of an automobile recycling business permit to
an automobile graveyard permit. A person who recycles
automobiles but does not qualify for or loses an automobile
recycling business permit may apply for an automobile
graveyard permit.
h.
Provisions regarding nuisances unaffected. This section shall not
be construed as in any way repealing, invalidating or abrogating
17 M.R.S.A. § 2802 or limiting the right of prosecutions under
that section. Violation of these sections in the establishment,
maintenance or operation of any automobile graveyard, automobile
recycling business, or junkyard constitutes prima facie evidence
that the yard is a nuisance as defined in 17 M.R.S.A. § 2802.
(9)
Violations.
Enforcement. All municipal police officers, code enforcement
officers, and any designee of the municipal officers may
enforce the provisions of this section.
a.
Penalties. Violations of this section are subject to the penalty
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452; 17 M.R.S.A. §§ 2264-A and
2264-B; or 17 M.R.S.A. Chapter 91. Each day that the violation
continues constitutes a separate offense.
b.
Abatement. If the municipality is the prevailing party in an
action taken pursuant to the provisions of this section or 17
M.R.S.A. Chapter 80 or Chapter 91 and the violator does not
complete any ordered correction or abatement in accordance
with the ordered schedule, the municipal officers or designated
agent may enter the property and may act to abate the site
in compliance with the order. To recover any actual and direct
expenses incurred by the municipality in the abatement of the
nuisance, the municipality may:
File a civil action against the owner to recover the cost
of abatement, including the expense of court costs and
reasonable attorney's fees necessary to file and conduct
the action;
1.
File a lien on real estate where the automobile graveyard,
automobile recycling business, or junkyard is located; or
2.
c.
(10)
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:261
Assess a special tax on real estate where the automobile
graveyard, automobile recycling business or junkyard is
located. This amount must be included in the next annual
warrant to the Tax Collector of the municipality, for
collection in the same manner as other state, county and
municipal taxes are collected. Interest as determined by
the municipality pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 505 in the year
in which the special tax is assessed accrues on all unpaid
balances of the special tax beginning on the 60th day after
the day of commitment of the special tax to the Collector.
The interest must be added to and becomes a part of the
tax.
3.
Prohibited conduct. The following are prohibited activities and
violations will follow the penalties outlined in Subsection (10)b
above.
Creating or maintaining an uncontrolled hazardous
substance site. No automobile graveyard, automobile
recycling business or junkyard shall allow itself to become
an "uncontrolled hazardous substance site" or
"uncontrolled site" as defined by 38 M.R.S.A. § 1362 and/
or the most current edition of the adopted rules of the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). Any
location declared by the municipality or DEP as being an
"uncontrolled hazardous substance site" and which fails
to take immediate action, to the satisfaction of the
municipality, in order to stop and abate the site, may also
be found guilty of this section. The municipality may take
whatever action necessary to abate, clean up or mitigate
the threats or hazards posed or potentially posed by an
uncontrolled site or to protect the public health, safety or
welfare or the environment, including the administering or
carrying out of measures to abate, clean up or mitigate
the threats or hazards, implement remedies to remove,
store, treat, dispose of or otherwise handle hazardous
substances located in, on or over an uncontrolled site,
including soil and water contaminated by hazardous
substances. All costs associated with the abatement, clean
up or mitigation of the threats or hazards shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
1.
Discharges prohibited. No person, firm, group or
corporation may recklessly, knowingly or intentionally
place, deposit or discharge, directly or indirectly, any
pollutant or hazardous material into or upon the
environment unless such activity has been approved and
regulated by the municipality and/or any necessary state
and/or federal agency. This section does not prevent the
municipality from bringing charges under this section for
2.
d.
Sec. 22-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:262
exceeding the amount of allowed discharges or by
violating any provisions outlined previously in order to
obtain municipal approval.
Failing to follow operational standards. A person, firm,
group, corporation or other legal entity who fails to follow
the operational standards as outlined in Subsection (8) c
and/or d shall be guilty of a civil offense under this section.
3.
Operating without proper permit. No person, firm, group
or corporation may operate an automobile graveyard,
automobile recycling business or junkyard without first
receiving a permit from the municipality. A permit issued
for one type of site may not be transferred or used to
operate a different type of site defined under this section.
This does not prohibit a location from applying to the
municipality to change from one permit type to another.
4.
Illegal disposal of a motor vehicle.
No person may leave, discard or otherwise abandon a
motor vehicle upon any public way within the City of
Biddeford.
[a]
No person may leave, discard or otherwise abandon a
motor vehicle at any facility or site permitted under
this section, unless title for the motor vehicle has
been given to the licensed facility and payment
arrangements have been made for the disposal of the
motor vehicle. If the vehicle is no longer required to
have a title, then a statement releasing the vehicle
must be supplied to the facility's owner or operator.
[b]
Any vehicle removed at the direction of the Police
Department or Code Enforcement Office, which has
been deemed abandoned and/or has not been claimed
from a licensed facility within 30 days is in violation
of this section. The facility, upon request from the
appropriate agency, shall be provided with the last
known registered or titled owner.
[c]
It will be the responsibility of the Police Department
to investigate complaints of abandoned motor vehicles
and to bring charges against the last known owner
under this section.
[d]
Anyone found guilty under this section shall be
penalized according to the provisions of Subsection
(10)b. Upon a finding of guilty, the owner of the motor
vehicle will be required to relinquish ownership to
the licensed facility and provide monetary relief for
all related towing and storage costs accrued to the
[e]
5.
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:263
facility. If the owner releases the motor vehicle to
the facility, but fails to provide monetary relief for
the costs accrued, then 1/2 of the fines levied by the
courts shall be given to the facility's owner upon
receipt by the municipality.
Revocation or suspension of permit.
Violation of any of this chapter or any condition, restriction
or limitation inserted in a permit by the municipal officers
is cause for revocation or suspension of the permit by
the same authority that issued the permit. No permit may
be revoked or suspended without a hearing and notice to
the owner or the operator of the automobile graveyard,
automobile recycling business or junkyard. Notice of
hearing must be sent to the owner or operator by
registered mail at least seven but not more than 14 days
before the hearing. The notice must state the time and the
place of hearing and contain a statement describing the
alleged violation.
1.
The municipal officers shall provide written or electronic
notice of the hearing to the automobile dealer licensing
section of the Department of the Secretary of State,
Bureau of Motor Vehicles at least seven days before the
hearing.
2.
e.
Removal of all materials after permit denial or revocation. The
owner or operator of an automobile graveyard, automobile
recycling business, or junkyard for which a permit has been
denied or revoked shall, not later than 90 days after all appeals
have been denied, begin the removal of all vehicles, vehicle
parts and materials associated with the operation of that
automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business, or
junkyard. The property must be free of all scrapped or junked
vehicles and materials not later than 180 days after denial
of all appeals. An alternative schedule for removal of junk
or vehicles may be employed if specifically approved by the
municipal officers.
f.
Recycling operations (with or without hazardous materials).
Purpose. The City of Biddeford has identified that to further the
City's goal to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens
of the City, certain uses should be licensed by the City of Biddeford.
(1)
Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise
indicates, the following terms have the following meanings.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or
reuse of materials that would otherwise be disposed of or
processed as waste or the mechanized separation of waste, other
(2)
(c)
Sec. 22-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-23
CHCT:264
Sec. 22-24. Places/dealers in products. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4);
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42; 4-19-2011 by Ord. No.
2011.14; 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
than through combustion, and the creation and recovery of
reusable materials other than as a fuel for any purpose or as
landfill. This term does not include the processing or handling of
construction and demolition debris for any purpose.
RECYCLING FACILITY — Land and buildings used for the recycling
of solid or liquid waste.
License required. No person, corporation or entity may establish,
operate or maintain a recycling facility without first obtaining a
nontransferable license from the municipal officers. Licenses
issued to a recycling facility under this section are valid until the
first day of January the following year.
(3)
Limitations on new recycling facility licenses. All new recycling
operations shall receive all required approvals, including from the
Planning Board, prior to being granted a license from the municipal
officers. The Planning Board shall review all new recycling
operations as conditional uses (Part III, Land Development
Regulations, Article VII, Conditional Uses), and no license shall be
granted by the municipal officers prior to receiving written notice
that the proposed new business has been approved by the Planning
Board and that it complies with all of the applicable requirements
in Part III, Land Development Regulations, Article VI; Performance
Standards, § 76, Recycling facilities.
(4)
Antique dealers and other dealers in used items, including but not
limited to, jewelry, gold, precious stones, used furniture, clothing and
other personal items, junk dealers, secondhand dealers and sellers of
used goods, including but not limited to, antiques and other personal
property, antique automobiles and other motorized craft.
Purpose. In order to protect the welfare of the citizens of the City
of Biddeford, the municipal officers require that all individuals,
groups of individuals, entities and or businesses or firms buying,
selling, bartering, dealing, or distributing antiques, jewelry,
precious stones, gold, silver and other metals, junk and or
secondhand goods including automobiles, motorcycles, motordriven
scooters, aircraft and other motorized vehicles, if they do
not hold a new or used car dealers or equipment dealer's license,
must obtain a City of Biddeford license and operate under the
provisions of this section.
(1)
Recordkeeping.
Junk dealers and junk collectors. A junk dealer or junk
collector, upon acquisition of any article meeting the
description of "junk" shall keep a permanent record of such
a.
(2)
(a)
Sec. 22-23 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-24
CHCT:265
transaction, which must include a full, accurate and detailed
description of the item including any identifying numbers and
characteristics, along with the full name, date of birth and
address of the seller, the registration number of any vehicle
used in the delivery of such item, and the time and date of
the transaction. A copy of the records shall be delivered to
the Biddeford Police Department within 48 hours of the
transaction, unless earlier delivery is requested by a police
officer. Such dealer must retain the original record of the
transaction, which may be inspected by any law enforcement
officer upon request. The article acquired by the junk dealer
or collector shall be retained by the individual or entity who
acquired it at its premises, not sold or otherwise disposed of
and not altered or changed in any way for six business days.
Secondhand dealers.
All secondhand dealers, upon the acquisition of any article
of used property by purchase, barter or trade, shall
complete duplicate records of transactions on blank forms
provided by the Chief of Police on which is denoted the
seller's full name, address, date of birth, type of
identification presented and its number, as well as the
month, day and year on which the transaction took place.
The records shall include a full and detailed description
of each article purchased, or exchanged, including
identifying marks and or numbers, with the price paid
therefor and will be signed by the seller in the presence
of the buyer. A copy of the record shall be delivered to
the Biddeford Police Department within 48 hours of the
transaction unless a police officer requests earlier
delivery. The secondhand dealer must retain the other
copy of the record of the transaction on file for no less than
two years during which the records may be inspected at
any reasonable time by a law enforcement officer. Articles
so purchased shall be maintained at the premises of the
buyer and not sold or otherwise disposed of or changed
or altered in their appearance for three complete business
days after purchase thereof.
1.
Any person who is licensed as a secondhand dealer must
also obtain a flea market dealer's license if that
secondhand dealer participates in more than four flea
markets in a year.
2.
b.
Transient seller of secondhand goods. Each transient seller of
secondhand goods is precluded from purchasing items in the
City of Biddeford.
c.
d. Antique dealer.
Sec. 22-24 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-24
CHCT:266
Antique dealers, upon the acquisition of any antique or
article of used property by purchase, exchange, barter
or trade shall record the transactions on duplicate forms
furnished by the Chief of Police. The records shall include
the name, date of birth and address for the individual/
entity from whom the property was acquired, a full and
detailed description of each article purchased including,
identifying marks and or numbers that would facilitate
identification of the item.
1.
A copy of the record shall be delivered to the Detective
Division of the Biddeford Police Department within 48
hours of the transaction unless a police officer requests
earlier delivery. The antique dealer must retain the other
copy of the record of the transaction on file for no less than
two years during which the records may be inspected at
any reasonable time by a law enforcement officer. Articles
so purchased shall be maintained at the premises of the
buyer and not sold or otherwise disposed of, or changed or
altered in their appearance for six business days after the
acquisition of the items, except with the written consent
of the Chief of Police or his designated representative. The
Chief of Police may impose reasonable conditions for the
granting of such consent.
2.
License required. No person will engage in the business of
dealing in jewelry, gold, silver and other metals, diamonds
and other precious stones and other personal property
or work as a junk collector, secondhand dealer, antique
dealer or transient seller of secondhand goods without
first obtaining a license issued by the City of Biddeford for
such activity in the City of Biddeford.
3.
Penalty. A person who violates the provisions of this section
commits a civil infraction for which a minimum penalty of $100 for
each occurrence will be imposed. For the purpose of this article,
each day any person operates contrary to the provisions of this
section is a separate violation.
(3)
Disqualification. The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the
following conditions:
The structure where the event is to be held is found to be
unsatisfactory.
a.
b. There is inadequate parking.
Other issues raised to the City Clerk and determined to be
adverse to the public health or safety or welfare of the
residents and occupants of the City of Biddeford.
c.
(4)
Sec. 22-24 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-24
CHCT:267
Flea markets. A person, group of persons or entity who/that provides
tables, space or otherwise operates a flea market for one or more days,
must obtain a license from the City Clerk for such flea market.
The operator of the flea market shall report no later than three
days to the City Clerk the names and addresses of all flea market
dealers in such flea market, and the number of times the dealer has
participated in the flea market since the previous March 1.
(1)
The operator of the flea market must maintain a vendor list which
shall be made available for inspection upon the request of any
police officer.
(2)
In addition, the operator of a flea market will cause each flea
market dealer to register on a form prescribed by the City Clerk,
and shall give the Clerk a copy of such registration.
(3)
Purchasing of goods by a flea market dealer from any person,
except another flea market dealer, at the flea market prior to the
opening of the flea market to the general public is prohibited. All
flee market dealers will adhere to the recordkeeping guidelines as
set forth in Subsection (a)(2).
Food will not be sold at a flea market unless all applicable
licenses have been obtained.
a.
Any person selling or working at the tables at more than four
flea markets between March 1 and the last day of February of
each year must obtain a flea market dealer's license.
b.
(4)
Related persons working at the same table or tables need only
obtain one flea market dealer's license, which must list all the
persons involved in selling. As used in this section, "related person"
shall mean and include persons who are related by either affinity
or consanguinity and reside at the same address.
(5)
A person who sells only craft items made by the flea market dealer
is not required to obtain a flea market dealer's license.
(6)
The flea market operator shall exclude from participation in any
flea market any person who the operator knows is required to
obtain a flea market dealer's license and does not present proof of
such licensing, or who the operator knows has been barred from
selling under this section.
(7)
A person under the age of 18 years will not be permitted to sell
goods or work as a flea market dealer unless permission has been
given by that person's parents or legal guardian.
(8)
A person who is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to
have violated any provision of this section may be barred from
selling at a flea market for a period of not more than one year. Any
(9)
(b)
Sec. 22-24 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-24
CHCT:268
Sec. 22-24.1. Purchase from minors prohibited. [Added 5-3-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011.23; amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
A pawnbroker, junk dealer, junk collector, secondhand dealer, antique
dealer or transient seller of secondhand goods will not either directly or
indirectly purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any goods or
articles of value from a person who has not attained the age of 18.
Sec. 22-25. Pawnbrokers. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended 9-1-2009
by Ord. No. 2009.42]
person so charged will be afforded notice and an opportunity to be
heard prior to being so barred.
All parking shall be in accordance with all applicable zoning and
state laws.
(10)
Purpose. In order to protect the welfare of the citizens of the City of
Biddeford, the municipal officers require that pawnbrokers obtain a
license and operate under the provisions of this section.
(a)
Purchase from minor prohibited. A pawnbroker will not either directly
or indirectly purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any
goods or articles of value from a person who has not attained the age of
18 years.
(b)
Recordkeeping: Every pawnbroker, at the time of receiving for any
and all consideration any article that is pawned, pledged, received
in exchange, shall give the pawnor a statement that the pawnbroker
will return the article at a stipulated price which shall be computed
in accordance with the requirements of 30 M.R.S.A., Chapter 215,
Subchapter 8, and shall complete a sworn statement, blanks for which
shall be furnished by the Chief of Police, stating the full name, age,
sex and address of the person with whom the transaction is being
made (pawnor), the day and hour when the transaction took place, and
a full, accurate and detailed description including all distinguishing
marks and identifying numbers of each article so pawned, pledged or
exchanged as will make its identification certain and plain; and the fair
market value thereof and the price paid by the licensee; the source
from which and the time when the pawnor, pledgor or vendor procured
the same, and cause such statement to be signed and sworn to by
the person with whom such transaction has been made, the pawnor.
[Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
(c)
Within 24 hours after the transaction, the pawnbroker shall report the
relevant information contained in the sworn statement to the Chief of
Police or his or her designee by delivering or causing to be delivered
at the office of the Chief of the Biddeford Police Department, or his
designee, one of such duplicate sworn statements, which will be kept
on file at the Biddeford Police Department. The pawnbroker shall retain
the other copy, which, together with any article therein, listed may
(d)
Sec. 22-24 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-25
CHCT:269
Sec. 22-26. Taxicabs, motorbuses, public automobiles and motor
vehicles for hire. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended 9-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009.42; 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.28]
be inspected by any law enforcement officer at any time. Articles
purchased outright by pawnbrokers must be retained at the place of
business for no less than six business days, not sold or otherwise
disposed of and not altered or changed in any way, unless released
sooner by the Chief of the Biddeford Police Department, or his
designee. [Added 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.3322]
Display of license, regulations, sign. Each pawnbroker shall post in a
conspicuous location within the place of business a copy of the state
statutes and a copy of this article. Each pawnbroker shall also display
within the place of business a sign that is legibly inscribed in large
letters in the English language that identifies the pawnbroker by name
and occupation. [Amended 5-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.33]
(e)
Penalty. A person who violates the provisions of this section commits
a civil infraction, for which a maximum penalty of $100 for each
occurrence will be imposed. For the purpose of this article, each day
any person operates contrary to the provisions of this section is a
separate violation.
(f)
Disqualification. The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the
following conditions:
The structure where the event is to be held is found to be
unsatisfactory;
(1)
(2) There is inadequate parking; or
Other issues raised to the City Clerk and determined to be adverse
to the public health or safety or welfare.
(3)
(g)
Except to the extent that this article contains a contrary provision, all
provisions of Title 30 M.R.S.A. §§ 3101 through 3155 shall be additional
to the provisions of this article. [Added 5-1-2012 by Ord. No.
2012.33]
(h)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
TAXICAB —
Includes any motor vehicle used for the transportation of
passengers for hire, the destination and route of which are under
the direction and control of the passenger(s); except that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to a motor vehicle licensed
(1)
(a)
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections (d) through (f) as
Subsections (e) through (g), respectively.
Sec. 22-25 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-26
CHCT:270
by another municipality to operate as a taxicab or other vehicle for
hire which is operated within the City of Biddeford in response to:
A call to convey a passenger from the City to such other
municipality; or
a.
A request to convey a passenger from the City to such other
municipality when such request is made at the point of delivery
in the City of a passenger from such other municipality; or
b.
A request to convey a passenger from such other municipality
to the City.
c.
"Taxicab" does not include a limousine, or other vehicle which
operates solely on a fixed schedule and route, such as, but not
limited to, a bus.
(2)
Purpose. In an effort to provide for the health, welfare and safety of
the citizens of the City of Biddeford, a person or firm operating motor
vehicles for the conveyance of members of the public, exclusive of
freight, operating regularly in the City must obtain a license.
(b)
License required. No person or firm will operate a vehicle subject to
these provisions without first having obtained a license from the City
of Biddeford, excluding nonprofit service, transit authority or municipal
vehicles. All taxicabs, motorbuses, public automobiles and motor
vehicles for hire must be fully inspected and licensed no later than
January 31 of each year. After January 31, any owner/operator that falls
within the provisions of this section that has not complied with the
provisions set forth herein will be subject to the revocation of his/her
license.
(c)
Application. A person applying for a license under this provision shall
complete forms provided by the City Clerk's office and provide the
following information:
The name and address of the firm, to include name of owner or
corporate executive and telephone numbers.
(1)
Make and types of all vehicles to operate in the City, including state
license numbers.
(2)
Certificate or other evidence of liability insurance covering all
vehicles and drivers.
(3)
The name, address and driver's license number of all employees
who will transport or convey passengers.
(4)
(d)
(e) Inspection of taxicab. [Amended 2-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.7]
Maintenance of taxicabs; required equipment. All taxicabs operating
within the City of Biddeford shall adhere to the following requirements
at all times:
(f)
Sec. 22-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-26
CHCT:271
Sec. 22-27. Victualers. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.42]
Taxicabs shall at all times be clean and in good repair inside and
out and shall be maintained at all times in compliance with the
laws of the State of Maine relating to passenger vehicles and the
rules and regulations of the State Commissioner of Transportation
enacted pursuant thereto.
(1)
Taxicabs may compute fare through the use of a taximeter and may
have those meters installed so as to give an accurate reading of all
the vehicle's movements and so as not to be subject to tampering.
Any meters used shall be tested, approved and sealed by the State
Sealer of Weights and Measures. Said meters shall indicate fare
and mileage by means of legible figures which are electrically
illuminated during the period between sunset and sunrise.
(2)
Every taxicab operating in the City shall be equipped with an
exterior light affixed to the roof thereof, which shall be covered
with a translucent fixture marked with the word "Taxi" in legible
lettering and which shall be operated during the period between
sunset and sunrise.
(3)
Every taxicab shall be conspicuously marked, in letters not less
than 1 1/2 inches in height, with the word "Taxicab," "Taxi" or "Cab"
and the owner's name or trade name or, in lieu of such name or
trade name, with a design or monogram containing the owner's
name or trade name. Such design or monogram shall be not less
than eight inches in diameter.
(4)
Every taxicab shall be conspicuously marked, in numbers not less
than 1 1/2 inches in height, with a vehicle number, which shall
correspond to the vehicle license number filed with the City Clerk,
such number to be unique to all taxicabs licensed by the City of
Biddeford.
(5)
Enforcement; violations and penalties. The Code Enforcement Officer,
or his/her designee, shall have the primary duty to enforce this section.
A police officer also has the authority to enforce the provisions of this
section. A person or entity in violation of this section is subject to a fine
as set forth under Chapter 1, § 1-12, of the City of Biddeford Code of
Ordinances. In addition to the payment of a fine as set forth herein, a
licensed owner or operator who is found in violation of the provisions
of this section may have his/her license to operate a taxicab within this
City suspended or revoked.
(g)
License.
No person may be a victualer without a license. A person who
violates this section commits a civil violation for which a forfeiture
of not more than $50 may be adjudged. Operating a victualer's
(1)
(a)
Sec. 22-26 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-27
CHCT:272
Sec. 22-28. Massage; massage therapists. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4);
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
establishment without the license required by this section
constitutes a nuisance, and the City Solicitor is authorized to seek
injunctive relief, if necessary. The City may recover its attorney's
fees in any enforcement proceedings.
Licenses issued under this article may not be assigned, and are
specific to the location for which the license was issued.
(2)
Application. Any person or firm operating, or sponsoring, a facility
preparing and selling food or nonalcoholic beverages to the public on a
regular basis will obtain a license from the City Clerk's office.
Any request for a license under this section will be conditioned on
the satisfactory inspection of the facility by the City Inspections
Department and the Fire Department to insure structural safety
issues.
(1)
Proof of State of Maine health license must be produced prior to
the issuance of a victualers license under this section.
(2)
The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the following
conditions:
The structure where the event is to be held is found to be
unsatisfactory;
a.
b. There is inadequate parking; or
Other issues raised or brought to the attention of the City Clerk
and determined to be adverse to the public health or safety or
welfare.
c.
(3)
(b)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the operation of
massage establishments in order to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare.
(a)
Exemptions. The following persons shall be exempt from this section
if duly licensed by and while practicing their respective professions
in accordance with the laws of this state: physicians, physician's
assistants, surgeons, osteopaths, nurses, chiropractors, physical
therapists, barbers, cosmetologists, beauticians, and other health and
hygiene professionals.
(b)
Penalty for violation of section; abatement of violation. The violation
of any provision of this section is punishable by a fine as prescribed
in Chapter 1, Section 1-12 for each offense. Each act of violation and
every day upon which any such violation occurs constitutes a separate
offense. In addition to such penalty, the City may enjoin or abate any
violation of this article by appropriate action.
(c)
Sec. 22-27 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-28
CHCT:273
Massage tables. A therapeutic massage shall be administered on a
massage table, treatment table or treatment mat, with a personalized
sanitary cover for each patron.
(d)
Maintenance and cleaning of establishment. Each person who conducts
or operates a therapeutic massage establishment shall keep such
establishment at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All
instruments, supplies and devices of any kind, or parts thereof, that
come into contact with the human body shall be kept clean by a modern
and approved method of cleaning.
(e)
Prohibited activities.
No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron
whose genitals are exposed.
(1)
No massage therapist shall administer or agree to administer a
massage to the genitals or anus of a patron.
(2)
No massage therapist shall administer a massage unless fully
clothed with nontransparent clothing such as a medical smock.
(3)
(f)
Closing hours. No massage establishment may remain open for the
administration of a massage between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m.
(g)
Supervision of massage establishment. At all times when open for
business, a therapeutic massage establishment shall have upon the
premises a licensed massage therapist or person who possesses a
combination massage establishment/massage therapist license who
shall be available to supervise the operation of the establishment and
assure that no violations of this article occur.
(h)
List of massage establishment employees. The therapeutic massage
establishment shall keep upon the premises a written list of the names
and current addresses of all persons working within the establishment,
both on-duty and off-duty. Such a list shall be available to the Chief
of Police, his authorized deputy, the City Clerk or City Clerk's
representative, upon request.
(i)
Licenses required:
Therapeutic massage establishment license. No person may
operate a therapeutic massage establishment without a valid
therapeutic massage establishment license. A separate license is
required for each such establishment.
(1)
Massage therapist license. No person may work as a massage
therapist without a valid massage therapist license or a combined
massage establishment/therapist license.
(2)
Combined massage establishment/therapist license. A sole
practitioner who employs no massage therapist other than himself
(3)
(j)
Sec. 22-28 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-28
CHCT:274
may apply for a combined massage establishment/therapist license
in lieu of both a therapeutic massage license and a massage
therapist license.
(k) Fees. License fees under this section are as set out in Section 22-11.
Denial of license. The City Clerk shall make and keep a written record
of every decision to deny an application for any license under this
section.
(l)
Grounds for suspension or revocation of license.
All licenses. A license may be suspended or revoked after hearing
by the municipal officers upon determination that the licensee:
Failed to notify the City Clerk of any change in material fact set
forth in the application for such license;
a.
b. Violated any provision of this article; or
c. Is convicted of a disqualifying crime.
(1)
Therapeutic massage establishment or combined establishment/
therapist license. In addition to the provisions of Subsection (m)(1)
of this section, either a massage establishment license or combined
massage establishment/therapist license may be suspended or
revoked upon a determination that the licensee:
Permitted a person to perform therapeutic massage without a
valid license to do so;
a.
Permitted or allowed an employee or massage therapist to
violate any provision of this section on the premises of the
establishment or in the course of conduct of the business of the
establishment; or
b.
Knowingly permitted any violation of 17-A M.R.S.A. §§ 851
through 855. Such knowledge shall be presumed if there have
been two or more convictions for any such offense within any
one-year period. The applicant or licensee may rebut such
presumption by showing that due diligence was used to
prevent the recurrence of any such offense, and despite such
diligence, he/she did not know and could not reasonably have
known of any subsequent offense.
c.
(2)
(m)
Application for licenses. A person desiring a license pursuant to this
section shall file a written, signed application with the City Clerk on
a form to be furnished by the Clerk. An application for a combined
massage establishment/therapist license, or a massage therapist
license shall be accompanied by one front face photograph of the
applicant taken within 30 days of the application, of such size that
the Clerk may specify. The City Clerk shall review the completed
(n)
Sec. 22-28 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-28
CHCT:275
application, and issue a license, provided that the applicant meets all
criteria and qualifications for the granting of such license.
Qualifications of applicant for license. Each applicant for a massage
therapist license or combined massage establishment/therapist license
shall show proof of basic proficiency in the field of massage therapy
which may be satisfied by:
Evidence of completion of a formal training course in massage
therapy given by a recognized school;
(1)
Evidence of 100 hours of on-the-job training in therapeutic
massage performed in the presence of a person holding a valid
massage therapist license or a combined massage establishment/
therapist license issued by the City;
(2)
Evidence of continuous practice as a massage therapist for at
least one year, accompanied by the written recommendation from
at least three health care professionals holding a valid license
or certification within the state, including, but not limited to,
physicians, surgeons, physician's assistants, osteopaths,
chiropractors, nurses, physical therapists, massage therapists,
psychiatrists, psychologists, and counseling professionals; or
(3)
Evidence of a successful completion of a certifying exam given by
another municipality or state, or of the certifying exam given by the
American Massage Therapy Association.
(4)
(o)
Obtaining license by fraud.
No person shall make any false, untruthful or fraudulent statement,
either written or oral, or in any way conceal any material fact, or
give or use any fictitious name in order to secure or aid in securing
a license required by this section. All names, including but not
limited to maiden name, ever used by the applicant must be noted
on the application.
(1)
Any license falsely or fraudulently secured, as described in
Subsection (p)(1) of this section, shall be void.
(2)
(p)
Unauthorized use of license. No person shall make use of, in any
manner, to his own or another's benefit any license which has not been
duly issued to him in accordance with this section.
(q)
Compliance of existing therapist and massage establishments;
expiration of licenses.
A person presently operating as a massage therapist and/or
operating a massage establishment in the City on the effective date
of the ordinance from which this article derives shall comply with
the terms of this article by obtaining a license under this article
within three months of such effective date.
(1)
(r)
Sec. 22-28 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-28
CHCT:276
Sec. 22-29. Newspaper vending machines. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4);
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Sec. 22-30. Video game devices. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended
9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
A license issued pursuant to this article expires at the end of the
calendar year for which it was issued.
(2)
Permit required. The code enforcement officer shall review written
requests for the placement of newspaper vending machines at any
public location. Permits issued for such purpose will be for a period of
one year. Applicants may request an annual extension of the original
permit.
(a)
Number limited. No more than three machines shall be clustered or
located in any given location or within 100 yards of such a cluster.
(b)
Location. Newspaper vending machines shall be so located that
pedestrian and vehicular safety is not endangered. As part of the
written request for locating a newspaper vending machine, the
applicant shall provide an exact description of the proposed location. If
the proposed location is adjacent to a specific business, the applicant
shall request permission from the owner/operator of the business to
place the vending machine at that location.
(c)
Maintenance. The vendor is responsible for keeping the newspaper
vending machine, and the area immediately adjacent to the machine,
clean and free of litter.
(d)
Responsibilities of vendor; liability insurance. The vendor, in
acknowledgment of receipt of a permit under this article, shall assume
all responsibility for the care, maintenance, repair, damage,
destruction, or loss of the vending machines. The vendor shall also
agree to indemnify and hold the City harmless for that portion of any
liability, losses or claims made by any third person against a vendor
and/or the City for any damages or injuries proximately caused by the
negligent acts or omissions of the vendor. The vendor shall provide, at
its expense, and keep in force during the term of its contract, with a
responsible insurance company or companies authorized to do business
in the state, commercial general liability insurance in the amount of
at least $1,000,000. The vendor agrees to deliver certificates of such
insurance to the City at the time of application.
(e)
Removal of machines; notice. The City reserves the right to have any
specific vending machine or device removed by the applicant if such
machine or device is in violation of this article. The permittee shall be
notified in writing of the City's decision to have the machine removed
and the specific reasons for such actions. The permittee shall have
seven days to remove the machine.
(f)
Sec. 22-28 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-30
CHCT:277
Sec. 22-31. Wastehaulers. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended 9-1-2009
by Ord. No. 2009.42]
A wastehauler shall meet the requirements as set forth in the City of
Biddeford's Solid Waste Ordinance.23
Sec. 22-32. Sludge disposal. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended
9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
A sludge disposal operator shall meet the requirements as set forth in the
City of Biddeford's Solid Waste Ordinance.
Sec. 22-33. Vendors on public places. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); Ord.
No. 2000.54, 7-5-2000; amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Purpose. To limit congestion in places of business that may pose a
safety hazard to the general public, the City will license video devices
and other standing game machines.
(a)
License. Persons or firms that propose to operate video game devices
must obtain a license from the City Clerk.
(b)
Application. The applicant will provide the information of the location
and number of machines on the application.
(c)
Withholding permit. The City Clerk may withhold a permit under the
following conditions:
(1) The structure or facility is found to be unsatisfactory;
(2) There is inadequate parking; or
Other issues raised to the City Clerk and determined to be adverse
to the public health, safety or welfare.
(3)
(d)
Purpose.
This section is designed to establish a uniform procedure, and
standards of review, to enable the City Clerk to make
determinations on applications for licenses to sell goods from ways,
public places and waterways within the City.
(1)
This section is adopted under the authority of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3931,
and is also intended to be enforced as a land use regulation within
the meaning of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
License required. No person or business will be allowed to
sell items or food from public ways or other public property
without first having obtained a license from the City Clerk.
a.
b. Other applicable licenses as may be required.
(2)
(a)
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Solid Waste.
Sec. 22-30 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-33
CHCT:278
This provision shall not apply to nonprofit organizations
vending on public places during special recognized events.
c.
Application.
A person seeking a license under this section may apply to the
City Clerk on such form as the City Clerk shall require. Copies of
application forms shall be available in the office of the City Clerk.
(1)
Applications shall include the following information:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
A specific description of the ways, public places, or portions
thereof in which the proposed activity would be conducted.
b.
A specific description of the vehicle or structure to be used,
including dimensions.
c.
The vendor shall provide, at its expense, and keep in force
during the term of its contract, with a responsible insurance
company or companies authorized to do business in the state,
commercial general liability insurance in the amount of at least
$1,000,000. The vendor agrees to deliver certificates of such
insurance to the City at the time of application.
d.
(2)
(b)
Bidding. The City Clerk, with discretion, may award licenses under this
section on a first-come-first served basis if more than one applicant
seeks a license for a particular location. The City Clerk may also restrict
or prohibit the sale of goods from any way or public place by limiting
the number of licenses awarded, in order to protect the public health,
safety and welfare and to accomplish the objectives of this section. Any
restriction or prohibition created under this subsection may be applied
to any application pending at the time the restriction or prohibition is
created.
(c)
Standards for issuance of license: The City Clerk may only grant a
license under this article when the applicant has demonstrated that:
The proposed activity will be in compliance with all applicable state
and federal laws or regulations.
(1)
The proposed activity will not have a significant detrimental effect
on the use and peaceful enjoyment of abutting property as a result
of noise, vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, glare or other cause.
(2)
The proposed activity will not create hazards to safety by
interfering with vehicular or pedestrian circulation.
(3)
The applicant is of good character and, through experience or
education, is able to conduct the proposed activity in accordance
with the standards of his/her trade.
(4)
(d)
Sec. 22-33 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-33
CHCT:279
Sec. 22-34. Adult businesses. [Ord. No. 99.97, 11-16-1999;
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
The application relates to a location that would be appropriate due
to lack of businesses in the vicinity which sell similar goods.
(5)
Vending on waterways. An applicant for vending on waterways will be
required to locate outside of channels and anchorage areas and only
in areas designated by the Harbormaster. Any vendor using a mooring
for vending on waterways shall be required to provide a mooring at
least 20% larger than required by Chapter 74, Section 74-80(d) of
the Revised Code of Ordinances of the City of Biddeford. All other
requirements of said Chapter 74 shall apply. A vendor on waterways
shall vend only when moored. Vending on waterways shall be restricted
to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and shall be permitted only from
May 15 to September 15. Any vessel or platform used for vending on
waterways shall meet all federal, state and City safety requirements.
Vendors on waterways shall show evidence of required permitting by
the United States Coast Guard, State of Maine Department of Marine
Resources and the City of Biddeford Harbormaster.
(e)
Conditions.
The City Clerk may attach such conditions to the granting of a
license under this section that it finds reasonably necessary to
ensure that the proposed activity complies with the standards
listed in this section.
(1)
The City Clerk may consider other factors and conditions to
granting of a license where vendor activity is fixed or mobile,
is deemed incompatible with the proposed location, the number
of vendors seeking licenses would change character of the
surrounding neighborhood, or the product to be vended is deemed
to provide unfair competition to other businesses.
(2)
(f)
Application of state law. If the state law requires a state license for
a proposed activity, the City Clerk may require that the state license
be obtained prior to issuing a license under this section. If the state
law imposes additional licensing requirements on the proposed activity,
such requirements are to be implemented by the City Clerk under
this section, along with consideration of state law requirements and
the provisions of this section. If state law creates exclusive licensing
requirements for the proposed activity, the provisions of that law shall
govern.
(g)
Revocation. The municipal officers may revoke any license granted
under this chapter as provided herein.
(h)
License. No person shall operate or maintain an adult business, as
defined by the City Land Use Regulations,24 without first having
obtained a license and paying the fee therefor.
(a)
Sec. 22-33 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-34
CHCT:280
Application and information.
Every applicant for an adult business license shall:
Complete and file an application on a form prescribed by the
City Clerk.
a.
Deposit the prescribed license fee in advance with the City
Clerk.
b.
Submit the completed application to the City Clerk, together
with attested copies of the articles of incorporation and
bylaws, if the applicant is a corporation, or articles of
association and bylaws if the applicant is an association, as
well as a list of all officers of the adult business.
c.
File an affidavit which will identify all officers and their places
of residency at the present time and for the immediately
preceding three years.
d.
(1)
Submission of false information in an application for a license shall
be in violation of this section, and such act shall be grounds for the
denial of the application.
(2)
(b)
Qualification of officers. All officers, directors, stockholders, owners,
managers or persons with a financial interest in an adult business
shall meet the following qualifications: Never have been convicted
of a Class A, B, or C crime nor of violating any of the gambling,
prohibitive liquor or sexual offense laws or any other disqualifying
crime (as defined in Section 22-2) either of the United States or of
Maine or any other state, within five years immediately preceding the
date of application. Each such officer shall file the release authorized by
16 M.R.S.A. § 620, Subsection 6, Criminal History Record Information
Act, with the application. Failure to provide such a release shall be
grounds for denial of the application.
(c)
Inspection of premises to be licensed; reports. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall verify that the premises of the proposed adult business
comply with the applicable ordinances of the City, including, but not by
way of limitation, the Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code,
and Zoning Ordinance, and shall report his findings in writing to the
City Clerk.
(d)
Notice of hearing.
After receipt of the written reports required by Section 22-34(d),
the City Clerk shall give notice of the public hearings on
applications for an adult business in the form and manner and to
the persons specified in this section. The notice shall include the
time and place of such hearing, the nature of the matter to be
(1)
(e)
24.Editor's Note: See Part III, Land Development Regulations, of this Code.
Sec. 22-34 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-34
CHCT:281
heard, and the address or location of the property involved. Where
notice by mail is required, it shall be mailed at least seven days in
advance of the hearing date by regular United States mail.
Notices for hearings under this section shall be given by
publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at the
applicant's prepared expense at least six consecutive days before
the date of hearing. Notice to the owners of all the property within
2,000 feet of such parcel or tract shall be by mail.
(2)
For the purpose of this section, the "owners of property" shall be
considered to be the parties listed by the Tax Collector of the City
as those against whom taxes are assessed. Failure of any property
owner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate
another hearing and shall not invalidate any action of the City
Council.
(3)
License not transferable. A separate license must be obtained for each
branch or separate establishment of an adult business. Each license
shall authorize the operation of such establishment only at the location
described in such license and in conformity with all applicable
ordinances and law. No license shall be transferred to another person
or to any other location.
(f)
Display of license. Every adult business shall exhibit its license at all
times in a conspicuous place on its premises.
(g)
Illegal activities. No licensee under this section shall knowingly permit
any illegal activities to take place on the licensed premises.
(h)
Right of inspection. The applicant or licensee, his agents and employees
shall allow access to the adult business by the Code Enforcement
Officer, Fire Chief and any law enforcement officer or their designated
assistants or agents for the purposes of inspecting the premises and
ensuring that no violation of this section or any law is taking place.
(i)
Suspension or revocation of license. A license to operate an adult
business, as provided for by this section, may be denied, suspended or
revoked by the City Council for either violation of or failure to comply
with any of the provisions of this section. Determination of the severity
of the violation and whether or not a denial, suspension or revocation is
warranted shall be made by the City Council, after notice and hearing.
An appeal from any final decision of the City Council may be taken
by the applicant to the state superior court in accordance with the
provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
(j)
Penalty for violation of section. In addition to any action which the City
Council may take, violation of any provision of this section shall be a
civil violation, and a fine not exceeding the amount of Section 1-12 may
be imposed. Each day that a violation continues will be treated as a
separate offense.
(k)
Sec. 22-34 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-35
CHCT:282
Sec. 22-35. Ice cream truck. [Added 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.3]
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the number of
ice cream trucks licensed within the City of Biddeford, and to limit
the areas within the City where these trucks may operate, and in
consideration for the public's safety.
(a)
License required. A person, business or corporation may not operate
an ice cream truck subject to these provisions without first having
obtained a license from the City of Biddeford.
(b)
Application. A person, business or corporation applying for a license
under this provision shall complete forms provided by the City Clerk's
office and provide the following information:
The name, address and telephone number of the company, as well
as the name, address and phone number of the ice cream truck
operator(s).
(1)
A photocopy of the valid ice cream truck registration(s) that will be
operating with the City.
(2)
A certificate or other evidence of liability insurance covering all ice
cream trucks and drivers.
(3)
(c)
Prohibitions.
Each licensee may not operate more than one truck engaged in the
sale of ice cream products within the City at any one time.
(1)
No ice cream truck may engage in the sale of products on any of the
City's streets that have been identified as a major route of travel
for vehicular traffic. These streets include, but are not limited to:
a. Elm Street.
b. Alfred Street.
c. Pool Street.
(2)
When an ice cream truck is stopped and left standing or parked,
a person may not operate a sound system in or on the ice cream
truck on a public way at a volume that is audible at a distance of
greater than 25 feet.
(3)
The operator of an ice cream truck may not occupy any parking
space within a no-parking zone, permit-parking-only zone, or fire
lane, or park in any other place that impedes or interferes with
the normal movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. [Added
3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.16]
(4)
Vending must be from the right side of the vehicle only. No vending
is permitted from the side of the vehicle that is exposed to
oncoming traffic. [Added 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.16]
(5)
(d)
Sec. 22-35 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-35
CHCT:283
Penalty. A person or company who violates any provision of this section
will be subject to the penalties set forth under Chapter 1, Section 1-12
of this Code; and in addition thereto, such violation may be cause for
the suspension or revocation of the vendor's license to operate within
the City of Biddeford.
(e)
Sec. 22-35 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-35
CHCT:284
ARTICLE IV
PROHIBITED CONDUCT
Sec. 22-36. Adult reading material. [Ord. of 4-21-1998(4); amended
9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the sale of books, photographs,
magazines, periodicals or newspapers of an adult nature to certain specified
and designated areas of business establishments in the City.
Sec. 22-37. Nudity in places of entertainment. [Ord. of
4-21-1998(4); amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any business establishment to display
or cause to be displayed for sale: photographs, covers of magazines,
newspapers, periodicals or other printed matter which exposes or
shows genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus or female breasts
at or below the aureole thereof, unless displayed in a specially
designated adult area in such business establishment and not visible to
children or disinterested adults entering such business establishment.
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or procure for a minor any
magazine, newspaper, periodical or other printed matter which is
labeled as adult reading material.
(1)
Penalty. Any violation of this article is punishable by a fine as prescribed
in Section 1-12 for each offense. Each day that such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense. In addition to any other penalty
provided by the law, the commission of acts prohibited by this section
shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the City seeking an
injunction to prohibit further and continued violation thereof.
(2)
Purpose. This section is to regulate nudity as a form of commercial
exploitation and to regulate dress as a form of conduct and not to
impede the free exchange and expression of ideas. The conduct
regulated is that which the citizens and members of the municipal
officers of the City have clearly found to be offensive to the general
welfare, public welfare, public safety, order and morals of the City and
its citizens.
(a)
Prohibitions.
It is unlawful for a person, while acting as a salesperson, waiter,
waitress, entertainer or in any other capacity as an owner, manager
or employee in a business subject to license under the ordinances
of the City to:
a. Expose genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum or anus;
Expose any portion of the female breasts at or below the
aureole thereof; or
b.
(1)
(b)
Sec. 22-36 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-37
CHCT:285
Sec. 22-38. through Sec. 22-45. (Reserved)
Expose oneself simulating nudity electronically and/or
electrically.
c.
It is unlawful for a person to cause, permit, procure, counsel or
assist any person to expose himself as prohibited by Subsection
(b)(1) of this section.
(2)
Entertainment outlined in this section is not allowed in any
establishment unless such establishment has a current victualer
and or entertainment license issued by the City Clerk.
(3)
Notice to be filed. The owner or agent of the owner of a business
establishment must notify the City Clerk when nude entertainment will
be scheduled at least two weeks prior to the event. This notification will
include time and date of the proposed entertainment.
(c)
Penalty for violation of section; abatement of nuisance.
Any act made unlawful by this section and any violation of this
section is punishable by a fine as prescribed in Section 1-12 for
each offense. Each day that such unlawful act or violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense.
(1)
In addition to any other penalty provided by the law, the
commission of acts prohibited by this section shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the City seeking an injunction to
prohibit further and continued violation thereof.
(2)
(d)
Sec. 22-37 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-38
CHCT:286
ARTICLE V
PUBLIC MARKETS
Sec. 22-46. Definitions. [Ord. of 4-6-1999; amended 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.42]
As used in this section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms have the following meanings.
BIDDEFORD PUBLIC MARKET — A venture, to be created and
administered by the Downtown Development Commission, and shall be
administered in accordance with this chapter.
BIDDEFORD PUBLIC MARKET HOURS OF OPERATION — Shall not
commence before 7:00 a.m. and shall end by 6:00 p.m. on Saturday, Sunday
and Mondays designated as a holiday, from May 1 to November 1.
DAY STALL — A space within the Public Market area, which is available for
rent on a daily basis and from day to day. The hours of operation of day stalls
shall be limited to the hours of operation of the Public Market.
FARM-RELATED PRODUCTS — Any agricultural, horticultural, forest or
other product of the soil or water, including but not limited to, fruits,
vegetables, eggs, dairy products, meat and meat products, poultry and
poultry products, fish and fish products, grain and grain products, honey,
nuts, maple products, apple cider, fruit juice, ornamental or vegetable
plants, nursery products, firewood and Christmas trees. Farm-related
products shall not include prepared foods which require separate licensing.
MARINE-RELATED PRODUCTS — Any fresh or frozen fish and fish
products, edible sea plants or other agricultural items derived from the sea,
seafood, shellfish, and sea salts.
POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS FOOD — Any perishable food which consists
in whole or in part of milk products, eggs, custards, whole or ground meat,
poultry, fish, shellfish, edible crustacean or other ingredients, including
synthetic ingredients capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth
of infection or toxigenic microorganisms.
PUBLIC MARKET — A private venture that is distinguished from the
Biddeford Public Market, and involves the sale of products as defined in
Section 22-47.
PUBLIC MARKET AREA — The public area known as "City Square," and
is further described as the public streets and sidewalks within the area
bordered by Adams Street and Main Street, Adams Street to Jefferson
Street and South Street from Adams Street to Jefferson Street. The public
market may also include all of the area known as the "City Hall parking lot,"
as authorized by the City Manager.
RECURRENT VENDOR — Any individual or entity that rents a day stall for
more than six days during any calendar quarter at the public market.
TEMPORARY VENDOR — Any individual or entity that rents a day stall for
six days or fewer, during any calendar quarter at the public market.
Sec. 22-46 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-47
CHCT:287
Sec. 22-47. Designation and products sold. [Ord. of 4-6-1999;
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
The City Council shall designate by order, the times and days during which
certain public property may be used as a public market. A public market
shall be for the sale of fruit, vegetables, flowers, seedlings, plants and
crafts. The following items may also be sold, provided that the product
is produced, processed or manufactured in an establishment licensed by
the Department of Agriculture to produce the item, and that the seller has
produced, processed or manufactured the item: farm-fresh eggs, provided
that they are stored at or below 45° F. during transport to, and display at,
the public market, honey, jams, jellies, pickles, relishes, maple syrup, apple
cider, packaged herbs or herb blend mixtures and pesto. The following
items may be sold, provided that the total amount of sales from all such
items does not exceed 49% of the total amount of sales made by the
licensee at the public market: any other edible product that is a derivative
of plants or produce grown by the licensee, provided that the licensee
also has a license from the Department of Agriculture. Any baked goods
sold at a public market must be individually or collectively wrapped while
displayed and sold. In no event shall any licensee sell at a public market
any potentially hazardous foods, which includes any perishable food or food
product which consists in whole or in part of milk or any other ingredient
capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious and
toxigenic microorganisms, including, but not limited to, cream fillings in
pies, cakes or pastries; custard products; meringue-topped bakery
products; or butter cream type fillings in bakery products.
Sec. 22-48. License required. [Ord. of 4-6-1999; amended 9-1-2009
by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Except as otherwise provided for in Section 22-49, a vendor in a public
market, must be licensed in accordance with "Vendors on public places,"
pursuant to Chapter 22 Article III, Section 22-33, of this Code.
Sec. 22-49. Biddeford Public Market licensing. [Ord. of 4-6-1999;
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
The Biddeford Public Market shall be responsible for obtaining a
vendor on public place license from the City Clerk, and shall be
responsible for all temporary and recurrent vendors.
(a)
The Downtown Development Commission shall remit to the City Clerk
a vendor on public place license fee of $100 for the Biddeford Public
Market, per annum. Any additional fees collected by the Downtown
Development Commission for operation of the Biddeford Public Market
shall be remitted to the City Treasurer, and shall be accounted for in
a special revenue fund, and may be dispersed for expenses related to
the operation of the Biddeford Public Market, at the direction of the
Downtown Development Commission.
(b)
Sec. 22-47 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-49
CHCT:288
Sec. 22-50. Street closure in Public Market area. [Ord. of 4-6-1999;
amended 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
During the Biddeford Public Market hours of operation, the Downtown
Development Commission is authorized to close public streets to vehicular
traffic within the area designated as the "Public Market area," as defined
in Section 22-46. Public sidewalks shall remain open to pedestrian traffic,
and vendors shall not block access to building or driveway entrances.
Additionally, as authorized by the City Manager, parking may be restricted
on Adams Street from the intersection of Adams Street and South Street to
the driveway exit for the now or formerly, Maine Bank and Trust Company,
and on South Street from Adams Street to Jefferson Street. All vehicles that
are parked contrary to this article, or that are not authorized to remain
within the Public Market area may be towed at the owner's expense.
Sec. 22-51. Revocation or suspension. [Ord. of 4-6-1999; amended
9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Pursuant to, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for
public markets, the license of any person who has combined with any other
licensee in the fixing or maintaining of a price, fraudulent use of weights
or measures, or who intentionally and knowingly deprives another licensee
of the use of the latter's designated stall in the market shall be revoked
by the City Clerk. In addition, the license of any person who is found in
A vendor renting a day stall at the Biddeford Public Market is not
required to obtain a municipal license as long as the following
requirements are met:
No food item may be displayed for sale or sold at a day stall absent
an appropriate license from the City unless the vendor is selling
fresh fruits or vegetables or has obtained a valid food license from
the Maine Department of Agriculture.
(1)
No potentially hazardous food may be displayed for sale or sold
at a day stall at the Biddeford Public Market unless it remains
refrigerated at a temperature of 45° F. or below. Frozen foods shall
remain at a temperature required by state rule or regulation.
(2)
The Biddeford Public Market shall provide to the City Clerk
information necessary to allow the City to track vendor
participation at the Market. The Biddeford Public Market shall
certify that vendors have obtained valid and current commercial
liability insurance in an amount of not less than $300,000.
(3)
The Biddeford Public Market shall allow any City inspector who
is on duty to access the premises at the Biddeford Public Market
at any and all times for the purpose of inspecting the premises,
including day stalls, in order to determine compliance with the
provisions of this Code. It is a violation of these regulations for
anyone to interfere with or prevent such inspection.
(4)
(c)
Sec. 22-49 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-51
CHCT:289
violation of any other section of this article may be suspended or revoked by
the City Clerk. Vendors renting a day stall at the Biddeford Public Market
may have their vendors privileges revoked by the Downtown Development
Commission for violating any provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 22-52. Penalty. [Ord. of 4-6-1999; amended 9-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009.42]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22-51, a person who violates this
section commits a civil violation for which a forfeiture of not less than $100
and not more than $200 may be adjudged.
Sec. 22-53. Solicitation. [Added 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
"Solicitation" is a consumer sale or credit sale of goods or services in which
the seller or person acting for a company, organization or entity engages
in personal solicitation of the sale at a residence, if the buyer's agreement
or offer to purchase is given to the seller or person acting for a company,
organization or entity.
Permit required. No person shall engage in transient sales of consumer
merchandise or services within the City without a license from the City
Clerk. The permit shall be carried by the seller while engaging in home
solicitation sales.
(1)
Application for permit. Applications for permits for home solicitation
will be made to the City Clerk, will be in writing and will contain the
following information:
The name and physical description of the applicant, including a
photocopy of the applicant's picture identification.
a.
b. The applicant's address.
A brief description of the nature of the business to be conducted
and the goods sold.
c.
If the applicant is employed, the name and address of the employer,
along with credentials establishing exact relationship.
d.
The length of time for which the solicitation permit is being
requested.
e.
If a vehicle is to be used, a description of that vehicle, along with
the license plate number and state registration for that vehicle.
f.
A sample of an agreement informing the buyer of his or her right
to cancel, as required by 9-A M.R.S.A. § 3-503. A sample of this
agreement is contained herein.25
g.
(2)
25.Editor's Note: See Subsection (8)
Sec. 22-51 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-53
CHCT:290
Such other information as the City Clerk may deem necessary for
the proper police and other protection of the City.
h.
State permit required. The obtaining and maintenance of a transient
seller's permit from the state by the applicant or licensee shall be a
condition precedent to the issuance or maintenance of a license.
(3)
Fees. The fee for home solicitation permits shall be $20 per year.
Additional licenses may be issued to employees of a license holder upon
payment of $20 per employee, per year; and upon filing of the necessary
paperwork with the City Clerk for each employee.
(4)
Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons
selling solely for the benefit of a bona fide nonprofit organization.
(5)
Revocation of permit. The City Clerk and/or the Chief of Police may
revoke a permit if the holder of the permit engages in disorderly
conduct, as defined by 17-A M.R.S.A. § 501, or harassment, as defined
by 18-A M.R.S.A. § 506-A, while in the course of business.
(6)
Sample permit application.
I, ___________________________, do hereby make application for a permit
for home solicitation sales in the City of Biddeford in compliance with
the ordinances of the City.
Street address: City: _____________ State: _____
Business Phone: __________ Home Phone: __________ Cell Phone:
__________
Age: ______ Weight: ______ Height: ______ Hair Color: ______ Sex: M/F
Length of time permit is desired:
Name of company, organization or entity represented:
Address:
Description of business/product(s)/service(s) to be solicited:
Number of vehicles to be operated: __________
Description of vehicle(s) to be operated and license plate number(s):
Signature of applicant:
Date: ____________________
(7)
(8) Sample right-of-cancellation agreement
Sec. 22-53 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-53
CHCT:291
Sec. 22-54. Penalty. [Added 9-1-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.42]
Referenced in Chapter 1, Sec. 1-12 in this Code of Ordinances.
Buyer's Right to Cancel
(9-A M.R.S.A. § 3-503)
If this agreement was solicited at your residence and you do not want
the goods or service, you may cancel this agreement by mailing a
notice to the seller. The notice must say that you do not want the goods
or service and must be mailed before midnight of _________________
(stated date three days from date of sale), when cancellation right
lapses.
This Cancellation Agreement must be mailed to:
(Name and mailing address of seller)
If you cancel by this date, the seller may not keep any of your cash
down payment.
Signature of Buyer:
Date: _______________
Sec. 22-53 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 22-54
CHCT:292
Chapter 26
CEMETERIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 2.
Sec. 22-54 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 22-54
CHCT:293

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 26-1. through Sec. 26-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 26-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 26-1
CHCT:295

ARTICLE II
ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 26-26. through Sec. 26-35. (Reserved)
Sec. 26-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 26-26
CHCT:297

DIVISION 2
SUPERINTENDENT OF BURIALS
Sec. 26-36. Office created. [Code 1975, § 8-1]
The office of Superintendent of Burials is hereby created.
Sec. 26-37. Nomination. [Code 1975, § 8-2; Ord. No. 99.69,
8-17-1999]
The Superintendent of Burials shall, subject to confirmation of the City
Manager, be appointed by the Director of Public Works.
Sec. 26-38. General duties. [Code 1975, § 8-3]
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Burials, subject to the
supervision of the trustees of Woodlawn Cemetery, to:
Sec. 26-39. Records to be kept. [Code 1975, §§ 8-4(a), 8-5]
Sec. 26-40. through Sec. 26-60. (Reserved)
(1) Keep the fences and gates of the cemetery in good order and repair;
(2) See that the burying ground is well secured by locks;
(3) Point out the place, depth and width of every grave dug therein;
Course out graves to be dug in exact ranges, and parallel with the lines
as laid out in the cemetery, and as near to each other as he may think
proper; and
(4)
See that graves are filled and elevated so that water may not remain
thereon.
(5)
The Superintendent of Burials shall record in a book to be kept for that
purpose the following information:
(1) The name, age and sex of each person interred;
(2) The family to which the deceased belonged;
(3) The time the deceased was interred; and
The number and range of the lot and grave in which the deceased
was interred.
(4)
(a)
It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Burials to record in a book
kept for that purpose the number of each lot in the cemetery and the
owner thereof.
(b)
Sec. 26-36 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 26-40
CHCT:299

ARTICLE III
CEMETERY LOTS
Sec. 26-61. Lot fees. [Code 1975, § 8-6; amended 3-1-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011.5]
Sec. 26-62. Form of deeds. [Code 1975, § 8-7]
Deeds of lots in the City cemetery shall be in the following form:
"Know all men by these presents, that the City of Biddeford, in
consideration of ________ dollars paid by _______________________ hereby
gives and grants to said _______________________ heirs and assigns forever,
the right to occupy for the purpose of burial, lot number _____ consisting of
_____ plats in the cemetery of the City of Biddeford. This right is granted,
and is to be held and enjoyed, subject to all such general regulations as
have been or may be adopted by the City Council, or under their authority,
for the management and care of said cemetery. In witness whereof, this
instrument is subscribed by in behalf of said City, this _______ day of
_____________ A.D."
Sec. 26-63. Miscellaneous fees. [Ord. of 2-18-1992(1), § 8-6;
amended 3-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.5]
The following fees shall apply for burials and other fees in the City
Cemetery:
Service Resident Nonresident
Weekly burials $400 $900
Weekend/holiday burials $500 $1,000
Vault fee $50 $50
Cremation burials weekdays $250 $625
Cremation burials weekends $350 $700
Foundation fees $50 $50
Disinterment:
The following fees shall apply for lot fees in the City cemetery:
Lot Sales Resident Nonresident
Single lot $500 $1,000
Cremation lot 3 feet by 3
feet
$250 $650
(a)
For the purposes of this article, a "resident" shall be defined as an
individual who is a registered voter in the City of Biddeford; and/or who
pays property taxes in the City of Biddeford; and/or who has maintained
a permanent address within the City of Biddeford for at least one year.
(b)
Sec. 26-61 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 26-63
CHCT:301
Service Resident Nonresident
Single lot $700
Cremains $550
Sec. 26-64. Kind of burials permitted. [Code 1975, § 8-8]
The City cemetery shall be used only for the burial of human beings.
Sec. 26-65. Removal of body from grave, tomb. [Code 1975, § 8-9]
Without the special permission of the Superintendent of Burials, no person
shall remove any body or the remains of any body from any grave or tomb
in the City cemetery.
Sec. 26-66. Breaking up, disturbing tombs, graves. [Code 1975,
§ 8-10]
Without the special permission of the Superintendent of Burials, no person
shall disturb or break up any tomb or grave in the City cemetery.
Sec. 26-67. Crossing lots, graves. [Code 1975, § 8-11]
No person shall unnecessarily go on or across any lot in the City
cemetery belonging to any person other than himself.
(a)
No person shall step on or drive any vehicle across the grave of any
person in the cemetery.
(b)
Sec. 26-63 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 26-67
CHCT:302
Chapter 30
PUBLIC SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 2. Buildings and building regulations — See Ch.
18.
Sec. 26-67 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 26-67
CHCT:303

ARTICLE I
EMERGENCY SERVICES
DIVISION 1
IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. through Sec. 30-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 30-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-1
CHCT:305

DIVISION 2
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
Sec. 30-26. Ambulance location.
The City ambulance will be garaged at the fire station of the City.
Sec. 30-27. Charge for use.
Sec. 30-28. Use of ambulance by other municipalities; fee.
The City ambulances will not service residents of other cities or towns
outside the City limits unless a preliminary agreement is approved by the
City Council that such cities and towns will pay an annual service fee to the
City and pay all ambulance charges directly to the City. Such services fee
will be annually determined by the City Council on or before August 1 of
each year.
Sec. 30-29. Collection, remittance of fees.
All fees required by this article will be collected by the Fire Department and
remitted to the City Treasurer monthly.
Sec. 30-30. Mutual aid pacts.
This article shall not affect cities and towns that have mutual aid pacts and
that have comprehensive ambulance service.
Sec. 30-31. through Sec. 30-50. (Reserved)
Fees for the use of the City's ambulance service shall be charged in
accordance with the reasonable and customary charges.
(a)
Any other fee relating to the use of the City's ambulance service shall
be established by the Fire Commission on or about January 1 of each
year.
(b)
Sec. 30-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-31
CHCT:307

DIVISION 3
EMERGENCY RESPONSE TO INTRUSION ALARMS, HOLD-UP
ALARMS, AND FIRE ALARMS
Sec. 30-51. Findings.
Intrusion, hold-up and fire alarms within the City that require an emergency
response from either or both the Fire Department and Police Department
poses a risk to the public's safety. There continues to be an increase in
the number of false alarms to which the police and Fire Departments must
respond, which impacts negatively on the Police and Fire Departments'
availability to respond to an actual emergency.
Sec. 30-52. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM USER — Any person whose property is protected by an alarm
system.
FALSE FIRE ALARM — Any alarm signal which is not due to an actual
emergency, requiring an immediate Fire Department response. This
includes, but is not limited to, any signal emitted by a negligently activated
alarm system, or by an alarm system deliberately activated when an
immediate Fire Department response is not required, or by a
malfunctioning alarm system.
FALSE HOLD-UP ALARM — An alarm signal which is not due to an actual
or attempted robbery or other serious and felonious crime, requiring an
immediate police response. This includes, but is not limited to, any signal
emitted by a negligently activated alarm system, or by an alarm system
deliberately activated when an immediate police response is not required.
FALSE INTRUSION ALARM — Any alarm signal which is not due to an
actual or attempted unauthorized entry upon property, requiring an
immediate police response. This includes, but is not limited to, any signal
emitted by a negligently activated alarm system, or by an alarm system
deliberately activated when an immediate police response is not required,
or by a malfunctioning alarm system.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanism or device designed for the
detection of smoke or fire in or upon any property, other than a motor
vehicle or vessel, and when activated, emits an audible, visual, electronic or
other signal, and; calls for a response by the Fire Department.
HOLD-UP ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanism or device that has a direct or
indirect connection which calls for a response from the Police Department.
INTRUSION ALARM SYSTEM — Any mechanism or device which has a
direct or indirect connection, calls for a response from the Police
Department, and; is designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry
Sec. 30-51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-52
CHCT:309
upon any property, other than a motor vehicle or vessel, and which, when
activated, emits an audible, visual, electronic or other signal.
Sec. 30-53. Fees for false alarms; collection; appeal.
Sec. 30-54. Grace period for false alarms.
All new alarm systems will have a one-month grace period from the false
alarm provisions of this article.
Sec. 30-55. through 30-75. (Reserved)
The City shall charge a fee for each false alarm to which the Police
Department or Fire Department responds in accordance with the
following schedule:
First false alarm: $0.
Second false alarm: $25.
Third false alarm: $80.
Each additional alarm: $200.
For the purposes of this section, the number of false alarms shall be
based upon a twelve-month period.
(a)
If any person fails to pay the false alarm fee within 10 days after
receiving written demand to do so, the City reserves the right to collect
such false alarm fee as otherwise permitted by law. Within the ten-day
period, the user may appeal the imposition of the false alarm fee to
the Chief of Police, who may abate or reduce the fee upon good cause
shown. The decision of the responsible Chief shall be final.
(b)
Sec. 30-52 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-55
CHCT:310
DIVISION 4
EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM
Sec. 30-76. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
EMERGENCY — A sudden unexpected occurrence which requires
immediate response and/or action on the part of a City agency.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Those services maintained by the City which
provide for the protection of life and property. Generally these services
consist of the Police Department and the Fire Department, to include
emergency medical services.
911 — A telephone access number used to make contact with emergency
services; specifically, the digits activated on a telephone device by
depressing or dialing the digit nine followed by the digit one followed by the
digit one.
911 SYSTEM — The hardware, software, telephone lines and service,
personnel, procedures and other related activity connected with the
operation and maintenance of the emergency access number.
Sec. 30-77. System adopted.
There is hereby adopted by the City for the purpose of providing the citizens
of the City direct telephone access to emergency services, a common access
number for all City emergency agencies. The designated access number
shall be consistent with the national standard emergency number and is
hereby designated as the digits "911." Such emergency access number and
any related activity shall be referred to in this article as the "911 system."
Sec. 30-78. Supervision.
Except as provided for elsewhere in this article, the Chief of the Police
Department and the Chief of the Fire Department shall jointly oversee
the operation of the 911 system. Nothing in this article shall prevent the
Chief of the Police Department and the Chief of the Fire Department from
assigning a subordinate employee to oversee operations at their direction.
Sec. 30-79. Enforcement of article.
Personnel who are employed by the City Police Department and who are
assigned to the operation of the 911 system are hereby authorized to take
necessary steps to ensure that users of the 911 system are not in violation
of this article. Specifically, these employees are authorized to record such
violations, issue warnings to violators, issue orders to violators to cease the
activity which caused or is causing the violation, and to request prosecution
by sworn law enforcement personnel if the violating activity is not ceased
after a warning/order is issued.
Sec. 30-76 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-80
CHCT:311
Sec. 30-80. Permitted use of system.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the 911 system shall be used
only as a means of contacting the emergency services of the City for the
following purposes:
Sec. 30-81. Prohibited uses of system.
Any use of the 911 system contrary to the uses defined in Section 30-80 is a
violation of this article. Specifically, the 911 system is not to be used for the
following purposes:
Sec. 30-82. Penalty for violation of article.
Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a civil infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be
fined in an amount no less than $100 and no more than $500. Each call
placed by a person which is in violation of the provisions of this article
Reporting any situation which the caller reasonably believes is of an
emergency nature and requires the response of emergency personnel
and equipment.
(1)
Requesting assistance for the caller and/or for a third party who is or
has been exposed to a situation which has caused harm, injury, illness,
distress or similar conditions.
(2)
Reporting or notifying law enforcement personnel of a crime, incident
or action which has happened or is reasonably expected to happen and
which the caller reasonably believes to be a violation of a state, county
or federal law or municipal ordinance.
(3)
Reporting or notifying Fire Department personnel of a situation which
has occurred or is reasonably likely to occur and which the caller
reasonably believes requires the services of the Fire Department
personnel and/or equipment.
(4)
Reporting any other situation, occurrence, incident or event which is of
a nature so as to cause a loss of life, destruction of property or injury to
persons or animals.
(5)
Questions of general information such as travel directions, weather
conditions, road conditions, school closings.
(1)
(2) Questions regarding event times or locations.
(3) Requests for services which are not of an emergency nature.
(4) Administrative conversations or messages.
Any blatant, willful, intentional or negligent act which does not
otherwise conform to the intended use of the system and causes or is
likely to cause a disruption of any duration to the 911 system.
(5)
Sec. 30-80 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-82
CHCT:312
shall be considered as a separate violation and shall be subject to the
aforementioned fine for each violation.
Sec. 30-82 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-82
CHCT:313

ARTICLE II
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
DIVISION 1
IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-83. Failure to comply with orders at fire.
Any person present at a fire and willfully neglecting to comply with any
order of the Chief and Assistant Chiefs of the Fire Department shall be in
violation of this chapter.
Sec. 30-84. Presiding officer at meetings of Board of Engineers.
Sec. 30-85. Mutual aid pacts.
Sec. 30-86. Charges for emergency responses to disposal facility.
The following schedule of charges shall be applied for each emergency
response by the Biddeford Fire Department to waste disposal facilities
located in Biddeford, Maine:
Regular call (all regular personnel): $1,500.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall preside at the meetings of the
Board of Engineers, and, in his absence, the Assistant Chief next in rank
shall discharge the duties of the Chief.
(a)
As used in this section, "Board of Engineers" shall mean the Chief and
the assistant Chief of the permanent force of the Fire Department.
(b)
When a request for aid is received from the Fire Chief, or his duly
authorized representative, of a municipal or incorporated volunteer fire
department of a mutual aid participating member, the Chief or his
duly authorized representative of the participating member to which
such request is directed shall send to such municipal or incorporated
volunteer fire department such equipment and men to aid in
extinguishing a fire in the municipality of such participating member as
in his sole and exclusive judgment he shall then deem warranted and
feasible.
(a)
Each participating member shall be responsible during the course of
rendering such aid as authorized under this section to another
participating member for damage to its own equipment, personal injury
or property damage, and for any payments which it is required to
make to any member of its fire department or to his widow or other
dependents on account of injuries or death.
(b)
The Chief or authorized representative making the request for
assistance pursuant to this section shall be in charge of the fire or any
other operation in his community.
(c)
Sec. 30-83 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-86
CHCT:315
Box alarm (all overtime personnel): $5,000 (additional).
Additional alarm (third alarm): $4,000 (additional).
Sec. 30-87. Underground fire suppression tanks.
Underground fire suppression tanks are required for new (private/public)
subdivisions, which are located outside the hydrant districts.
Sec. 30-88. through Sec. 30-100. (Reserved)
The subdivider/developer is required, at their own expense, to provide a
minimum of a 10,000 gallon underground fire suppression tank(s) when
a subdivision is located over a 1,000 feet from the Fire Department
water supply. Exception: An underground fire suppression tank will
not be required if a natural water supply (i.e., stream) can provide a
minimum of 500 gallons per minute for 20 minutes, and is not located
more than 1,000 feet from the subdivision.
(1)
The subdivider/developer is required to meet with a Fire Department
representative to obtain and review all specifications requirements for
the tank(s). The Biddeford Fire Chief will determine if more than one
tank is required and the placement of the tank(s). In the event that the
subdivider/developer disputes the Chief's decision, an appeal may be
made to the Biddeford City Council. This appeal shall be presented, in
writing, to the City Manager within 30 days of the Chief's decision and
shall include the reason(s) for the disagreement.
(2)
The subdivider/developer will be required to submit a letter to the
Planning Board from the City Engineering Department, Public Works
Department and the Fire Department that insures that all local and
state regulations have been met pertaining to the tank(s) location in the
subdivision.
(3)
In private subdivisions the subdivider/developer is required to create
an easement, for the Fire Department to access the tank for emergency
purposes and or maintenance purposes. The subdivider/developer will
also have to present a copy of the easement to the Planning Board prior
to final acceptance.
(4)
The subdivider/developer will be required to submit a letter of approval
from the Fire Department to the Code Enforcement Office after the
completion of the tank(s). No building permit will be issued until such
letter is received.
(5)
In public subdivisions the subdivider/developer will be required to deed
the land in which the tank is located to the City of Biddeford before the
acceptance of the subdivision by the City Council.
(6)
Sec. 30-86 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-88
CHCT:316
ARTICLE III
FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU
DIVISION 1
IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-101. Established; enforcement authority.
The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Fire Department of the City, which is hereby established
and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire
Department.
Sec. 30-102. Appointment, tenure of Chief.
The Chief in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by
the Chief of the Fire Department on the basis of examination to determine
his qualifications. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and
satisfactory service.
Sec. 30-103. Inspectors.
The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The
Chief of the Fire Department shall recommend to the City the employment
of technical inspectors who, when such authorization is made, shall be
selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position.
The examination shall be opened to members and nonmembers of the Fire
Department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an
indefinite term.
Sec. 30-104. Annual report.
A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Board of Fire Commissioners; it shall contain all
proceedings under the Fire Prevention Code, with such statistics as the
Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include therein; the Chief of
the Fire Department shall also recommend any amendments to the Fire
Prevention Code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
Sec. 30-105. Copy of codes on file.
Not less than one copy of each of the codes adopted in Sections 38-141
and 38-142 will be filed in the office of the City Clerk. Copies of each code
adopted, or referenced in Sections 38-141 through 38-143 shall be filed in
the fire prevention office. The codes are hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section
shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits
of the City.
Sec. 30-101 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-106
CHCT:317
Sec. 30-106. Definitions of words used in codes adopted in this
chapter.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the codes adopted
in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT, CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE
PREVENTION, BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION, or STATE FIRE MARSHAL
— The Chief of the Fire Department of the City or his duly authorized
representative.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action.
FIRE LANE — A designated unobstructed passageway at least 20 feet
in width with an outside burning radius of 50 feet and constructed and
maintained in a manner to permit free passage of fire apparatus and other
emergency equipment and personnel from a public way to all necessary
areas, regardless of season of year or weather conditions, around buildings,
in areas or in developments of subdivisions as may be required elsewhere
in this article.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Biddeford.
PARKING AREA — Lots, areas or other accommodations for the parking of
motor vehicles off the street, alley or other way, which lots, areas or other
accommodations are available for use by the public either with or without
charge.
Sec. 30-107. through Sec. 30-140. (Reserved)
Sec. 30-106 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-107
CHCT:318
DIVISION 2
STANDARDS
Sec. 30-141. Fire Prevention Code.
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire
or explosion, that certain code known as the NFPA Fire Prevention Code,
particularly the 1997 Edition, as amended, thereof and the whole thereof, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association and except for such
portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article.
Sec. 30-142. Life Safety Code adopted by reference.
There is hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and safety, that a certain
code known as the Life Safety Code 101, particularly the 2000 Edition, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association.
Sec. 30-143. National Fire Protection Codes adopted by reference.
The 1998 National Fire Protection Codes, as amended, shall be adopted for
use by reference.
Sec. 30-144. Modifications to adopted codes.
Sec. 30-145. Penalty for violations.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Codes and standards adopted in Section 30-141 or fail to comply therewith,
or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder,
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to recommend
modification of any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Codes and
standards adopted in Section 30-141 upon application in writing by the
owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such codes
and standards, provided that the spirit of such codes and standards
shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done.
The particulars of such recommended modification shall be entered
upon the records of the Department and a copy signed by the Chief of
the Fire Department shall be furnished to the applicant and the City
Council. Such modification shall be granted unless a majority of the City
Council shall file with the Mayor within such time written objection to
the granting of such modification.
(a)
The Chief of the Fire Department shall from time to time determine
and recommend to the City Council for inclusion in the Fire Prevention
Codes and standards adopted in Section 30-141 any new materials,
processes or occupancies for which permits shall be required in
addition to those now enumerated therein.
(b)
Sec. 30-141 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-145
CHCT:319
or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications
or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall
fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council
or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall
severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively
be punishable as provided in Section 1-12. The imposition of one penalty
for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and
all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or
defects within a reasonable time, and, when not otherwise specified, each
day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
Sec. 30-146. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application
or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the fire prevention codes and standards adopted in this article
do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such codes and
standards have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the
City Council within 10 days from the decision of the Chief of the Fire
Department. The City Council may reverse the decision of the Chief of the
Fire Department and permit exceptions to or variances from the specific
provisions of the fire prevention codes and standards in cases where the
enforcement of the provisions of such codes and standards would result in
undue hardship, subject always to the rule that the City Council shall give
due consideration to the purposes of the fire prevention code in promoting
public health, safety and welfare.
Sec. 30-147. Fire lanes.
Purpose. Fire lanes are established for the purpose of promoting the
public health, safety and welfare by recognizing that there exist, and
will in the future exist, buildings and other areas within the City within
which and to which the public will be invited, served or housed. These
buildings or other areas must be provided prompt, adequate emergency
services, including access by fire fighters and firefighting equipment
and other emergency personnel and equipment, in order to accomplish
such purposes and effect the saving of life and property in emergency
situations.
(a)
Applicability. The provisions of this article shall, in order to accomplish
the stated purpose, be applicable to all proposed developments,
subdivisions, buildings and other premises as defined by the Planning
Board.
(b)
(c) Establishment of fire lanes.
Sec. 30-145 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-147
CHCT:320
Each application for residential or nonresidential subdivision
approval and each application for site plan review submitted to
the Planning Board shall be reviewed by the Chief of the Fire
Department and/or the State Fire Marshal within which such
development or building is located. The Fire Chief and/or Fire
Marshal shall review each such application to determine the
location of such fire lanes as are necessary and report his finding,
recommendations and suggested designation of fire lanes to the
Planning Board, in writing, which findings, recommendations and
suggested designations of fire lanes shall be made a part of the
record of proceedings before the Planning Board on each such
subdivision site plan review application. In such cases, the decision
of the Planning Board shall govern the requirement and
designation of such fire lanes.
(1)
Within existing developments and premises to which this article
is applicable, the Fire Chief shall designate fire lanes by written
order and shall notify in writing both the Planning Board and
the owner, owners or agents of such development or premises by
certified mail of such designation and of any specific requirements
for compliance with this article, and shall publish notice of such
establishment of such fire lanes once in a newspaper having
general circulation within the City. The Fire Chief shall file one
copy of any order of designation of any such fire lanes with the City
Clerk. Any person aggrieved by such order may file with the Clerk
within 30 days after the date of the receipt of such order written
notice of appeal, setting forth therein reasons for aggrievement. A
public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board, after which the
board must affirm, modify or rescind such order within 30 days of
the public hearing. The Board shall notify the Fire Chief, as may
be applicable, by written communication, any and all action taken
relative to the establishment of a fire lane.
(2)
Compliance. Notice of establishment of fire lanes shall prescribe a
reasonable time for compliance, such compliance time being 30 days
from time of notification by certified mail. If compliance is not obtained
within such time, then the owner, owners or agents receiving such
notice shall be subject to a fine in accordance with Section 1-12. Each
day following such specified time for compliance shall constitute a new
and separate violation.
(d)
Parking prohibited; notice of violation; towing of vehicles.
No person shall park or permit to stand unattended a motor vehicle
in any fire lane established in accordance with this article, except
when actually picking up or discharging passengers or actively
engaged in loading or unloading a motor vehicle.
(1)
Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of this
section, any police officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to
the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in
(2)
(e)
Sec. 30-147 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-147
CHCT:321
Sec. 30-148. Smoke detectors.
Sec. 30-149. through Sec. 30-159. (Reserved)
violation of these regulations. Any motor vehicle found parked or
standing in a fire lane that has been established in accordance with
this article, in addition to the foregoing, may be towed upon the
direction of a police officer to any public or private parking facility
or area; and all expense of such towing and any subsequent storage
shall be borne by the registered owner or operator of such vehicle.
Required in residential property. All residential properties shall have
smoke detectors.
(a)
Location. The location of smoke detectors shall be outside of sleeping
areas and in stairways leading to occupied areas.
(b)
Installation. Smoke detectors are to be installed in such a way as to
ensure that rising smoke is not obstructed in reaching the detectors
and that the detectors intercept rising smoke before it reaches the
sleeping area.
(c)
Detectors to be battery operated or hard wired. Detectors in existing
buildings shall be battery operated or hard wired.
(d)
Wiring for new and remodeled buildings. New buildings, or buildings
undergoing major remodeling, shall have hard wired smoke detectors.
(e)
Application of other laws and codes. Any state laws or local codes more
stringent than this article will apply.
(f)
Responsibility for installation and maintenance. It will be the smoke
detector owner's responsibility to install and maintain these detectors.
(g)
Penalty for violation of article; grace period. Any person in violation of
this article shall be fined $100 for each day of violation. A five-day grace
period will take effect from the date the Fire Chief's notice is sent, and
such fine will then be imposed from that date.
(h)
Notice of inspection. The Fire Chief or his designate may, upon
reasonable notice to the owner or occupant, enter any dwelling unit
for purposes of determining compliance with this article. Such notice
shall precede the inspection by at least five days and shall be in writing
delivered by ordinary mail to the owner of such dwelling unit, if such
unit is owner-occupied, or to the occupant. Any such inspection shall be
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
unless another time is requested by the owner or occupant. The failure
of an owner or occupant to allow access for purpose of inspection to
any dwelling unit after having been given the notice as provided in this
section shall constitute a violation of this article, and shall be subject
to the penalties provided in this article. Each day such violation exists
shall be deemed a separate violation.
(i)
Sec. 30-147 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-149
CHCT:322
DIVISION 3
OPEN BURNING
Sec. 30-160. Types permissible with permit.
In accordance with 12 M.R.S.A. § 9325 the types of burning described
herein are allowed, provided that a permit has been obtained from the
Biddeford Fire Department or from the forest ranger having jurisdiction
over the location where the fire is to be set. The burning must be conducted
according to the terms and conditions of the permit and may not create a
nuisance. A permit is required for:
Recreational campfires kindled when the ground is not covered by
snow;
(1)
(2) Fires in conjunction with holiday and festive celebrations;
Burning of solid or liquid fuels and structures for research or bona
fide instruction and training of municipal, volunteer and industrial
firefighters when conducted under the direct control and supervision of
qualified instructors;
(3)
Burning for agricultural purposes, including, but not limited to, open
burning of blueberry fields, potato tops and hayfields and prescribed
burning for timberland management;
(4)
Out-of-door burning of wood wastes as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 9324,
Subsection 7-A, and painted and unpainted wood from construction
and demolition debris in the open or in an incinerator with a primary
chamber volume no greater than 133 cubic feet or 1,000 gallons that is
not licensed by the Department of Environmental Protection;
(5)
Burning on site for the disposal of wood wastes and painted and
unpainted wood from construction and demolition debris generated
from the clearing of any land or by the erection, modification,
maintenance, demolition or construction of any highway, railroad,
power line, communication line, pipeline, building or development;
(6)
Burning for hazard reduction purposes, such as, but not limited to, the
burning of grass fields;
(7)
Burning for the containment or control of spills of gasoline, kerosene,
heating oil or similar petroleum products;
(8)
(9) Open burning of leaves, brush, dead wood and tree cuttings;
Campfires, bonfires, or any other type of open burning on any of the
City's public beaches, public parks, or other recreational facilities;
(10)
The burning of wood wastes and painted and unpainted wood from
construction and demolition debris at solid waste facilities; and
(11)
Sec. 30-160 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-160
CHCT:323
Sec. 30-161. Types permissible without permit.
When not otherwise prohibited by state rule, local ordinance or water utility
regulation, the following types of burning are permissible without a permit
if no nuisance is created:
Sec. 30-162. through Sec. 30-199. (Reserved)
The burning of empty containers, including fiberboard boxes and paper
bags, previously containing explosives and being disposed of in
accordance with the provisions of Title 25, § 2472.
(12)
Recreational campfires kindled when the ground is covered by snow or
on frozen bodies of water, excepting public beaches;
(1)
Residential use of outdoor grills and fireplaces for recreational
purposes, such as preparing food; and
(2)
Use of outdoor grills and fireplaces for recreational purposes, such
as preparing food at commercial campgrounds in organized towns
as long as the commercial campgrounds are licensed by the Health
Engineering Division of the Department of Human Services.
(3)
Sec. 30-160 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-162
CHCT:324
ARTICLE IV
SEX[A OdFdFeEdN5D-1E9R-2 R0E15SIBDyEONrCdY. RNEo.S 2T0R1I5C.T2I8O]NS
Sec. 30-200. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Biddeford Sex Offender Residency
Restriction Ordinance."
Sec. 30-201. Findings and purpose.
The City promotes and strives to create a safe environment for its citizens
to live and raise families and considers the promotion of the safety and
welfare of children to be of paramount importance. The City recognizes that
sex offenders who prey upon children may have a high rate of recidivism.
Notwithstanding the fact that certain persons convicted of sex offenses or
sexually violent offenses are required to register pursuant to the Maine
Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act of 1999, 34-A M.R.S.A. §
11201 et seq., as may be amended from time to time, the City finds that
further protective measures are necessary and warranted to safeguard
places where children congregate. The purpose of this article is to provide
such further protective measures while balancing the interests and
residential needs of sex offenders.
Sec. 30-202. Authority.
This article is adopted in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. §
3001 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3014, as may be amended from time to time.
Sec. 30-203. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DESIGNATED SEX OFFENDERS — Persons convicted of Class A, B or C sex
offenses committed against persons who had not attained 14 years of age at
the time of the offense, regardless of whether the offense was committed in
the State of Maine or another jurisdiction.
RESIDENCE — The temporary or permanent occupation or use of a place,
including, but not limited to, a domicile, for the purpose of living, residing
or dwelling.
RESTRICTED PROPERTY —
The real property comprising a public or private elementary, middle or
secondary school; and
(a)
The real property comprising a municipally owned property or stateowned
property that is leased to a nonprofit organization for purposes
of a park, athletic field or recreation facility that is open to the public
where children are the primary users.
(b)
Sec. 30-200 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-203
CHCT:325
SETBACK — A seven-hundred-fifty-foot radius surrounding restricted
property.
Sec. 30-204. Restricted property map; restrictions.
Sec. 30-205. Exceptions.
A designated sex offender maintaining a residence within the setback of
a restricted property is not in violation of this article if the residence was
established and consistently maintained as a residence prior to May 19,
2015, the date of adoption of this article. A designated sex offender is
not in violation of this article if the restricted property is created, moved
or enlarged and such creation, movement or enlargement results in a
designated sex offender residing within the setback of a restricted property,
as long as the residence was in place and consistently maintained prior
thereto.
Sec. 30-206. Violations and penalties.
The Planning Department, with the assistance of the Police
Department, shall prepare and file with the City Clerk and Police
Department an official map showing restricted property, as defined by
this article. The map is hereby incorporated herein and made a part
of this article.26 The Planning Department, with the assistance of the
Police Department, shall by July 1 of each year recommend updates
to the map to the City Council to reflect any changes in the locations
of any restricted property and setbacks. The City Council may amend
the restricted property official map by Council order, and any amended
official map shall be filed with the City Clerk and the Police Department.
(a)
No designated sex offender shall reside within the setback of any
restricted property.
(b)
A designated sex offender who, 30 days after actual receipt of written
notice sent by regular mail or hand delivered from the City acting by
and through its Police Department, is in violation of this article shall be
subject to an action brought by the City to enforce the requirements of
this article. The City may file a legal action against the violator seeking
any and all remedies to which it is entitled pursuant to state and local
laws, including, without limitation, declaratory and injunctive relief.
(a)
The City also may seek a penalty in the minimum amount of $500 per
day. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate violation. In the
event the City is the prevailing party in any action under this article,
it shall be entitled to an award of its reasonable attorney's fees, court
costs and the costs of any expert witness fees incurred by the City. All
civil penalties shall inure to the benefit of the City of Biddeford.
(b)
26.Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
Sec. 30-203 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-207
CHCT:326
Sec. 30-207. Severability.
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
Sec. 30-207 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 30-207
CHCT:327
Chapter 34
ENVIRONMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 6.
Animals — See Ch. 10.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 46.
Solid waste — See Ch. 58.
Subdivisions — See Ch. 66.
Utilities — See Ch. 70.
Land development regulations — See Part III.
Sec. 30-207 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 30-207
CHCT:328
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 34-1. through Sec. 34-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 34-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-1
CHCT:329

ARTICLE II
LITTERING
Sec. 34-26. Findings and purpose. [Ord. of 7-17-1990(3), § 15-71]
The proliferation and accumulation of litter throughout the City endangers
the citizens' use and enjoyment of the environment and constitutes a public
health hazard. The City hereby exercises the authority provided by 17
M.R.S.A. §§ 2271 and 2276 to control littering within the City.
Sec. 34-27. Definitions. [Ord. of 7-17-1990(3), § 15-72]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
DISPOSE — To drop, deposit, discard or otherwise get rid of.
LITTER — All waste materials, including, but not limited to, any bottles,
glass, crockery, cans, scrap metal, junk, paper, garbage, rubbish, offal,
feathers, except feathers from live birds while being transported, old
automobiles or parts thereof, or similar refuse, or disposable packages
or containers thrown or deposited as prohibited in this article, but not
including the wastes of the primary processes of mining, logging,
sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container of suitable size which is clearly
identified with a sign, symbol or other device as a place where the public
may dispose of litter.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any area that is used or held out for use by the public,
whether or not owned or operated by public or private interests.
VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled and designed for carrying
persons or property or which is used for the transportation of persons,
except motorcycles, farm implements and snowmobiles.
Sec. 34-28. Prohibited. [Ord. of 7-17-1990(3), § 15-73]
No person may dispose of litter upon any public property or private
property not owned by him in this City or in the waters of this City
or on the ice over such waters, which property shall include, but
not be limited to, any public park, beach, campground, forest land,
recreational area, trailer park, highway, road, street or alley, except:
When such property is designated by the City or any of its agencies
or by the state or any of its agencies for the disposal of garbage
and refuse, and such person is authorized to use such property for
such purpose; or
(1)
Into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements
upon any part of such private or public property or waters.
(2)
(a)
Sec. 34-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-28
CHCT:331
Sec. 34-29. Improper use of litter receptacle. [Ord. of 7-17-1990(3),
§ 15-74]
No person may deposit household waste, leaves, clippings, gardening
refuse, hazardous waste, or demolition debris in any public litter receptacle.
Sec. 34-30. Penalty for violation of article. [Ord. of 7-17-1990(3),
§ 15-75]
Any person adjudged to have violated this article shall pay a monetary
forfeiture of $500, payable to the City.
Sec. 34-31. Reward for information leading to arrest of violator.
[Ord. of 7-17-1990(3), § 15-76]
The City shall pay a reward of $150 for information which leads to the arrest
and conviction of a person violating this article.
When littering prohibited by the article occurs from any vehicle or
watercraft, the operator of such vehicle or watercraft, as well as the
person littering, commits a violation of this article.
(b)
Sec. 34-28 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-31
CHCT:332
ARTICLE IIA
DELIVERY OF U[ANdSdOeLdI9C-I1T9E-D20 P1R7IBNyT EODrd O. 2R0 W17R.1IT0T3E]N MATERIALS
Sec. 34-32. Purpose and intent.
Sec. 34-33. Opt-out list.
The City Clerk shall maintain a list of all residents and property owners,
by address, that have filed written notice with the City Clerk requesting
that unsolicited printed and other written materials not be delivered to
their property. Written notice shall be effective indefinitely until and unless
written notice is received from the resident or property owner that they
now desire to receive unsolicited printed or other written materials. The list
shall be revised from time to time as the City Clerk is notified by a resident
or property owner that they desire to have their property either removed
from or placed on the list. Nothing in this article shall require the City Clerk
to verify the identity of any resident or property owner or to verify any
change of ownership, occupancy or control. The City shall not be liable for
any errors or omissions on the list. The list shall be maintained by the City
Clerk and provided electronically to license holders.
Sec. 34-34. Annual license and recordkeeping requirements.
The purpose of this article is to protect the rights of Biddeford residents
and property owners who desire not to receive unwanted printed or
written materials, whether commercial or noncommercial in nature,
including unsolicited newspapers. The right of privacy affords citizens
the right to determine and limit the materials they will allow to be
delivered on their private property. When a resident or property owner
affirmatively provides notice that they do not want to receive delivery of
unsolicited print or other written materials on their property, to deliver
such materials in contravention of such expressed desire is, in effect, a
trespass against the resident or property owner.
(a)
This article is intended to ensure and protect the privacy rights of
Biddeford residents and property owners on their private property and
to deter the accumulation of unsolicited printed or written materials
that might signal that a house is unoccupied. It is further intended
to prevent littering and protect the aesthetic appearance of the City
by reasonable regulation as to the time, place, and manner of the
distribution and delivery of unsolicited printed or written materials
within the community.
(b)
No person, organization, business, or other entity, or their agents or
representatives, may distribute or deliver any unsolicited printed or
other written materials upon the property of any City resident or
property owner on more than two occasions in any calendar year
without first having obtained an annual license from the City Clerk
prior to such distribution or delivery. The license application shall
identify the name of the printed or other written material to be
(a)
Sec. 34-32 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-34
CHCT:333
Sec. 34-35. License renewal.
Sec. 34-36. Prohibition of delivery to opt-out properties; exception.
distributed and shall be signed and duly acknowledged by an individual
or, in the case of an organization, business, or other entity, by the
authorized agent or representative who shall agree to accept
responsibility for i) the receipt of the opt-out list of residents and
property owners described in Section 34-33 above, and ii) any notice of
violations by delivery persons and carriers with the provisions of this
article.
Upon receipt of a completed application and an application fee of
$100, the City Clerk shall administratively issue the license unless the
City Council previously has revoked or declined to renew a license
previously held by the applicant. If the City Council previously has
revoked or declined to renew a license application by the same
applicant, then the City Clerk shall forward the application to the City
Council who shall decide whether to issue the license.
(b)
The City Clerk shall administratively renew the license annually upon
payment of the annual license fee of $100 unless the applicant has
violated this article on five or more separate days during the prior
calendar year.
(a)
If the applicant has violated this article on five or more separate days
during the prior calendar year, a hearing before the City Council shall
be held to determine if the license shall be renewed. A license holder
may continue to distribute printed or other written material in
accordance with this article after the expiration of its license until a
decision by the City Council denying the license renewal.
(b)
The license shall be renewed by the City Council if at the conclusion of
the hearing the City Council determines:
The violations have been reasonably corrected or are expected to
be corrected in the future; and
(1)
The violations that have occurred in the past are not expected to
occur in the future; and
(2)
An agreement has been entered into that provides relief for the
residents or property owners that have been adversely impacted by
the license holder; and
(3)
That there are no mitigating circumstances warranting a denial of
the license renewal.
(4)
(c)
An annual administrative fee of $100 shall be due and payable by
December 1 of each year to accompany the license application or
renewal. The license may not be issued until all outstanding penalties,
fees, attorney fees, court costs, and any other charges have been paid.
(d)
Sec. 34-34 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-36
CHCT:334
Sec. 34-37. Delivery in public places; exceptions.
Sec. 34-38. Required removal from public places.
Any person, organization, business, or other entity, or their agents or
representatives, that delivers or distributes any unsolicited printed or other
written materials shall collect and remove all of its printed or other written
materials from the City rights-of-way, streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks,
and all other locations set forth in Section 34-37 within 72 hours from the
time of delivery.
Sec. 34-39. Required removal of uncollected items; exceptions.
No person, organization, business, or other entity, or their employees,
authorized agents or representatives, including but not limited to the
authorized agent described in Section 34-34 hereof and their delivery
persons and carriers, shall deliver, distribute, throw, cast or place or
cause or permit to be delivered, distributed, thrown, cast, or placed any
unsolicited printed or other written materials of any nature whatsoever
upon the premises of any City resident or property owner who has
requested that such print or other written materials not be delivered
to their property and whose address has been listed with the City
pursuant to Section 34-33 hereof.
(a)
This section shall not apply to persons, organizations, businesses, or
other entities, or their agents or representatives, who distribute or
deliver unsolicited printed or other written materials upon the property
of any City resident on no more than two occasions in any calendar year.
(b)
No person, organization, business or other entity shall throw, cast
or place in or upon any City right-of-way, street, avenue, highway or
sidewalk any unsolicited printed or other written material, including
but not limited to newspapers, handbills, circulars, advertising and
cards.
(a)
This section shall not apply to public service announcements or notices
distributed by the City or a Department of the City. Such
announcements or notices shall be placed on the driver's side of the
windshield of the vehicle.
(b)
Any lawfully delivered items that are not collected by the resident or
property owner must be removed by the person, organization, business,
or other entity distributing such materials within 72 hours from the
time of delivery.
(a)
This section shall not apply to persons, organizations, businesses, or
other entities, or their agents or representatives, who distribute or
deliver unsolicited print or other written materials upon the property of
any City resident or property owner on no more than two occasions in
any calendar year.
(b)
Sec. 34-36 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-40
CHCT:335
Sec. 34-40. Violations and penalties.
Sec. 34-41. Severability.
If any section or provision of this article is for any reason held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
Sec. 34-42. through Sec. 34-50. (Reserved)
Penalties for violations. Any person, organization, business or other
entity that violates any provisions of this article may be subject to
a minimum penalty of $100 and a maximum penalty of $2,500 per
violation; provided, however, that any person, organization, business
or other entity that fails to obtain or renew a license in accordance
with this article may be subject to a minimum penalty of $500 and a
maximum penalty of $2,500 per violation. The amount of the penalty
assessed by the City shall be based upon the frequency and severity
of the violation(s) and whether the violation(s) was corrected within a
reasonable time.
(a)
Revocation of license. The City Council, after notice and hearing may
revoke the license of any person, organization, business or other entity
that has violated this article on five or more separate days in a calendar
year or who has failed to pay any fines, penalties and costs assessed
under this article.
(b)
Recovery of costs. In any action that the City initiates to enforce the
provisions of this article, the City if it is the prevailing party shall be
entitled to recover its reasonable costs, including attorneys fees and
court costs.
(c)
Sec. 34-40 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-42
CHCT:336
ARTICLE III
NOISE
Sec. 34-51. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 15-30]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — The all-encompassing noise level associated
with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from many distant,
individually indistinguishable sources, excluding the alleged offensive
noise.
COMPLAINING RECEPTOR (COMPLAINANT) — Any person who owns,
controls, or occupies as a temporary or permanent residence real property
or any part thereof and notifies the Noise Control Officer or other proper
enforcement authority of a possible violation of this article affecting such
real property and his enjoyment thereof.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial
repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition, for or of
public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT — Any equipment or device operated by fuel
or electric power used in construction or demolition work.
DAYTIME HOURS — The hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
DECIBEL (db) — The practical unit of measurement for sound pressure
level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10, of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured
sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals);
abbreviated "db."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way.
DOMESTIC POWER EQUIPMENT — Means, but is not limited to, power
saws, drills, grinders, lawn and garden tools and other domestic power
equipment intended for use in residential areas by a homeowner or other
authorized person.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage which demands immediate
action.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle authorized by the City to have
sound warning devices such as sirens and bells which can lawfully be used
when responding to an emergency.
EMERGENCY WORK — Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following an emergency, or work required to protect persons or
property from exposure to imminent danger.
Sec. 34-51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-51
CHCT:337
LOUD AND UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which
exceeds the standards set forth in Section 34-54 and Section 6-91(a)(2).
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by
a motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers,
semitrailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land,
dune buggies, or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles, trailbikes
or minibikes.
NIGHTTIME HOURS — The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — A municipal employee trained in the use
of sound level meters. This article shall normally be enforced by a police
officer, but may also be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer during
normal working hours.
NOISE LEVEL — The sound pressure level as measured with a sound level
meter using either the A- or C-weighting network. The level so read is
designated db(A) or db(C).
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, municipality, agency, or political or
administrative subdivision of the state or other legal entity of any kind.
PREMISES — Any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards, and real
properties without buildings or improvements, owned or controlled by a
person.
PROPERTY LINE — That real or imaginary line along the ground surface
and its vertical extension which separates real property owned or controlled
by any person from contiguous real property owned or controlled by
another person, and which separates real property from the public right-ofway.
In situations involving multiple buildings on the same lot, the property
line shall be deemed to be the exterior walls. In situations involving multiple
occupancies within the same building, the property line between individual
units shall be deemed to be common walls (including floors and ceilings).
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Any internal combustion engine powered
vehicle which is being used for recreational purposes.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — All residential zones specified in the City
Zoning Ordinance (suburban residential, general residential, and singlefamily
residential).
SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level measured in decibels with
a sound level meter set for A-weighting or C-weighting; sound level is
expressed in db(A) or db(C).
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels conforming to A.N.S.I. Type I or Type II standards.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — The level of a sound measured in db units
with a sound level meter which has a uniform (flat) response over the band
of frequencies measured.
Sec. 34-51 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-52
CHCT:338
Sec. 34-52. Findings and purpose. [Code 1975, § 15-21]
It is recognized that people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive noise that may jeopardize their health,
safety or welfare or degrade the quality of life. This article is enacted to
protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare and quality of life
for the citizens of the City through the reduction, control and prevention of
excessive noise.
Sec. 34-53. Noise levels. [Code 1975, § 15-22]
It shall be unlawful for any person to emit or cause to be emitted any
noise beyond the boundaries of his premises in excess of the noise levels
established in this article.
Sec. 34-54. Noise level standards. [Code 1975, § 15-23]
Sound from any source controlled by this article shall not exceed the
following limits at the property line of the source:
7:00 a.m. through 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. through 7:00
a.m.
Type of District db(A) db(C) db(A) db(C)
Industrial 70 82 60 72
Commercial 60 72 50 62
Residential 55 67 45 57
Sec. 34-55. Exclusions from noise level standards. [Code 1975,
§ 15-24]
The noise level standards set out in Section 34-54 shall not apply to noise
emitted by or related to:
Where the emitting and receiving premises are in different districts, the
limits governing the stricter district shall apply to any regulated noise
entering that district.
(1)
The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 dbA for a single period, no
longer than 15 minutes, in any one day.
(2)
(1) Natural phenomena.
(2) Any bell or chime from any building clock, school or church.
Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or
any other alarm systems used in an emergency situation; provided,
however, that burglar alarms not terminating within 30 minutes after
being activated shall be unlawful.
(3)
Warning devices required by OSHA or other state or federal safety
regulations.
(4)
Sec. 34-52 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-55
CHCT:339
Sec. 34-56. Exemptions from noise regulations. [Code 1975,
§ 15-25; Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
The following shall be exempt from this article, subject to special conditions
spelled out:
Sec. 34-57. Prohibited activities. [Code 1975, § 15-26]
The following activities are specifically prohibited:
(5) Farming equipment or farming activity.
Noise from domestic power equipment, such as but not limited to
power saws, sanders, grinders, lawn and garden tools or similar devices
operated during daytime hours.
(1)
The noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure
relief valves, and any other emergency activity.
(2)
Timber harvesting (falling trees and removing logs from the woods)
during daytime hours.
(3)
Noise generated by any construction or demolition equipment which is
operated during daytime hours and emergency construction or repair
work by the state or public utilities also is exempted.
(4)
Noise created by municipal vehicles in the removal of snow, debris or
refuse.
(5)
Noise created by any recreational activities which are permitted by
law and for which a license or permit has been granted by the City,
including, but not limited to, parades, sporting events, concerts, and
fireworks displays.
(6)
Noise created by blasting operations, except that all blasting operations
shall be in accordance with Chapter 34, Environment, Article V,
Blasting.
(7)
Animals and birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or
bird which intermittently or continuously for 1/2 hour or more makes
sounds which disturb the peace and tranquility of a residential area, or
makes such sounds to the disturbance of any person residing in such
residential area, at any time of the day or night, regardless of whether
the animal or bird is situated on private property.
(1)
Motor vehicle noise, truck idling. No person shall operate an engineer
or any standing motor vehicle with a weight in excess of 10,000 pounds
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight for a period in excess of 15
minutes within any hour during daytime hours and in excess of 15
minutes within any eight-hour period during nighttime hours, when
such vehicle is parked on a residential premises or on a City street next
to a residential premises.
(2)
Sec. 34-55 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-58
CHCT:340
Sec. 34-58. Noise level measurement procedures. [1975, § 15-27]
For the purpose of determining noise levels as set forth in this article, the
following guidelines shall be applicable:
Sec. 34-59. Inspections; interference with authorized personnel.
[Code 1975, § 15-28]
Sec. 34-60. Enforcement; arrests and summonses; notice of
violation; service of notice. [Code 1975, § 15-29]
All personnel conducting sound measurements shall be trained in the
current techniques and principles of sound measuring equipment and
instrumentation.
(1)
Instruments used to determine sound level measurements shall
conform to the sound level meters as defined by this article.
Specifically, they shall be ANSI Type I or Type II meters.
(2)
The general steps listed below shall be followed when preparing to take
sound level measurements:
The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
a.
The sound level meter shall be calibrated before and after each set
of measurements. The calibrator itself shall be recalibrated at least
once every year.
b.
When measurements are taken out of doors, a wind screen shall
be placed over the microphone of the sound level meter as per the
manufacturer's instructions. No sound level measurements, shall
be taken at wind speeds greater than 12 miles per hour.
c.
The sound level meter shall be placed as specified by the
manufacturer's instructions and at least four feet above the
ground. It shall be so placed as not to be interfered with by
individuals conducting the measurements.
d.
Sound measurements shall be taken at a point that is located at
least one foot beyond the property line of the emitter's premises
and at least one foot within the complaining receptor's
(complainant's) premises.
e.
(3)
For the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this
article, the Noise Control Officer, upon complaint, is authorized to make
tests whenever necessary to determine the level of noise.
(a)
No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent in any way,
interfere or attempt to interfere with any authorized person while in the
performance of his duties under this article.
(b)
Sec. 34-58 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-60
CHCT:341
Sec. 34-61. through Sec. 34-100. (Reserved)
The Noise Control Officer is directed to enforce the provisions of this
article and is hereby authorized to and may arrest or summons any
person when he has reasonable cause to believe that such person has
violated this article. Such person may only be summonsed or arrested
if he has previously received written notice of an initial violation of this
article in accordance with Subsections (c) and (d) of this section.
(a)
No person shall interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person
charged with the enforcement of this article while such person is
engaged in the performance of his duty.
(b)
Violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as
other violations, provided, however, that in the event of an initial
violation of the provisions of this article, a written notice shall be given
the alleged violator which specifies the time by which the condition
shall be corrected. No complaint or further action shall be taken if the
cause of the violation has been removed or the condition abated or fully
corrected within the time period specified in the written notice.
(c)
If the alleged violator cannot be located in order to serve the written
notice of initial violation as required in this section, the notice shall be
deemed to be given upon mailing such notice by registered or certified
mail to the alleged violator at his last known address or at the place
where the violation occurred, in which event the specified time period
for abating the violation or applying for a variance shall commence at
the date of the day following the mailing of such notice. Subsequent
violations of the same nature shall result in the immediate filing of a
misdemeanor complaint.
(d)
Sec. 34-60 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-61
CHCT:342
ARTICLE IV
AIR TOXICS CONTROL REGULATIONS (SUSPENDED)27
DIVISION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 34-101. Preface. [Ord. No. 2002.112,28 (preface), 11-6-2002]
General. The City of Biddeford Air Toxics Control Ordinance is a
comprehensive regulatory plan to prevent, control, abate and limit
the emission of toxic air pollutants into the ambient air. Reaching
beyond the State of Maine's current program to promote voluntary
reductions in toxic air pollutants, the article prescribes twenty-fourhour
and annual ambient air limits which are intended to promote
public health by reducing actual and potential human exposure to
toxic air pollutants which are known to cause, or may be reasonably
anticipated to cause adverse health effects, including increased cancer
risk. This article establishes a permit system administered and enforced
by the Biddeford Environmental Board to regulate the emission of toxic
air pollutants. This article initially regulates toxic air emissions sources
which are now regulated by the State of Maine as minor or major
sources of air pollution for other pollutants. This article also requires
a newly created environmental officer to conduct a comprehensive
emissions inventory of other sources of toxic air emissions not now
regulated by the state and directs the Environmental Code Officer
to recommend regulating additional sources of such emissions after
evaluation of the inventory.
This article is authorized under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 597, and all other applicable laws of the State of Maine.
(a)
Organization and history. This article is divided into divisions for
general application and for specific environmental concerns.
Division 1 encompasses the purposes and policies of this article,
statement of authority, and general definitions.
Division 2 establishes the organization and powers of the
Environmental Board and the Environmental Code Officer, and sets
forth the system for permit administration, investigation, enforcement
and penalties.
Division 3 sets forth general content requirements for applications,
procedures for hearings on applications, fees and appeal procedures.
Division 4 regulates toxic air pollutant emissions.
(b)
27.Editor's Note: This Article Was Suspended In Its Entirety As Of 7-1-2016 By Ord. No.
2016.41, Adopted 6-7-2016.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, adopted 11-7-2001 by Ord. No.
2001.102.
Sec. 34-101 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-101
CHCT:343
Sec. 34-102. Short title. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 1-101, 11-6-2002]
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Biddeford Air
Toxics Emissions Control Code."
Sec. 34-103. Findings, purposes and intent. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 1-102, 11-6-2002]
Division 5 regulates recordkeeping, reporting and monitoring of
permitted toxic air pollution sources.
The City of Biddeford may revise this article in accordance with
applicable state and local law to accommodate changes in state and
federal law. Persons referring to this article should obtain from the City
Clerk any amending ordinances subsequent to this article in order to
review a current and complete version of this article.
In enacting this article, the City finds that:
Chemical substances and mixtures are used each year by the
manufacturing, production, service, educational, research, and
health sectors of our economy, including within the City;
(1)
Among the many chemical substances and mixtures which are
being developed, produced and used, there are many whose
manufacture, processing, use and disposal may present an
unreasonable risk of injury to health or to the environment;
(2)
(a)
It is the intent of the City that the Biddeford Environmental Code
Officer and the Biddeford Environmental Board shall carry out the
purposes and policies of this article in a reasonable and prudent
manner.
(b)
(c) The purposes and policies of this article are:
Sec. 34-101 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-103
CHCT:344
The City of Biddeford has enacted this article in order to reduce
the risks associated with exposure to toxic air pollutants and thereby
promote and protect the public health by inventorying, controlling,
abating and limiting the emissions of air toxics into the ambient air.
This article is enacted pursuant to the Home Rule powers bestowed
upon the City of Biddeford by the Constitution and laws of the State
of Maine. This article is intended to provide a comprehensive scheme
of air toxics regulation at the local level in furtherance of the policies
reflected in federal and state environmental laws and regulations for
the protection of the human public health and environment. It is
enacted to identify, prevent, reduce and eliminate threats to the public
health and environment posed by the discharge of toxic air pollutants.
This article seeks to be consistent with federal, state and local
environmental laws and regulations, while imposing stricter standards
where permitted by applicable law. Therefore, to the extent feasible,
procedures under this article will encourage cooperation and sharing
of information with other permitting agencies of government and
devising forms and filing requirements which correspond to or can be
satisfied by those employed by other governmental agencies. Where
it aids the timely execution of these duties, the Board may consent to
hold hearings jointly with other agencies of government considering
similar permits or approvals.
In addition to the foregoing, the purposes and policies of this article
are:
To help ensure the protection of human health and the environment
in the City of Biddeford by reducing the potential for exposure to
air toxics in local commercial, industrial and residential areas;
(1)
To help conserve and protect the City of Biddeford's natural
resources;
(2)
To control and monitor through a permitting system the amount
of air toxics which can be discharged or emitted into the City of
Biddeford's environment;
(3)
To foster local control of the environment through the exercise of
the City of Biddeford's home rule authority;
By bestowing certain powers and duties upon the City of
Biddeford's Environmental Board and the City of Biddeford's
Environmental Code Officer;
a.
By establishing uniform procedures and guidelines for the
protection of public health, welfare and safety and the
environment, including during emergency conditions which
create or are likely to create a substantial and immediate
danger;
b.
(4)
Sec. 34-103 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-103
CHCT:345
Sec. 34-104. Authority. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 1-103, 11-6-2002]
This article is enacted pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Maine,
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, 38 M.R.S.A. § 597, and all other applicable laws of the
State of Maine and the United States.
Sec. 34-105. Territorial application. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 1-104,
11-6-2002]
This article applies to all persons conducting activities in the City of
Biddeford, which are regulated by this article.
Sec. 34-106. Severability. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 1-105, 11-6-2002]
If any provision or section of this article, or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance, is held void or invalid, such invalidity shall
not effect other provisions or applications of this article that can be given
By providing procedures to inventory, abate, reducing and
control the air toxics emissions within the City of Biddeford's
environment; and
c.
By providing a system for the imposition of penalties, stop
orders and injunctions for violations of this article in order
to foster compliance with this article and the terms and
conditions of any permits, orders or approvals issued pursuant
to this article;
d.
To implement federal and state policies that encourage
municipalities to regulate the environment;
(5)
To provide for the careful planning, analysis, and management of
air toxics emissions within the City of Biddeford to prevent damage
to human health and the environment;
(6)
To maintain and improve the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the City of Biddeford's air;
(7)
To encourage pollution prevention through appropriate voluntary,
cooperative and collaborative activities involving representatives
of the City and others including individuals and companies residing
or doing business in the City of Biddeford; provided, however,
nothing said or done by any one or more members of the
Environmental Board or the Environmental Code Officer or any
other representative of the City of Biddeford in any such
collaborative or cooperative program shall be legally sufficient to
work any estoppels or otherwise to commit or bind the Board or
the City on any issue relating to any provision of this article or any
permit or order issued hereunder.
(8)
This article shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes and
policies.
(d)
Sec. 34-103 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-106
CHCT:346
effect in whole or in part without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end each provision of this article is declared to be severable and
independent. It is the intent of the City of Biddeford that each and every
part, clause, paragraph, section and subsection of this article be given effect
to the degree possible.
Sec. 34-107. Effective date and applicable dates. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 1-106, 11-6-2002]
This article shall be effective on March 1, 2002. It shall apply to all
existing and new sources of air toxics pollution, the construction or
operation of which begins after the effective date.
(a)
The Board shall approve and furnish forms as required by this article
for each permit or approval. Within six months of the Board's approval
of the form of application for any permit or approval required under this
article, every person subject to this article shall file with the Board an
application for each such permit or approval required.
(b)
Any existing source, activity or discharge of a regulated pollutant
within the City of Biddeford at the time of enactment of this article
is deemed an "existing source." Any person owning or operating an
existing source shall make application for all permits or approvals
governing activities subject to this article within six months after the
Board approves the forms for applications under any provision of this
article. During this period for application an existing source may
continue to operate under permits, licenses and approvals issued
pursuant to state and federal law.
Existing sources may not continue to operate without the required
permit(s) or approval(s) under this article beyond a point six months
after the Board approves the forms for applications under any
provision of this article; provided, however, that the owner or operator
of an existing source who has made timely application for all necessary
permits or approvals under this article and pays the application fees
when due in accordance with Section 3-114 shall be allowed to operate
under its existing state and federal permits, licenses, and approvals
until such time as the Board has denied a particular required permit
or approval. An existing source may continue to operate pending a
decision of the Board upon a timely filed petition for reconsideration
or timely filed judicial appeal of a denial of an application for a permit.
Nothing in this provision is intended to supersede the authority of any
state or federal agency of government to protect the public health,
safety, welfare and environment against public nuisances or imminent
threats.
(c)
Prior to the termination of an existing permit or approval under this
article, an applicant subject to this article shall reapply for a renewed
permit or approval. If such application is deemed to be complete for
processing prior to the expiration of the permit, the applicant shall be
entitled to continue operation under the current permit or approval
(d)
Sec. 34-106 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-107
CHCT:347
Sec. 34-108. Savings clause. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 1-107,
11-6-2002]
Nothing in this article may be construed to affect any substantive right
or obligation gained by any person solely under the provisions of any law
repealed or amended by this article. All substantive rights and obligations
created under the provisions of any law repealed or amended by this article
continue in effect.
All officers, officials or other persons elected, appointed, hired or otherwise
selected to act in any capacity under provisions repealed or amended by this
article shall continue in that capacity under the provisions of this article.
Sec. 34-109. Other rights. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 1-108, 11-6-2002]
Nothing in this article is intended, nor shall be construed, to limit, impair,
abridge, create, enlarge or otherwise affect, substantively or procedurally,
the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injury to
persons or property due to any violation of this article or to activity subject
to this article and to maintain any action or other appropriate procedure
therefor; nor to so affect the powers of the City to initiate, prosecute and
maintain actions to abate public nuisances.
Nothing in this article is intended, nor shall be construed, to limit, impair or
abridge, substantively or procedurally, the powers of the City of Biddeford
under state or common law to protect the general health, safety and welfare
by initiating, prosecuting and maintaining actions concerning activities not
in violation of this article.
Sec. 34-110. General definitions. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 1-201,
11-6-2002; Ord. No. 2005.37, 5-17-2005]
Subject to additional definitions contained in the subsequent divisions of
this article which are applicable to specific parts or parts thereof, and
unless the context otherwise requires, in this article the following terms
have the following meanings:
ACGIH or ACGIH 2001 EDITION — The publication entitled "The Threshold
Value Limits (TLVs) and Biological Exposure Indices (BIEs)" published in
2001 by the American Conference of Governmental and Industrial
Hygienists.
ACTUAL EMISSIONS — The actual rate of emissions of a pollutant from
a device or process. In general, actual emissions as of a particular date
shall equal the average rate, in pounds, at which the unit actually emitted
the pollutant. Actual emissions shall be calculated using the unit's actual
operating hours, production rates, applicable control efficiency for pollution
control equipment in actual operation, and types of materials processed,
stored, or combusted during the selected time period.
until the Board renders a decision on the application for permit
renewal.
Sec. 34-107 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-110
CHCT:348
AIR CONTAMINANT — Soot, cinders, ashes, any dust, fume, gas, mist
(other than water), odor, toxic or radioactive material, particulate matter, or
any combination thereof.
AMBIENT AIR — The unconfined atmosphere that envelops the earth.
AMBIENT AIR LIMIT — The standard that establishes the maximum
allowable concentration of emissions of a specific regulated toxic air
pollutant at or beyond the compliance boundary.
APPLICANT — Any person applying for a permit, certification, approval, or
similar form of permission, or a modification, repeal or renewal thereof,
from the Biddeford Environmental Board.
AREA SOURCE — A two-dimensional horizontal source from which air
emissions are being released at a relatively uniform rate from every part of
its surface.
BEGIN ACTUAL CONSTRUCTION — In general, initiation of physical onsite
construction activities on an emissions unit which are of a permanent
nature. Such activities include, but are not limited to, installation of building
supports and foundations, laying of underground pipework, and
construction of permanent storage structures. With respect to a change in
method of operation, this term refers to those on-site activities, other than
preparatory activities, which mark the initiation of the change.
BIDDEFORD AIR TOXICS EMISSIONS PERMIT — The permit which may be
issued by the Biddeford Environmental Board pursuant to this article.
BIOMEDICAL WASTE — A waste that may contain human pathogens of
sufficient virulence and in sufficient concentrations that exposure to it by a
susceptible host could result in disease. Such wastes shall include, but not
be limited to, those wastes defined in 06 096 CMR 900(7)(A).
BOARD — The City of Biddeford Environmental Board.
BTU — British thermal units.
CITY COUNCIL — The City officers elected to the City of Biddeford Council
by the residents of the City.
COMPLIANCE BOUNDARY — The boundary of the property on which the
stationary source is located or an alternate compliance boundary, located
beyond the said boundary of the property established in a permit issued in
accordance with this article.
DAY — Calendar day.
DEVICE — Any burner, furnace, machine, equipment, or article which emits
a regulated toxic air pollutant into the ambient air.
EMISSION — A release of an air contaminate into the ambient air.
ENVIRONMENTAL CODE OFFICER (ECO) — The City of Biddeford
Environmental Code Officer.
EXCESS EMISSIONS — An air emission rate of a regulated air toxic
pollutant which exceeds any applicable emission or ambient air limitation.
Sec. 34-110 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-110
CHCT:349
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of regulated air toxics emissions within
the City of Biddeford which began actual construction, operation or
discharge prior to the time of enactment of relevant portions of this article.
FACILITY — Any stationary source which emits or has the potential to emit
regulated air toxics.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A waste substance or material, in any physical
state, designated as hazardous under 06 096 CMR 850(3)(A)(3). It does not
include waste resulting from normal household or agricultural activities.
The fact that a hazardous waste or a part or a constituent may have value
or other use or may be sold or exchanged does not exclude it from this
definition.
INTERESTED PERSON — Any person having a property right or interest in
a facility or who may be aggrieved by the granting, modification, repeal or
denial of any permit, approval or order by any proceeding under this article.
ISSUING AUTHORITY — The Board.
MINOR MODIFICATION — A permit amendment for (a) the correction of
typographical errors, (b) the identification of an administrative change, (c)
a change in monitoring and reporting requirements, (d) the emission of a
regulated toxic air pollutant not identified on a permit issued under this
article in an amount above the established de minimus levels which will
not exceed the ambient air limits for the regulated pollutant established
in Table I,29 (e) any other changes approved by the ECO which meet the
criteria of a minor modification.
MODIFICATION — Any physical or operational change in a stationary
source or device which increases the amount of a specific regulated toxic air
pollutant emitted by such source or device, or which results in the emission
of any additional regulated toxic air pollutant in excess of the ambient air
limits for the regulated pollutant established in Table I30 and which is not a
minor modification.
MDEP — The Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
NEW SOURCES OF POLLUTION — Any source of a regulated pollutant or
contaminant which begins construction, operation or discharge after the
effective date of relevant portions of this article.
ORDINANCE — The several divisions comprising this article, as may be
amended from time to time.
PERMIT — Any permit, certificate, approval, registration, schedule of
compliance or similar form of permission required or authorized by this
article.
PERMIT DEVIATION — Any occurrence that results in an excursion from
any emission limitation, ambient air limit, operating condition or work
29.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
30.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 34-110 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-110
CHCT:350
practice standard as specified in a permit or compliance schedule issued
under this article.
PERMIT HOLDER — A person who has received a permit pursuant to any
division of this article.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association, federal,
state or local governmental entity, or a combination thereof, and the agents
of same.
PERSON AGGRIEVED — Any person who because of an act or failure
to act by the issuing authority, may suffer an injury, in fact, which is
different either in kind or magnitude from that suffered by the general
public and which is within the scope of the interests identified in this article.
Such person must specify in writing sufficient facts to allow the Board to
determine whether or not the person is aggrieved.
POLLUTION CONTROL EQUIPMENT — Any device that treats, removes,
restricts, or otherwise controls the release or discharge of regulated toxic
air pollutants that is not vital to normal production or operations.
PROCESS — Any operation which combines devices, equipment, raw
materials, utilities, and manpower for the production of goods, services,
energy, pollution control, or other purposes which emits a regulated toxic
air pollutant into the ambient air.
REFERENCE CONCENTRATION LIMIT — An estimate established by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency of a daily exposure to the
human population, including sensitive subgroups, that is likely to be without
an appreciable risk of deleterious non cancer effects during a lifetime.
REFUSE DERIVED FUEL — Municipal solid waste which has been
processed prior to combustion to increase the heat input value of the waste.
REGULATED TOXIC AIR POLLUTANT — Any substance or compound
emitted into the ambient air by a stationary source or process in an amount
exceeding the facility threshold amounts established for the substances
and compounds listed in Appendix B to Chapter 115 of the Maine DEP Air
Emission Rules (06 096 Code of Maine Rules Chap. 115, as amended) and
designated a regulated toxic air pollutant under the applicable provisions of
this article. Regulated toxic air pollutants are:
STATIONARY SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility, device, or
installation that emits or may emit a regulated toxic air pollutant or air
contaminant into the ambient air.
Those hazardous air pollutant chemical substances for which a facility
threshold limit has been established by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to 06 096 CMR 115 (Appendix B),
as amended and which appear on Table I attached to this article; and
(1)
Those substances and compounds which are designated as regulated
toxic air pollutants by being added to Table I in accordance with the
applicable provisions of this article.
(2)
Sec. 34-110 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-110
CHCT:351
THRESHOLD FACILITY LIMIT — The total facility limit in pounds per year
as set forth in Table C of Appendix B attached to Chapter 115 of the Maine
DEP Air Emission Rules, as amended (06 096 CMR 115).
ULTIMATE FUEL ANALYSIS — An analysis for hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen,
oxygen and chlorine, as approved by the ECO.
UNCONTROLLED EMISSION — Any emission of a regulated toxic air
pollutant into the ambient air from a device or process at a stationary
source without consideration of treatment or removal by pollution control
equipment prior to being emitted, or license conditions specifically limiting
an applicable RTAP in an enforceable permit or document.
Sec. 34-111. through Sec. 34-130. (Reserved)
Sec. 34-110 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-111
CHCT:352
DIVISION 2
CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Subdivision
I.
Environmental
Board
Sec. 34-131. Short title. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-101, 11-6-2002]
This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Biddeford Air
Toxics Permit Administration and Enforcement Code."
Sec. 34-132. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-102,
11-6-2002]
The Biddeford Environmental Board is hereby established pursuant to
Article VIII, Part Second of the Maine Constitution and the laws of the State
of Maine, including, but not limited to, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
Sec. 34-133. Composition. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-103, 11-6-2002;
Ord. No. 2004.36, 6-1-2004; Ord. No. 2008.10, 3-4-2008; amended
5-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.33; 7-5-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.42]
Sec. 34-134. Appointment. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-104, 11-6-2002]
The members and alternate members of the Board shall be nominated by
the Mayor no later than 60 days after the effective date of this article and
shall serve upon approval of the City Council.
Sec. 34-135. Terms of office. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-105,
11-6-2002]
Members of the Board shall be appointed for staggered five-year terms.
Voting members shall be appointed initially for one, two, three, four and
The Board shall consist of seven voting members who shall serve until
their term ends or until their resignation, two City Councilors, who
shall be voting members, and such number of alternate members, as
the Mayor and City Council deem necessary. Members and alternate
members of the Board shall be residents of the City of Biddeford at all
times during their terms.
(a)
When a member is unable to act because of interest, physical
incapacity, absence or any other reason satisfactory to the majority of
the Board; the chairman may designate an alternate member to sit as a
voting member.
(b)
In the event a quorum is not present, alternate members may be
appointed by the Chairman as voting members for the duration of the
meeting.
(c)
Sec. 34-131 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-135
CHCT:353
five years, with two members initially being appointed for one year. City
Council liaisons shall serve for five years or until replaced by the City
Council. Alternate members shall be appointed for a term of five years. This
structure is intended to establish continuation of "institutional knowledge"
by the Board as a whole. Members of the Board, prior to the end of their
terms, may be reappointed by the City Council.
Sec. 34-136. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-106, 11-6-2002]
The City Council may declare a vacancy on the Board upon the
nonacceptance, resignation, death, removal, permanent disability or
relocation of a member's place of residence outside of Biddeford. In such
circumstances, the Mayor, upon approval of the City Council, shall fill
all positions; pending any such action, the Chairman may designate an
alternate member to act to fill a vacancy.
Sec. 34-137. Removal. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-107, 11-6-2002; Ord.
No. 2008.10, 3-4-2008]
Sec. 34-138. Officers. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-108, 11-6-2002]
Members of the Board may be removed from office by the City Council
for the following reasons:
(1) A member is no longer a resident of the City of Biddeford; or
A voting member or alternate is absent from three consecutive
regular Board meetings without prior satisfactory explanation; or
(2)
A voting member or alternate is absent from six workshops of the
Board without prior satisfactory explanation; or
(3)
A member knowingly fails to excuse him or herself on a matter in
which the member has a conflict of interest.
(4)
(a)
Removal action shall be initiated by the Board. The Chair shall submit
in writing a letter to the City Council stating the reasons for the
removal request.
(b)
The Board member in question shall be provided a copy of the Chair's
letter and shall be given the opportunity to reply to the City Council.
(c)
Election of officers. The Board shall, by majority vote, elect a Chair and
Vice Chair and shall fill any vacancies in said offices as soon as practical
after they occur. The Chair and Vice Chair shall each serve a term of
one year or until his or her successor is duly elected by the Board. The
Chair and Vice Chair may serve successive terms, if so elected.
(a)
(b) Chair. The Chair shall preside at all meetings.
Vice Chair. In the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall act as
Chairperson and shall have all the powers of Chair.
(c)
Sec. 34-135 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-139
CHCT:354
Sec. 34-139. Meetings, quorum, agenda, materials, conflict of
interest. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-109, 11-6-2002]
Meetings. Regular meetings of the Board shall be held at least monthly,
or as provided by rule of the Board unless excused by the Chair.
Special meetings may be called by the Chair, the Chair designated for
a particular matter, or any four members of the Board.
The Board may hold executive sessions as provided in the Maine
Freedom of Access Act, 1 M.R.S.A. 401 et seq. (Freedom of Access
Law); otherwise all meetings, hearings, proceedings and deliberations
of the Board shall be open to the public in accordance with the
Freedom of Access Law.
Workshops may be called by the Chair or by a member designated
by the Chair for the presentation of information. Workshops shall be
informational only, shall not be used by the Board for the weighing of
positions or reasons for or against a proposition, and shall not be used
by the Board for the formulation of formal decisions on any matter.
(a)
Quorum. No business shall be transacted by the Board without a
quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members authorized to vote.
The Board shall act by majority vote, calculated on the basis of the
number of members present and voting. If less than a quorum is
present, the meeting may be adjourned for a period not exceeding three
weeks at any one time.
(b)
Agenda. No item of business or plan shall be placed on the Board
agenda for any meeting unless such item or plan shall have been
submitted to the Board not less than seven days prior to the date of a
meeting or other proceeding; provided, however, that the Board may
upon request by an interested person or on its own motion, waive the
seven day advance submission requirement.
(c)
Materials. Submittals associated with an item of business or plan
placed on the Board agenda shall be provided to the Board not later
than five days prior to Board consideration of that submittal provided,
however, that the Board may, upon request or on its own motion, waive
the five-day advance submission requirement.
(d)
Conflict of interest. Any member of the Board shall voluntarily
disqualify himself or herself from voting on a particular matter in which
the member has a private interest distinct from the public interest. In
addition, a member shall be disqualified from voting on a particular
matter for cause by a majority vote of the members present and voting,
except the member whose disqualification is at issue shall not vote on
his or her own disqualification.
(e)
Public notice. At least seven days prior to the date of a regular meeting
and at least three days prior to the date of a special meeting, the Board
shall publish in one issue in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City a notice of the time and place of the meeting.
(f)
Sec. 34-139 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-140
CHCT:355
Sec. 34-140. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-110,
11-6-2002]
The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
To hear and review applications for a Biddeford Air Toxics Emissions
Permit and to grant, grant with conditions, modify, repeal or deny a
Biddeford Air Toxics Emissions Permit;
(1)
To hear and review petitions for an addition, deletion, or modification
of the list of regulated air pollutants, or for the modification of a
parameter for any substance or compound named on the list entitled
Table I31 to this article.
(2)
To issue such orders as necessary to properly administer and to ensure
compliance with the article;
(3)
To administer enforcement proceedings including, but not limited to
conducting enforcement hearings, to assure compliance with this
article;
(4)
To exercise such powers as are provided to the Board by this article
consistent with the Constitution and laws of the State of Maine;
(5)
To perform such duties as delegated and requested by the City Council;
and to perform such duties as requested by other public agencies, as
the Board determines is proper and appropriate;
(6)
To obtain such goods and services, and employ or contract with such
staff, including but not limited to attorneys, engineers and other
professionals as may be necessary to carry out its duties hereunder and
to pay for such expenses within the limits of appropriations made for
the purpose, upon the approval of the City Council as may be necessary;
(7)
To hold hearings jointly with other agencies of the government in
connection with activities which are subject to the provisions of this
article;
(8)
To issue such orders as necessary to properly administer and to ensure
compliance with the article; and
(9)
To issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses or for the
production of documents as follows:
General. At the request of the Board, or any member thereof, or
at the request of the Environmental Code Officer, or an applicant
or respondent in any proceeding under Division 3, the presiding
officer may issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and/or
for the production of documents.
a.
(10)
31.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 34-140 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-140
CHCT:356
Sec. 34-141. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-111, 11-6-2002]
An appeal from any final decision or action of the Board may be taken by
any aggrieved party in accordance with Section 34-213.
Sec. 34-142. through Sec. 34-150. (Reserved)
Subdivision
II.
Environmental
Code
Officer
Form. Every subpoena so issued shall bear the name of the Board,
the name of the issuing officer and shall command the person to
whom it is directed to attend and give testimony and/or produce
specified documents or things at a designated time and place. The
subpoena shall also advise of the quashing procedure provided
herein.
b.
Service. Unless receipt of the subpoena is acknowledged by the
witness, it shall be served by a person who is not a party to the
proceeding and is not less than 18 years of age. Service shall be
made by delivering a copy of the subpoena to the person named
in it and tendering the fees and mileage paid to witnesses in the
superior courts of this state.
c.
Return. The person serving the subpoena shall make proof of
service by filing the subpoena and affidavit or acknowledgment of
service with the Board. Failure to make such proof of service shall
not affect the validity of such subpoena and service.
d.
Quashing. On motion made promptly, and in any event before
the time specified in the subpoena for compliance by the person
to whom the subpoena is directed, and on notice to the party
at whose instance the subpoena was issued, the Board may (a)
quash or modify the subpoena on a finding that it is unreasonable
or required evidence not relevant to any matter in issue, or (b)
condition denial of the motion on just and reasonable terms. Any
person requesting a hearing on a motion to quash a subpoena shall
be granted a hearing before the Board upon such motion.
e.
Denial of subpoena. The Board may condition the granting of the
subpoena upon the advancement by the person in whose behalf the
subpoena is issued of the reasonable cost of producing the books,
papers, documents or tangible items.
f.
Sec. 34-140 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-151
CHCT:357
Sec. 34-151. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-201,
11-6-2002]
The City of Biddeford hereby establishes the office of Environmental Code
Officer "ECO."
Sec. 34-152. Appointments; terms. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-202,
11-6-2002]
The ECO shall be selected by the Mayor and City Council in accordance
with the City Charter. In addition, the City Council may appoint assistants
as necessary to the ECO.
The ECO and an assistant, if any, shall be residents of the State of Maine, at
least 18 years of age and citizens of the United States at all times during his
or her term. The ECO shall be appropriately qualified by reason of education
and experience. The City Council may remove an ECO or his assistant for
cause, after notice and hearing utilizing the same procedures specified in
Section 34-137 herein for the removal of a Board member. The term "cause"
shall mean conduct or conflict affecting the ability and fitness of the ECO or
his assistant, to perform his or her duties. If an ECO or his assistant, if any,
is unable to act because of interest, physical incapacity, absence or other
reason satisfactory to the City Council, the City Council shall designate
another person to fill the vacancy.
Sec. 34-153. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-203,
11-6-2002]
Powers generally.
The ECO shall be empowered to execute the duties of his or her
office in a manner necessary and proper to implement the
provisions of this article.
(1)
The ECO shall investigate potential violations of the article,
including, but not limited to potential violations referred by the
Board or Code Enforcement Officers, report to the Board when
appropriate and commence and maintain enforcement
proceedings.
(2)
The ECO shall have the power to enter any property at reasonable
hours and to enter any building with the consent of the property
owner, occupant or agent, to inspect the property or structure for
compliance with this article.
(3)
The ECO shall have the power to represent the City of Biddeford in
District Court in the prosecution of alleged violations of this article.
(4)
The ECO, upon approval of the Board, and of the City Council
as may be necessary, shall have the power to obtain such goods
and services and to contract with attorneys, engineers and other
(5)
(a)
Sec. 34-151 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-153
CHCT:358
professionals as may be necessary to carry out his or her duties
hereunder within the limits of appropriations made for the purpose.
Duties.
In addition to any other duties specified within this article, the ECO
will generally be responsible for all day-to-day operations of this
article, including but not limited to the following:
Communications and meetings with City Manager and the
Board.
a.
b. Compliance inspections of affected industries.
Continued compliance assurance monitoring of affected
industries.
c.
d. Issue compliance orders as provided in this article.
Respond and investigate air pollution complaints by local
citizens.
e.
Coordinate air pollution control activities with the Maine DEP
and USEPA as warranted.
f.
Represent the City in the prosecution of alleged article
violations.
g.
h. Assist the Board in the implementation of the article.
(1)
In addition to the duties specified in Subsection (b)(1), above,
and any other duties specified in this article, the ECO will be
specifically responsible for the following areas related to the
article:
Assist the Board in formulating standard complaint, permit
application, investigation and other forms.
a.
Review all permit applications, related data, modeling,
calculations, engineering data, process data, assumptions and
test data.
b.
Review all permit applications to ensure they comply with all
article requirements.
c.
Draft permit conditions which will ensure compliance with the
article.
d.
Develop, in consultation the Board, an inventory of annual
emissions of regulated air toxic pollutants from all significant
sources within the City and, no later than two years from the
effective date of this article, submit recommendations to the
Board identifying additional sources of regulated pollutants to
e.
(2)
(b)
Sec. 34-153 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-153
CHCT:359
Sec. 34-154. Compliance. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-204, 11-6-2002]
The ECO shall be responsible for overseeing compliance with the provisions
of the article and the terms of any permits issued pursuant to the article as
set forth in Division 3.
Sec. 34-155. Investigation. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-205, 11-6-2002]
The ECO may investigate alleged violations of this article as set forth in
Division 2.
Sec. 34-156. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-206, 11-6-2002]
The ECO shall be responsible for, undertake and oversee enforcement
proceedings, including enforcement hearings as set forth in Division 2.
Sec. 34-157. through Sec. 34-170. (Reserved)
Subdivision
III.
Permit
Investigation
and
Enforcement
Sec. 34-171. General. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-301, 11-6-2002]
be regulated under the article, together with a report of their
estimated annual emissions.
Develop an hourly and annual RTAP emission inventory for all
affected facilities.
f.
Review the RTAP table annually, and, as new and revised data
is published through OSHA, the ACGIH, and IRIS, submit to
the Board no less frequently than once per year proposed
additions, deletions and modifications to RTAPs in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
g.
The ECO shall attend all regular and special meetings of the Biddeford
Environmental Board and enforce this article.
(c)
General. The Environmental Code Officer shall generally oversee the
administration of, and compliance with, all permits issued by the Board.
(a)
Compliance facilitation. Whenever it appears to the ECO that there is
or may be any irregularity in the administration of, or compliance with,
any permit issued by the Board, the ECO may contact the permittee
and may attempt to secure satisfactory permit administration and
compliance. The ECO is authorized, but not required, to meet at
reasonable times and places with representatives of the permittee to
discuss issues or problems relating to administration of, or compliance
(b)
Sec. 34-153 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-171
CHCT:360
Sec. 34-172. Investigations. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-302,
11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-173. Emergencies. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-303, 11-6-2002]
Whenever the Board, determines that there is or may be an ongoing
violation of any provision of this article or of the terms or conditions of
any permit, approval or order of the Board which is creating or is likely
to create a substantial and immediate danger to public health, welfare or
safety or significant environmental harm, the Board may in accordance
with this section order the person or persons causing or contributing to
such hazard to take such immediate actions as are necessary to reduce
or alleviate the danger. Service of a copy of the order issued under this
emergency procedure shall be made by sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable,
or Biddeford Police Officer to the person to whom the order is directed.
Before issuing such order, the Board or ECO may consult and coordinate
with appropriate state and federal agencies in responding to the emergency.
Each person to whom such order is directed shall comply with it
immediately. Any such person may apply to the Board for a hearing on such
order within two business days of receipt of the order, or, after providing
written notice to the City, seek judicial review pursuant to Section 34-182
of this article. The filing of an appeal of an emergency order of the Board
does not stay the Board's order. If requested, a hearing shall be held by
the Board within two business days of service of the request for hearing.
Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 34-179 of this
with, any permit. Notwithstanding any effort undertaken by the ECO
pursuant to this section, responsibility for compliance with the
permittee's obligations under any permit remains with the permittee.
The ECO may at any time, consistent with the applicable provisions
of this article, conduct an investigation of a possible violation of this
article or of any permit, approval, or order of the Board. On receipt of
a written complaint signed by a person residing or conducting business
in Biddeford, and alleging with reasonably sufficient information one
or more violations of this article or a violation of any permit, approval
or order of the Board, the allegations of the complaint shall be
investigated by the ECO.
(a)
In all cases not within the provisions of Section 34-173 (Emergencies),
the investigation shall be conducted in a reasonably expeditious
manner.
(b)
After an investigation under this section has been completed, the ECO
shall report to the Board. The ECO may commence an enforcement
proceeding in accordance with the provisions of this division. If the
ECO determines that commencement of an enforcement proceeding is
inappropriate or inadvisable, the ECO shall so report to the Board and
the report of investigation conducted by the ECO shall be placed on file
and the matter shall be considered closed without prejudice.
(c)
Sec. 34-171 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-173
CHCT:361
article to the extent possible under the circumstances, but to the extent
that the circumstances require expedited action the presiding officer may
apply such procedural rules as required by the circumstances and shall
clearly state such procedures at the start of the proceeding. Within three
days after such hearing, the Board shall make findings of fact and continue,
revoke or modify the order. The findings of fact and order shall be served
as specified above in this subsection. The decision of the Board shall be
considered final Board action which may be appealed in accordance with
Section 34-182. This subsection is additional to and independent of any and
all other remedies that might otherwise be available at law or in equity.
Sec. 34-174. Commencement of enforcement proceedings. [Ord.
No. 2002.112, § 2-304, 11-6-2002]
Commencement of proceedings. Whenever it appears to the ECO, after
investigation, that there is or has been a violation of this article or
of the terms or conditions of a license, permit or order issued by the
Board under this article, the ECO shall commence an enforcement
proceeding by filing and serving a complaint upon the alleged violator
(herein called "respondent"); provided, however, that prior to serving
such complaint pursuant to this paragraph, the ECO shall issue a notice
of violation of the person or persons the ECO considers likely to be
responsible for the alleged violation or violations.
(a)
The notice of violation issued pursuant to paragraph (a), above, must
describe the alleged violation or violations, to the extent then known
by the ECO; cite the applicable law, term or condition of the license,
permit or order alleged to have been violated; and provide the alleged
violator a time period not to exceed 30 days in which to take necessary
corrective action. For violations the ECO finds to be minor, the notice
may state that further enforcement action will not be pursued if
compliance is achieved within the time period specified in the notice
or under other appropriate circumstances. A notice of violation is not
required before issuing an emergency order pursuant to Section 34-173
of this article.
(b)
Complaint: form and content. Each complaint for the assessment of
a penalty and/or for the suspension, revocation or modification of a
permit shall include:
A statement reciting the section(s) of the article authorizing the
issuance of the complaint;
(1)
A specific reference to each provision of the article or any
applicable permit which respondent is alleged to have violated or
to other legal grounds for the complaint;
(2)
(3) A concise statement of the factual basis for the alleged violation;
(c)
Sec. 34-173 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-174
CHCT:362
Sec. 34-175. Response to complaint. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-305,
11-6-2002]
The respondent shall file and serve upon the ECO a written response to the
complaint within 20 days following service of the complaint:
Sec. 34-176. Default order. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-306, 11-6-2002]
Either a demand for specific penalties or forms of relief authorized
by this article or a statement that the complaint seeks whatever
outcome may be appropriate under the circumstances; and
(4)
Notice of respondent's rights to (a) admit to the violation, consent
to the penalty or other action specified in the complaint; or (b)
admit to the violation, but request a hearing before the Board to
contest the penalty or other action sought in the complaint; or (c)
deny the alleged violation.
(5)
Copy of ordinance. A written statement of the enforcement provisions
contained in this article shall be served with the complaint.
(d)
Service. A complaint under this section shall be served upon the
respondent by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by sheriff,
deputy sheriff, constable or Biddeford Police Officer. If service is by
certified mail, the return receipt, properly endorsed and postmarked
shall be prima facie evidence of the completion and date of such
service. If service is made in hand the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure
shall apply to the making of such service and proof thereof.
(e)
If respondent admits to all of the allegations contained in the complaint
and consents to the penalty or other action requested in the complaint,
the response shall unequivocally and unambiguously so state;
(1)
If respondent admits to the violation as alleged in the complaint, but
contests either the amount of the penalty or the terms of any other
action sought in the complaint or both, the response shall expressly
admit the allegations and specifically state all of the factual and legal
circumstances which respondent contends support a different
disposition; and
(2)
In all other instances, the response shall specifically and clearly admit
or deny each of the factual allegations in the complaint or state clearly
that respondent lacks knowledge or information sufficient to form a
belief as to the truth of any allegation, which allegation shall be deemed
to have been denied. Each and every allegation not specifically
addressed in the response shall be deemed to have been admitted.
The response shall also state all factual or legal matters upon which
respondent bases any defense or affirmative defense and identify any
additional factual or legal issues which respondent intends to place at
issue in the proceeding.
(3)
Sec. 34-174 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-176
CHCT:363
Sec. 34-177. Board decision. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-307,
11-6-2002]
After receipt of respondent's response to the complaint or after the deadline
for receipt of such response, the Board may take any of the following
actions:
Default. A respondent may be found to be in default by the Board: (1)
after motion, upon failure to file a timely response to the complaint; (2)
after motion or sua sponte, upon failure to comply with a prehearing
or hearing order of the presiding officer; or (3) after motion or sua
sponte, upon failure to appear at a conference or hearing without good
cause being shown. No finding of default on the basis of a failure to
appear at a hearing shall be made against the respondent unless the
ECO presents sufficient evidence to the Board to establish a prima
facia case against the respondent. Any motion for a default order shall
include a proposed default order and shall be served upon all parties.
The alleged defaulting party shall have 20 days from service to reply
to the motion. Default by respondent constitutes, for purposes of the
pending enforcement action only, an admission of all facts alleged in
the complaint and a waiver of respondent's right to a hearing on such
factual allegations. Default by the ECO shall result in the dismissal of
the complaint with prejudice.
(a)
Procedures upon default. Upon finding that default has occurred, the
presiding officer shall issue a default order against the defaulting party.
(b)
Contents of a default order. A default order shall include findings of
facts showing the grounds for the order, conclusions regarding all
material issues of law or discretion, the penalty to be assessed and/
or the terms and conditions of permit revocation, suspension or
modification as appropriate.
(c)
Relief from default. For good cause shown, the presiding officer, as
appropriate, may set aside a default order.
(d)
In the event that the respondent admits to the violation and agrees
to any monetary penalty and/or the terms and conditions of the
revocation, suspension or modification recommended in the complaint
by the ECO, the Board shall ratify or disapprove those sanctions.
(1)
In the event the respondent admits to the violation set forth in the
complaint, but contends that the amount of the monetary penalty and/
or the terms and conditions of the suspension, revocation or
modification recommended by the ECO are inappropriate, or in the
event the complaint does not seek specific monetary penalties or other
specific sanctions but respondent does not contest the allegations, the
Board will conduct a hearing limited to the amount of the monetary
penalty and/or the terms of the revocation, suspension or modification.
The Board will determine the amount of the monetary penalty and/or
the terms and conditions of the suspension, revocation or modification;
(2)
Sec. 34-176 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-177
CHCT:364
Sec. 34-178. Prehearing conference. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-308,
11-6-2002]
In the event the respondent denies that a violation occurred, the Board
will decide whether to dismiss the enforcement action or to proceed
with a hearing.
(3)
Purpose of prehearing conference. Unless the conference appears
unnecessary, the presiding officer, at any time before an enforcement
hearing begins, shall direct the ECO and the respondent, either
personally or through a representative, to appear at a conference
presided over by the chair or a member of the Board designated by the
chair to consider:
(1) A schedule for the filing of motions and other pleadings;
A schedule for the exchange of exhibits, documents, prepared
testimony, and admissions or stipulations of fact which will avoid
unnecessary proof;
(2)
(3) The designation of the number of expert or other witnesses;
(4) Setting a time and place for the hearing; and
Any other matters which may expedite the disposition of the
proceeding.
(5)
(a)
Exchange of witness lists and documents. Unless otherwise ordered by
the presiding officer, the ECO and respondent shall exchange:
The names of the expert and other witnesses each intends to
call, together with a brief narrative summary of their expected
testimony; and
(1)
Copies of all documents and exhibits to be offered as evidence.
Documents and exhibits shall be marked for identification as
ordered by the presiding officer. Documents that have not been
exchanged and witnesses whose names have not been exchanged
shall not be introduced into evidence or allowed to testify at the
enforcement hearing without permission of the presiding officer.
(2)
(b)
Record of the prehearing conference. No transcript of a prehearing
conference relating to settlement shall be made. With respect to other
prehearing conferences, no transcript of any prehearing conferences
shall be made unless ordered by the presiding officer upon motion of a
party or sua sponte. The presiding officer shall prepare and file for the
record a written summary of the action taken at the conference. The
summary shall incorporate any written stipulations or agreements and
all rulings and appropriate orders.
(c)
Unavailability of a prehearing conference. If a prehearing conference
is unnecessary or impracticable, the presiding officer, on motion or
(d)
Sec. 34-177 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-178
CHCT:365
Sec. 34-179. Enforcement hearings. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-309,
11-6-2002]
This section shall apply to all hearings which may result in the modification,
suspension or revocation of any permit, approval or order or the imposition
of a monetary penalty whenever such hearings are based upon the alleged
violation of any provisions of this article or the terms or conditions of any
permits, approvals or orders issued by the Board pursuant to this article.
sua sponte, may direct other arrangements to accomplish any of the
objectives set forth in this section.
Duties and responsibilities of the presiding officer.
The presiding officer at all hearings shall be either (a) the Chair
of the Board, if present and willing to preside, Vice Chair of the
Board, if present and willing to preside in the absence of the Chair,
or (b) a member of the Board selected by those members present
at the hearing.
a.
The presiding officer shall have the authority to:
1. Hold a prehearing conference for the simplification of issues;
2. Issue subpoenas requested by the parties;
3. Place witnesses under oath;
4. Take action necessary to maintain order;
Rule on motions and procedural questions arising before and
during the hearing;
5.
6. Call recesses or adjourn the hearing; and
7. Prescribe and enforce general rules of conduct and decorum.
b.
(1)
Role of Board members. The voting members of the Board, including
the presiding officer, collectively shall be responsible for reviewing
evidence and hearing testimony and argument in order to determine
the appropriate disposition of the complaint.
(2)
Role of Biddeford Code Enforcement Officer and advisory staff to the
Board. The Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Biddeford shall
advise the Board upon request with regard to documentary evidence
produced and testimonial evidence heard at the enforcement hearing.
The code enforcement officer will not act as an advocate at the hearing.
The Board may also retain legal counsel or expert witnesses as it deems
necessary.
(3)
Ex parte communications prohibited. Throughout any enforcement
proceeding:
(4)
Sec. 34-178 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-179
CHCT:366
No presiding officer, Board member or City Council liaison in a
proceeding shall communicate, directly or indirectly, in connection
with any issue relating to the merits with either the ECO or
respondent, or any other person legally interested in the outcome
of the proceedings except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate pursuant to order of the presiding officer.
a.
Nothing in this section prohibits inquiry by an ECO, respondent,
presiding officer, or Board member concerning the scheduling or
rescheduling of any event contained in the procedural schedule,
any filing or any motion, order, or other pleading.
b.
Except as otherwise provided by law, this section shall not prohibit
the Board from communicating in any respect with legal counsel
retained by the Board who has not participated and will not
participate in the enforcement proceeding in an advocate capacity.
c.
General conduct.
Opening statement. The presiding officer shall open the hearing
by describing in general terms the purpose of the hearing and the
general procedure governing its conduct.
a.
Complaint. The presiding officer shall read or otherwise have
inserted in the official record of the proceeding the complaint and
the response.
b.
Transcription of testimony. All testimony at hearings before the
Board shall be recorded.
c.
Witnesses. Witnesses shall be sworn and shall testify under oath.
Witnesses will be required to state for the record their names,
residence, and business or professional affiliation for purposes of
the hearing. Witnesses may be compelled to attend, testify and
produce records if subpoenaed by the Board.
d.
Continuance. All hearings conducted pursuant to this section may
be reasonably continued for reasonable cause and reconvened from
time to time and from place to place by the Board or presiding
officer as circumstances require. All orders for continuance shall
specify the time and place at which such hearings shall be
reconvened. The Board or presiding officer shall provide
reasonable notice of the time and place of such a reconvened
hearing to any person who so requests in writing, to the respondent
and to the public.
e.
(5)
Order of proceedings. The order of proceedings, unless modified by the
presiding officer to facilitate the hearing, shall be as follows:
a. The ECO may offer an opening statement;
b. The respondent may offer an opening statement;
(6)
Sec. 34-179 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-179
CHCT:367
The ECO may present evidence. Witnesses may be cross-examined
by respondent and questioned by Board members, staff or Board
counsel after the completion of the witness' direct testimony;
c.
The respondent may present evidence. Witnesses may be crossexamined
by the ECO and questioned by Board members, staff, or
Board counsel after the completion of the witness' direct testimony;
d.
e. The ECO may offer rebuttal evidence;
f. The ECO may offer a closing statement;
g. The respondent may offer a closing statement; and
h. The ECO may offer a rebuttal.
Varying order of appearance. When circumstances warrant, the Board
or the presiding officer may vary the order in which witnesses appear
and the order in which testimony is given or witnesses are questioned.
(7)
Record. A full and complete record shall be kept of all enforcement
hearings. The records shall include, but not be limited to, the complaint,
supporting documents, all exhibits, proposed findings of fact and
conclusions submitted by either party or by Board staff and counsel, if
any, staff documents, respondent's answer and supporting documents,
consent orders, if any, Board findings of fact and orders and the
recording or transcript of the proceedings, if prepared.
At any time prior to the Board's final decision after the close of the
enforcement hearing, the Board may reopen the record for further
proceedings consistent with this section, provided, however, that the
Board shall give written notice of such further proceedings at least
10 days prior to such proceedings. After the close of an enforcement
hearing held pursuant to Section 34-179, the Board may reopen the
record after giving notice to the parties and to the public.
(8)
Burden of proof. The ECO has the burden of proving, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the alleged violation occurred and
that proposed penalty, revocation, suspension, or modification of the
permit is appropriate. Following the establishment of a prima fascia
case, respondent shall have the burden of presenting and of going
forward with any defenses, affirmative defenses, or mitigating
circumstances.
(9)
General evidence.
Admissibility. Evidence which is relevant and material to the
subject matter of the hearing and is of a type commonly relied upon
by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall
be admissible. Evidence which is relevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious shall be excluded by the presiding officer. The Board's
experience, technical competence and specialized knowledge may
be utilized in the evaluation of all evidence submitted to the Board.
a.
(10)
Sec. 34-179 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-179
CHCT:368
Existence and duration of a violation may be established by any
credible evidence including but not limited to observations,
operating parameters, reporting operating data, environmental
indices, health indices, compliance assurance data, test results,
opinion evidence or other evidence.
Official notice. The Board may take official notice of any facts of
which judicial notice could be taken, and in addition may take
official notice of general, technical or scientific matters within
its specialized knowledge and of statutes, regulations and nonconfidential
Board records. Facts officially noticed shall be included
and indicated as such in the record.
b.
Official record. An official record or lack thereof may be evidenced
in the manner provided in Rule 44 of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, as amended from time to time.
c.
Objections. All objections to rulings of the presiding officer
regarding evidence or procedure and the grounds therefore shall
be timely stated at the time of such ruling during the course of the
hearing. If during the course, of or after the close, of the hearing
and during its deliberations the Board determines that the ruling
of the presiding officer was in error, it may reopen the hearing or
take such action as it deems appropriate to correct such error.
d.
Offer of proof. An offer of proof may be made in connection with an
objection to a ruling of the presiding officer excluding or rejecting
any testimony or question on cross-examination. Such offer of proof
shall consist of a statement of the substance of the proffered
evidence or that which is expected to be shown by the answer of
the witness.
e.
Documentary and real evidence.
All documents, materials and objects offered in evidence, shall,
if accepted, be numbered or otherwise identified. Documentary
evidence may be received in the form of copies or excerpts if
the original is not readily available. The presiding officer may
require, after prior oral or written reasonable notice, that any
person offering any documentary or photographic evidence shall
provide the Board with a specified number of copies of such
documents or photographs, unless such documents or photographs
are determined to be of such form, size or character as not to be
reasonably suitable for reproduction.
a.
All written testimony and documents, materials and objects
admitted into evidence shall be made available during the course
of the hearing for public examination. All such evidence will be
available for public examination at the City office or as otherwise
ordered, during normal business hours, except for documents,
materials and object deemed confidential pursuant to Section
34-204.
b.
(11)
Sec. 34-179 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-180
CHCT:369
Sec. 34-180. Enforcement orders. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-310,
11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-181. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-311, 11-6-2002]
Following the conclusion of an enforcement hearing, or in the event
of a default by respondent, the Board shall within 30 days thereafter
make findings of fact based on the record. The Board shall issue an
order aimed at abating or correcting the violation and ensuring that
the violation does not recur, and, in addition, may assess a penalty, or
modify or condition any permit, approval or order in whole or in part,
whenever the Board finds:
The respondent violated any term or condition of the permit,
approval or order;
(1)
The respondent obtained a permit, approval or order by false
statement, misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant
facts;
(2)
There has been a change in any condition or circumstance that
requires modification or conditioning of the terms of the permit,
approval or order; or
(3)
(4) The respondent violated any provision of this article.
(a)
The order shall state the date upon which it becomes effective and shall
advise the respondent that it may seek judicial review. The findings
and order shall be served on the respondent as provided in Section
34-174. All orders entered by the Board pursuant to this section shall
be considered final Board action as of the date of the order for purposes
of judicial review.
(b)
Any person who violates any provision of this article or terms or
conditions of any order, permit, approval or decision of the Board shall
be subject to the following civil penalties, due and payable to the City
of Biddeford:
For violations of any requirement of Divisions 4 and 5, or of any
term of condition of a permit, approval or order implementing
or assuring compliance with requirements of Divisions 4 and 5:
A penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $2,500 unless it
is demonstrated that the person has violated a requirement of
Division 4 or 5, or of any term of condition of a permit, approval
or order implementing or assuring compliance with requirements
of Divisions 4 and 5 within the past two years. If such a previous
violation has occurred, the maximum penalty may exceed $2,500,
but shall be no more than $25,000. Penalties may be assessed on
a per day basis for a continuing violation. If the economic benefit
resulting from the violation exceeds the maximum applicable
penalties, the maximum penalties may be increased. When so
increased, the maximum civil penalty may not exceed an amount
(1)
(a)
Sec. 34-180 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-181
CHCT:370
equal to twice the economic benefit resulting from the violation.
Economic benefit shall, without limitation, include the costs
avoided or enhanced value accrued at the time of the violation
as a result of the violator's noncompliance with the applicable
requirements.
In setting penalties, the Board may consider all relevant factors
including any one or more of the following:
(1) Prior violations by the same person;
The nature and scope of environmental harm that cannot be abated
or corrected;
(2)
(3) The extent to which the violation continued;
(4) Economic benefit derived by the person as a result of the violation;
Importance of setting a civil penalty substantial enough to deter
future violation;
(5)
Whether penalties have been imposed by another governmental
agency for the same incident(s);
(6)
(7) The economic impact of the penalty on the violator; and
The duration of the violation as established by any credible
evidence including but not limited to observations, operating
parameters, reporting information, records, correlations, operating
data, environmental indices, health indices, compliance assurance
data, test results, opinion evidence or other evidence.
The Board is not required to make itemized express findings on
these factors.
(8)
(b)
Payment of any penalty assessed shall be made in cash or by a certified
check drawn on a recognized financial institution, made payable to
"City of Biddeford" in an amount equal to the full amount of the penalty.
(c)
If the municipality is the prevailing party, the municipality must be
awarded reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless
the Board finds that special circumstances make the award of these
fees and costs unjust. If the respondent is the prevailing party, the
respondent may be awarded reasonable attorney fees, expert witness
fees and costs unless the Board otherwise specifically directs.
(d)
In lieu of all or a portion of any penalty assessment, the Board may elect
to request the respondent to submit for review and approval by the
Board one or more supplementary environmental projects (SEP) that
will yield environmental benefits to the regulated source and to the City
and its residents. Such SEPs shall not include actions at the permitted
facility that were otherwise required under any license, permit, order
(e)
Sec. 34-181 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-181
CHCT:371
Sec. 34-182. Judicial review. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-312,
11-6-2002]
Any person aggrieved by a final action or decision of the Board in an
enforcement or emergency proceeding pursuant to this section may seek
judicial review in accordance with state law within 30 days of the date of
issuance of the final Board action. The filing of a motion for reconsideration
on an enforcement or emergency order is not a prerequisite to judicial
review.
Sec. 34-183. Stay. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-313, 11-6-2002]
The filing of an appeal of a decision of the Board in an enforcement action
shall operate as a stay of the final Board action. The filing of an appeal of a
decision of the Board on an emergency order shall not operate as a stay of
the Board's emergency order.
Sec. 34-184. Judicial enforcement. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 2-314,
11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-185. through Sec. 34-200. (Reserved)
or consent agreement issued or approved by the City of Biddeford,
State of Maine or federal government.
General. In the event of a violation of any provision of this article or of
any order, permit, approval or final decision or action of the Board or
decree of court, as the case may be, the City of Biddeford may institute
judicial proceedings in accordance with state law for an order enjoining
those acts or practices which constitute such a violation, for an order
directing compliance with this article, or any order, permit, approval,
condition or final decision or action of the Board pursuant to this
article; for an order assessing penalties or any appropriate combination
of actions.
(a)
Substantial and immediate danger to public health, safety or
environment. If the Board finds that the violation of any provision of
this article or the failure to comply with any order, permit, approval,
condition, or final decision or action of the Board constitutes a
substantial and immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare
of any person(s), or property, or the environment of the City of
Biddeford, the City of Biddeford may initiate immediate injunction
proceedings to abate or correct such violation.
(b)
Recovery of costs. In any action that the City of Biddeford institutes
before the court to enforce any provisions of this article, the prevailing
party in such action shall be allowed to recover reasonable costs,
including attorneys fees, incurred in connection with such action.
(c)
Sec. 34-181 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-185
CHCT:372
DIVISION 3
ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS
Sec. 34-201. Application requirements. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-101,
11-6-2002]
Contents of application.
Forms. Application forms shall be designed and approved by the
Board and shall require sufficient information as the Board deems
necessary or desirable in order to process the application for a
permit in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(1)
Modification of a permit. Any request by an applicant for a
modification of a permit issued pursuant to this article shall comply
with the provisions for application for a permit as contained in
this article. The applicant shall submit all information required
to determine whether the modification will comply with the
requirements of this article. The Board may request the applicant
to reproduce additional copies of materials previously filed for the
convenience of the Board or the Board's staff in reviewing the
modification application.
(2)
Title, right or interest. The Board will consider an application
only when the applicant has evidenced sufficient title, right, or
interest in all of the property which is the subject of such permit.
An applicant shall demonstrate in writing, and by affidavit when
so requested by the Board, sufficient title, right, or interest, as
follows:
When the applicant owns the property or an easement(s) on
the property, a copy of the deed(s) or easement(s) to the
property shall be supplied;
a.
When the applicant is a lessor or lessee of the property, the
applicant shall submit a memorandum of lease describing all
but the business terms of the lease;
b.
When the applicant has an option to buy or lease the property,
the applicant shall submit a memorandum of option agreement
describing all but the business terms of the option agreement;
c.
When the applicant has eminent domain power over the
property, evidence shall be supplied as to the ability and intent
to use the eminent domain power to acquire sufficient title,
right, or interest as determined by the Board;
d.
When the applicant has either a valid preliminary permit or
a notification of acceptance for filing of an application for a
license or amendment of a license from the Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission for the site which is proposed for
e.
(3)
(a)
Sec. 34-201 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-201
CHCT:373
Sec. 34-202. Public notice of application. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-102, 11-6-2002]
The Board shall, within 10 days of the date an application for a new permit
or permit renewal has been deemed to be complete for processing by the
Board in accordance with Section 34-205(a), cause to be given public notice
of the Board's determination, inviting within 20 days written comments on
the application and requests for public hearing. Requests for public hearing
shall indicate the interest of the person filing such request and the reasons
why a hearing is warranted.
Such notice shall include the following information:
development or use, a copy of that permit or notification shall
be supplied; or
Service. All applications shall designate a person within the State
of Maine on whom all orders and notices may be served and to
whom all other correspondence regarding the application should
be sent.
(4)
Copies of federal and state permits. The applicant shall, as part of
the application process, submit to the Board copies of all federal
and state air pollution control permits, approvals and licenses,
including renewals, modifications, or extensions thereto,
regulating the source or process for which a permit is sought
under this article, for the five-year period prior to application. In
addition, upon the request of the ECO, the applicant shall provide,
for inspection and copying, all monitoring reports required by any
state or federal air pollution permits and licenses; operating and
maintenance records; accidental or excess emissions, and all other
unlicensed emissions and releases; and reports on which the
permits or licenses were based for the same five-year period.
(5)
Continuing data requirements. The applicant shall have a
continuing duty to provide copies of all renewed or modified federal
and state air pollution control permits, approvals and licenses as
well as to inform the Board promptly in writing of any modification,
suspension or revocation of any such federal and state air pollution
permits, approvals and licenses, and of any enforcement action
initiated by any federal or state official or agency alleging
noncompliance with any air pollution article, statute, rule,
regulation, permit, approval or license.
(6)
(1) Name and address of the applicant;
(2) Citation of the article under which the application is being processed;
(3) Location of the activity;
(4) Summary of the activity; and
Sec. 34-201 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-202
CHCT:374
Sec. 34-203. Public access to information. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-103, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-204. Confidentiality. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-104,
11-6-2002]
The Board shall keep confidential those documents which may remain
confidential pursuant to the Maine Freedom of Access Law 1 M.R.S.A.
Section 401 et seq. The Board shall also keep confidential information
demonstrated by the person submitting it to be a trade secret or production,
commercial or financial information the disclosure of which would impair
the competitive position of that person and would make available
information not otherwise publicly available. The Board shall make
Telephone number and mailing address of the City official to whom
written comments and hearing requests should be directed.
(5)
Except as expressly made confidential by law and by this article, the
Board shall make all documents and records available to the public in
accordance with the Maine Freedom of Access Act, 1 M.R.S.A. § 401
et seq., for inspection and copying including but not limited to the
following:
All applications or other forms and documents submitted in support
of any permit application;
(1)
All correspondence, into or out of the Board, and any attachments
thereto;
(2)
Written comments received from any source regarding any
application for a permit or any hearings or proceedings held
pursuant to Division 2 or 3 of this article;
(3)
The transcripts of hearings, if made, tape recordings of hearings,
if made, and the official, approved minutes of all Board meetings;
and
(4)
(5) All orders, permits, approvals, or other determinations.
(a)
The City of Biddeford shall provide facilities for the inspection of such
documents, records, correspondence and other information during
reasonable hours. Persons wishing to copy papers and documents shall
arrange to do so with the Board.
(b)
Copies of documents may be made at the following costs, as may
reasonably be adjusted from time to time:
Copies shall be $0.50 per page; payment shall be made to the City
of Biddeford by cash, check or money order and shall be paid prior
to the release of copies by the Board.
(1)
(c)
Except as expressly authorized by the Board, all Board files shall
remain in the City of Biddeford Office.
(d)
Sec. 34-202 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-204
CHCT:375
determinations of confidentiality and any person aggrieved by such
determination may appeal to court in accordance with state law. The Board
shall withhold disclosure of such information pending a final judicial
determination on any claim of confidentiality.
Sec. 34-205. Board decisions. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-105,
11-6-2002]
Acceptable for processing. The ECO shall notify the applicant in writing
of the official date on which the application was accepted as complete
for processing or the reasons the application was not accepted. If a
written notice of acceptance or nonacceptance is not mailed to the
applicant within 15 business days of receipt of the application, the
application is deemed to be accepted as complete for processing on
the 15th business day after receipt by the City. If the application is not
accepted, the ECO shall return the application to the applicant with the
reasons for nonacceptance specified in writing. For the purposes of this
article, complete for processing shall mean that the applicant provided
responses to each and every item on the application and signed the
application and certifications as required.
(a)
Requests for further information. The fact that an application is deemed
acceptable for processing does not prohibit the Board from requesting
further information and data deemed necessary to evaluate the permit
application. At any time during the review of an application for a
permit, the Board or staff may request any additional information that
is reasonably necessary to make any finding or determinations required
by this article.
(b)
Public hearing. Within 60 days after an application has been
determined acceptable for processing, the Board shall notify the
applicant in writing of the date, time and location of a public hearing,
if the Board decides to hold one. The Board shall also provide public
notice of the public hearing in a manner designed to inform interested
and potentially interested persons.
If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, the hearing shall take
place within 120 days of the date the Board mails written notice to
the applicant that a permit application is acceptable for processing. All
hearings shall be held and additional notice given in accordance with
Section 34-207.
(c)
Board action. Within 30 days of the close of the public hearing, or
any continued hearing thereto, on a permit application, or within 120
days of acceptance of the application if no hearing is held, or within
such other time limits as the Board may establish by order, either with
the applicant's consent or for good cause after giving the applicant
notice and an opportunity to be heard, the Board shall take any of the
following actions:
(d)
Sec. 34-204 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-205
CHCT:376
Sec. 34-206. Action prior to hearing or final decision. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 3-106, 11-6-2002]
The following procedures may apply to any application pending before the
Board.
Approve the application, with or without conditions necessary for
the applicant to satisfy the requirements of the article and set forth
in writing its findings that the applicant has met each of the criteria
of the appropriate division of this article and its reasons for the
imposition of conditions;
(1)
Deny the application and set forth, in writing, its findings and
reasons for its denial. The Board may deny an application for
failure of the applicant to comply with the informational
requirements of this article or if the information supplied is untrue
or misleading. Should the Board be evenly divided as to whether to
approve or deny an application, such a vote shall have the effect of
denying the application for failure to receive a majority in support.
(2)
Written decisions. Every decision of the Board on an application shall
be in writing and shall include findings of fact, conclusions of law, a
plain statement of the appropriate rights of administrative and judicial
review, and the time within which those rights must be exercised.
(e)
Projects requiring more than one application. If an applicant submits to
the Board for more than one application at any one time, the deadlines
specified in this section for Board review and decisions on applications
may be extended by the Board for reasonable cause for a reasonable
period. The Board shall provide written notice to the applicant,
intervener(s) and the public of any such extension.
(f)
Procedure and scheduling orders. In its discretion, the Board may
issue scheduling orders governing all proceedings occurring between
acceptance of the application for processing and decision by the Board.
Such orders may but need not necessarily include provisions directing
or authorizing:
Presentation of evidence or argument by the applicant or by
members of the public;
a.
Opportunities for the Board or staff to seek or provide amplification
or clarification of any matter under consideration by the Board;
b.
Particular methods or formats for the submission of information
such as pre-filed testimony or affidavit;
c.
Procedures for participation by members of the public that have
a direct and substantial interest which may be affected by the
proceedings including but not limited to adequate notice of the
hearing or related Board deliberations, opportunities for discovery,
and manner of presentation of evidence; and such other procedural
d.
(1)
Sec. 34-205 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-206
CHCT:377
Sec. 34-207. Public hearings. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-107,
11-6-2002]
The following procedures shall apply to all public hearings held by the
Board except enforcement hearings or proceedings which are governed by
Section 34-179.
issues as may in the discretion of the Board facilitate orderly
consideration of the issues presented during consideration of the
application.
Requirement for notice. Unless otherwise specified in this article, prior
to any hearing conducted by the Board, the Board shall provide notice
as follows:
To the applicant at least 10 days prior to the hearing date by
certified mail, return receipt requested;
a.
At least 10 days prior to the hearing by regular mail to persons who
have filed a written request to be notified of hearings;
b.
At least 10 days prior to the hearing to persons who have made
timely requests to be notified of a specific hearing;
c.
By publication twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City of Biddeford. The date of the first publication shall be at least
14 but no more than 21 days prior to the date of the hearing and
the second publication shall be at least seven but no more than 10
days prior to the date of the hearing; and
d.
The Board may, by scheduling order, provide for additional notice.
For purposes of this section, all notices shall be deemed to be
delivered when deposited, postage prepaid in the United States
mail.
e.
(1)
Contents of notice. Notice of hearings shall contain the following
minimum information:
a. Reference to this article authority under which the Board is acting;
b. The purpose of the hearing;
c. Time, date, and place of hearing;
d. The manner in which views may be submitted for consideration;
The place and time where relevant material may be examined prior
to the hearing; and
e.
The name, address and telephone number of the City official to
contact for information.
f.
(2)
Sec. 34-206 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-207
CHCT:378
Amendment of applications after public notice of hearings has been
given. After the first public notice of hearing, no amendment of any
application shall be permitted except by order of the Board on motion
of the applicant for good cause shown.
In its discretion, the Board may reschedule the public hearing,
conduct the public hearing as originally scheduled, or conduct
the hearing as originally scheduled and direct or authorize other
appropriate steps to assure that the public's opportunity to
comment on the application as amended is preserved.
a.
Following the determination of the Board pursuant to Subsection 1,
the applicant shall place a public notice in the same newspaper in
which the original public notice appeared stating:
That the application has been changed, and the nature of the
change; and
1.
The information provided in the original notice pursuant to
Subsections (2)c, d, e and f, amended as necessary.
2.
b.
(3)
Presiding officer.
The presiding officer at all hearings shall be either (a) the Chair of
the Board, if present and willing to preside, or (b) the Vice Chair,
if present and willing to preside, or (c) a member of the Board
selected by a majority of those members present at the hearing.
a.
The presiding officer shall have the authority to:
1. Regulate the course of the hearing;
2. Rule upon issues of procedure;
3. Rule upon issues of evidence;
Hold conferences before or during the hearing for settlement
or simplification of issues or procedure;
4.
In special cases, where good cause appears, permit deviation
from the procedural rules insofar as compliance therewith is
found to be impractical or unnecessary; and
5.
Take such other action as may be necessary for the efficient
and orderly conduct of the hearing, consistent with this article
and applicable statutes.
6.
b.
The presiding officer may be overruled by a majority vote of the
Board members present on any decision or ruling relating to a
hearing.
c.
(4)
(5) General conduct.
Sec. 34-207 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-207
CHCT:379
Opening statement. The presiding officer shall open the hearing
by describing in general terms the purpose of the hearing and the
general procedure governing its conduct.
a.
Transcription of proceedings. All proceedings at hearings before
the Board may be recorded and, as necessary, transcribed. The
tape recordings and transcript of testimony, if made, shall
constitute part of the hearing record.
b.
Witnesses. Witnesses shall be required to state for the record
their names, residence, business or professional affiliation, and
whether or not they represent another individual, firm, association,
organization, government agency or other legal entity, for purposes
of the hearing.
c.
Statements in written form. At any time prior to or during the
course of a hearing, the presiding officer may require that all or
part of the statements to be offered at such hearing be submitted
in written form at such time and in such form as may be specified.
All persons offering statements in written form shall be subject to
questioning. This subsection shall not be construed to prevent oral
testimony at a scheduled hearing by any member of the public who
requests and is granted time to testify at a hearing.
d.
Submission of proposed findings and conditions. All persons
participating in any hearings shall have the right to submit to
the Board in writing proposed findings of fact and conclusions
of law, briefs, and recommended conditions, providing that such
documents shall be submitted in writing not later than seven days
after the close of the hearing or within such other time as ordered
by the presiding officer or the Board.
e.
Continuance. All hearings conducted pursuant to this section may
be continued for reasonable cause and reconvened from time to
time and from place to place by the Board or presiding officer, as
circumstances require. All orders for continuance shall specify the
time and place at which such hearings shall be reconvened. The
Board or presiding officer shall provide reasonable notice to any
person at the hearing who so requests in writing and to the public
of the time and place of such a reconvened hearing.
f.
Public participation.
Members of the public. Any person may participate in a public
hearing by making oral or written statements of such person's
position on the issues, by introducing evidence and by submitting
written or oral questions through the presiding officer, with such
limits and on such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the
Board or presiding officer.
a.
(6)
Sec. 34-207 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-207
CHCT:380
Sec. 34-208. General evidence. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-108,
11-6-2002]
State, federal and municipal agencies. The presiding officer shall
afford a representative of any interested federal, state, municipal
or other governmental agency a reasonable opportunity to
participate in such hearing and introduce evidence and question
witnesses. Such representatives shall be permitted such rights as
are granted by this section only if representing the views and
position of the agency on whose behalf that representative appears
and not personal views and opinions.
b.
Oral statements. The following procedures shall apply in those hearings
in which oral statements are to be received by the Board:
The order of witnesses shall be determined by the presiding officer
with due regard to the time available, the number of witnesses
to be heard, considerations of fairness and efficiency including
redundancy, and matters of time and distance with respect to
witnesses having travel constraints. Absent such considerations,
the applicant should generally be permitted to present its
witnesses before any other witnesses testify and in such order as
the applicant considers most effective.
a.
Board members, staff, counsel and consultants may be permitted
by the presiding officer to ask questions of any witness at any time.
b.
The applicant's representatives shall be given a reasonable
opportunity, subject to the presiding officer's discretionary
authority to schedule the Board's business, to question witnesses
directly.
c.
The Board may designate times during the hearing when
representatives of federal, state or other governmental agencies,
persons deemed to have a direct and substantial interest or
members of the public may make statements, and may set time
limits on such questions or statements.
d.
(7)
Admissibility. Evidence which is relevant and material to the subject
matter of the hearing shall be admissible. Evidence which is irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious shall be excluded. The Board's
experience, technical competence and specialized knowledge may be
utilized in the evaluation of all evidence submitted to the Board. The
Maine Rules of Evidence shall not apply to hearings held under this
section.
(a)
Official notice. The Board may take official notice of any facts of which
judicial notice could be taken, and in addition may take official notice of
general, technical or scientific matters within its specialized knowledge
and of statutes, regulations and nonconfidential Board records. Facts
officially noticed shall be included and indicated as such in the record.
(b)
Sec. 34-207 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-208
CHCT:381
Sec. 34-209. Documentary and real evidence. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-109, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-210. The record and burden of proof. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-110, 11-6-2002]
The record upon which any Board decision is to be made shall consist of the
application, proposed findings of fact and conclusions, all documentary and
real evidence properly submitted and received by the Board, all statements
whether prefiled or delivered in person which has been admitted by the
Board and, if prepared, the recording or transcript of the proceedings.
The record shall remain open for other evidence or testimony for 10 days
following the close of any public hearing unless otherwise provided by the
Board, and if no public hearing is held, then according to Board scheduling
order. All parties to the proceedings and members of the public may submit
additional evidence or testimony during the ten-day period that the record
Official record. An official record or lack thereof may be evidenced in
the manner provided in Rule 44 of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
(c)
Objections. All objections to rulings of the presiding officer regarding
evidence or procedure and the grounds therefore shall be timely stated
during the course of the hearing. If during the course of, or after the
close of, the hearing and during its deliberations the Board determines
that the ruling of the presiding officer was in error, it may reopen the
hearing or take such action as it deems appropriate to correct such
error.
(d)
Offer of proof. Consists of a statement of the substance of the proffered
evidence or that which is expected to be shown by the answer of the
witness.
(e)
Exhibits and evidence. All documents, materials and objects offered
in evidence as exhibits, shall, if accepted, be numbered or otherwise
identified. Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies
or excerpts if the original is not readily available. The presiding officer
may require, after prior oral or written reasonable notice, that any
person offering any documentary or photographic evidence shall
provide the Board with a specified number of copies of such documents
or photographs, unless such documents or photographs are determined
to be of such form, size or character as not to be reasonably suitable for
reproduction.
(a)
Availability. All written testimony and documents, materials and objects
admitted into evidence shall be made available during the course of the
hearing for public examination. All such evidence will be available for
public examination at the City office during normal business hours.
(b)
Record of application. In any proceeding involving an application, the
application filed with the Board, including exhibits and amendments
thereto, shall be placed into evidence.
(c)
Sec. 34-208 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-210
CHCT:382
remains open. Once the record has been formally closed, no further
evidence of any kind may be placed in the record except by order of the
Board and after appropriate notice is given.
An applicant for a new, renewed, modified or transferred permit shall have
the burden of proof on all matters unless otherwise expressly provided by
law or by this article. It shall be the applicant's burden to present sufficient
admissible evidence to enable the Board to make each and every affirmative
finding necessary under this article to enable the Board to take the action
being sought by the applicant.
Sec. 34-211. Proposed findings and conditions. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-111, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-212. Permit conditions. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-112,
11-6-2002; Ord. No. 2006.37, 6-6-2006]
The Board may impose any appropriate and reasonable conditions in any
permit issued under this article in order to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this article. In addition, and except as otherwise provided,
every permit shall be subject to the following standard conditions:
By procedural order, the Board shall establish a date by which the
applicant and any other person may submit in writing proposed findings
of fact, conclusions of law, and recommended conditions supported by
written explanation and argument but not by new evidence. If any
person other than the applicant makes any submission, that person
shall mail or deliver a copy to the applicant.
(a)
By procedural order, the Board shall establish a date by which the
Board's staff, consultants and counsel shall file with the Board and
serve upon the applicant a draft permit or proposed findings of fact and
conclusions of law and recommended conditions.
(b)
By procedural order, the Board shall establish a reasonable opportunity
for the applicant to submit comment or argument concerning any draft
permit or proposed findings and conditions submitted by any person or
the Board staff.
(c)
The Board's deliberations with respect to any and all such draft permits
or proposed findings and conditions shall be conducted in a meeting
open to the public provided, however, that neither the applicant nor
members of the public shall have any right to participate in the
deliberation except as may be specifically permitted by the presiding
officer.
(d)
Inspection. The ECO and any employees and agents of the City of
Biddeford may enter any property at reasonable hours and enter any
building with the consent of the property owner, occupant or agent,
or pursuant to an administrative search warrant, in order to inspect
the property or structure, including the premises of a facility which
(1)
Sec. 34-210 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-212
CHCT:383
is regulated under this article or believed to be emitting regulated
pollutants, and to take samples, inspect records relevant to any
regulated activity or conduct tests as appropriate to determine
compliance with any laws administered by the department or the terms
and conditions of any order, regulation, license, permit, approval or
decision of the Board.
Modification. A new or modified permit shall be required prior to the
change or modification of any activity regulated by permit under this
article, except as provided for a minor modification.
(2)
Recordkeeping.
The permit holder shall maintain sufficient records to document
compliance with any condition of the permit under this article.
a.
The permit holder shall comply with the record retention
requirements of Division 5 of this article.
b.
Recordkeeping information shall be accessible at the permit
holder's facility or otherwise readily available upon request of the
Board.
c.
(3)
Time limit for construction. Unless a division of this article provides
otherwise, approval to conduct any activity subject to permit shall
become invalid if such activity is not commenced within 18 months after
receipt of such approval or if such activity is discontinued for a period
of 18 months or more. The Board may extend such time period upon a
satisfactory showing that an extension is justified.
(4)
Monitoring. The holders of all permits shall be subject to the following
monitoring conditions:
Any regulated facility shall be required, as provided by its permit
or otherwise ordered by the Board, to allow the City to obtain real
time reports of monitoring equipment that is installed at the facility
in order to monitor those activities which are the subject of the
permit.
a.
The permit holder shall monitor the activity regulated by permit
under this article according to test procedures approved under this
article and applicable federal and state law or regulations, unless
other test procedures have been specified in the permit. Samples
and measurements taken for the purpose of monitoring shall be
representative of the volume and nature of the regulated activity
over the sampling and reporting period.
b.
Monitoring records shall include information on:
1. The date, exact place, and time of sampling or measurements;
The individual(s) who performed the sampling or
measurements;
2.
c.
(5)
Sec. 34-212 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-212
CHCT:384
Sec. 34-213. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-113, 11-6-2002]
Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Board on a permit
application or a petition to amend or modify a Biddeford permit may seek
reconsideration by the Board or judicial review thereof in accordance with
this division. A motion for reconsideration is not a prerequisite for judicial
review. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Biddeford
Environmental Code Officer may appeal such decision to the Board under
this section and the Board shall render a final decision on such appeal
consistent with Section 34-205. An appeal of any decision of the ECO shall
act as a stay of the decision until the Board has acted on such appeal.
3. The date(s) analyses were performed;
4. The individual(s) who performed the analyses;
5. The analytical techniques or methods used; and
6. The results of such analyses.
Assignment or transfer of permits. Every permit issued by the Board
is nontransferable unless prior written consent is obtained from the
Board. Written consent must be obtained no later than two weeks
prior to any transfer or assignment of property which is subject to
a permit. Any proposed transferee or assignee shall demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Board its technical and financial capacity and
intent to: (1) comply with all conditions of the applicable permit; and
(2) to satisfy all applicable criteria of this article. The permit holder and
proposed transferee or assignee shall be jointly and severally liable for
failing to comply with the permit transfer requirement.
(6)
Signatory requirement. All applications, petitions, reports and other
papers submitted to the Board shall be signed by the party, or its duly
authorized officer or agent, and shall include the following certification:
"I certify under penalty of law that I have personally examined and
am familiar with the information submitted in this document and all
attachments thereto and that, based on my inquiry of those individuals
immediately responsible for obtaining the information, I believe the
information is true, accurate and complete. I am aware there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment."
(7)
Petition for reconsideration. Within 30 days of receipt of notice of
the decision of the Board on a permit application or a petition to
amend or modify a Biddeford permit, an applicant, permit holder, or
any person aggrieved by the decision may petition the Board in writing
for reconsideration of the decision. A Board member who voted on the
prevailing side of the decision may move to reconsider at any time
within such thirty-day period.
(1)
Sec. 34-212 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-213
CHCT:385
Sec. 34-214. Environmental Reserve Fund and Fees. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 3-114, 11-6-2002]
The petition shall identify the findings, conclusions or conditions
objected to or believed to be in error, the basis of the objections or
challenge, the nature of the relief requested and the nature of any new
or additional evidence to be offered. Any person aggrieved by a final
decision of the Board may only petition the Board for reconsideration
of the decision once.
The Board shall, within 30 days of receipt of such a petition, commence
its review of such petition and determine whether or not to hold a
public hearing. Any public hearing shall be held within 60 days of
receipt of the petition in accordance with the procedures specified in
Section 34-207. Within 90 days of receipt of the petition, the Board
shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the petition in full
or in part. Should the Board be evenly divided as to whether to
approve or deny the petition, such a vote shall have the effect of
denying the application. The Board shall promptly provide written
notice of its decision on reconsideration to the person who petitioned
for reconsideration, to the applicant and all other parties, and shall
promptly publish its decision in a newspaper of general circulation
in the City of Biddeford. The Board's decision on a petition for
reconsideration shall constitute its final decision.
In accordance with Subsection (2), the petitioner shall have 30 days
from receipt of notice of the Board's decision on reconsideration to
appeal to court the Board's final decision on the petition for
reconsideration.
Judicial appeal. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the Board
may seek judicial review in accordance with applicable state law within
30 days from the date of the Board's decision or within 30 days from the
date of the Board's decision on reconsideration. The filing of an appeal
of a Board decision to grant a permit with or without conditions shall
not operate as a stay of the Board's decision. Application for a stay shall
ordinarily be made first to the Board, which may issue a stay upon a
showing of irreparable injury to the petitioner, a strong likelihood of
success on the merits, and no substantial harm to adverse parties or
the general public. A motion for relief may also be made to the superior
court pursuant to the provisions of 5 M.R.S.A. § 11004, as amended.
(2)
Environmental Reserve Fund. The Environmental Reserve Fund is
hereby established. The purpose of the Environmental Reserve Fund
is to promote all the purpose, policies and objectives of this article as
expressed therein. All fees required to be paid to the City of Biddeford
for permits issued pursuant to this article, and all other sums of money
paid to or given to the City of Biddeford pursuant to this article
including, without limitation, all fines and penalties shall be credited to
(a)
Sec. 34-213 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-214
CHCT:386
the Environmental Reserve Fund and only the expenditures authorized
by this article shall be charged to the Environmental Reserve Fund.
Money in the Environmental Reserve Fund shall be deposited, invested
and administered by the City Council and the Treasurer of the City of
Biddeford and may be invested as provided by Maine law. Interest on
the investments shall be credited to the Environmental Reserve Fund.
The City Council may receive, apply for, or accept, on behalf of the
City, funds, grants, bequeaths, gifts or contributions from any person.
All such funds shall be deposited in the Environmental Reserve Fund.
Annual fees. Permit holders of a Biddeford air toxics emissions permit
shall pay to the City of Biddeford an annual base fee and emission fees,
as follows:
Annual base fee. Any facility whose stationary sources or processes
are required to obtain a permit pursuant to Division 4 of this article
shall pay to the City of Biddeford on an annual basis a base fee of
$1,000. The annual fee shall be assessed beginning for the calendar
year in which this article becomes effective and is payable to the
City no later than December 15 of the first calendar year and no
later than June 1 of each calendar year thereafter. A regulated
facility shall obtain a credit of up to the full amount of the annual
base fee for direct expenditures on compliance with any applicable
ambient air limit for a regulated air toxic under this article upon
submission to the Biddeford Environmental Board of information
sufficient to establish such expenditures made by the facility.
(1)
Emission fees. Any facility whose stationary sources or processes
are required to obtain a permit pursuant to Division 4 of this article
shall pay to the City of Biddeford on an annual basis emission fees
as follows:
Any substance or compound classified on Table I32 as Class I:
$1.75 per pound per year.
a.
Any substance or compound classified in Table I as Class II: $1
per pound per year.
b.
Any substance or compound classified in Table I as Class III:
$0.50 per pound per year.
c.
(2)
(b)
32.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 34-214 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-214
CHCT:387
Emission fees are to be assessed for regulated emissions
reported beginning for the calendar year in which this article
becomes effective and for each calendar year thereafter. The
emissions fees are to be based upon a regulated facility's
annual emissions report, except for the emissions fees due for
calendar year 2002 which are to be based upon a separate
emissions report required by the City, and are due and
payable no later than March 1, 2003 for calendar year 2002
and, for each year thereafter, June 1 of the calendar year
following the year for which emissions are reported. Emission
fees are to be assessed only upon regulated air toxic emissions
exceeding, on an uncontrolled basis, the de minimus levels
established in Table I of the article.
Any facility whose stationary sources or processes are
required to obtain a permit pursuant to Division 4 of this
article, and which facility emits any dioxin compound in
excess of 0.1 ng TEQ/m3 shall pay to the City of Biddeford
on an annual basis no later than January 30 of each year
beginning for the calendar year following the effective date of
this article an emission fee of $25,000. The dioxin fee shall be
assessed for regulated emissions beginning in calendar year
2002. The dioxin emissions fee is to be based upon a regulated
facility's annual emissions report and are due and payable no
later than June 1 of the calendar year following the year for
which emissions are reported.
These annual fees have been based upon the City's best
estimate of the actual costs necessary for the City to
administer and enforce this article. If the date on which an
annual fee or emission fee is due falls on a Saturday, Sunday
or national holiday, the payment is due on the next business
day. By May 1 of each year, the City shall bill each permit
holder the amount due for its annual fee. Failure to pay the
annual fee shall be deemed a violation of this article and
a violation of the permit. The City Council may adjust the
annual fees on the annual basis according to the United States
consumer Price Index established by the Federal Department
of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Failure to pay any annual fee as provided in this article is
sufficient grounds for revocation of a permit. There are no
additional fees assessed for renewals or amendments.
Expenditures. The City Council may authorize expenditures from the
Environmental Reserve Fund. Such expenditures shall be all
expenditures for the implementation, administration and enforcement
of this article. Such allowable expenditures may include, but not be
limited to, personnel or payroll expenses and benefits, including but
not limited to, ECO clerks and other staff, expenses relating to the
Biddeford Environmental Board including payroll expenses relating to
(c)
Sec. 34-214 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-214
CHCT:388
any pre-permit activities such as application reviews, public hearings,
and appeals, the actual permit processing activities and associated
post-permit compliance activities required to assure continued permit
compliance, expenses relating to telephone, training, travel, supplies,
monitoring, sampling and computer supplies and services, expenses
related to enforcement activities as a result of permit noncompliance,
expenses related to retention of lawyers or legal services, the retention
or contracts with consultants including engineers, scientists, and
inspectors, reasonable capital expenditures for specific equipment to
carry out the objectives of this article, or any other expenditure for
costs which are related to carrying out the objectives of this article.
Application fee and filing fee. The following fees shall be assessed
against all applicants, with the exception of the City of Biddeford.
Filing fee: a filing fee of $1,000. The filing fee shall be paid at
the time a permit application is filed. Failure to pay the fee at the
time of filing will result in the application being returned to the
applicant.
(1)
Application fees. The applicant will be assessed reasonable and
appropriate fees for the direct costs incurred in connection with
the review of a permit application and any amendment or
modification thereto including, but not limited to, legal,
engineering and other professional fees and other costs specifically
accountable to a permit, together with all costs relating to the
preparation of information and materials for the Board associated
with the permit application.
(2)
(d)
Fee processing. The Board shall bill the applicant monthly for any
application fee. The applicant shall pay the bills to the designated
recipient within 30 days. If any applicant withdraws its application,
the applicant remains liable for all direct costs incurred to the date of
withdrawal. Upon failure to pay the application fee when due, the Board
and the Environmental Code Officer may cease its activity regarding
the application, may take enforcement action pursuant to Division 2
to recover the application fee and any other appropriate enforcement
action. Final payment of the application fee shall occur before issuance
of the permit.
(e)
Fee administration. The Environmental Code Officer shall be
responsible for fee administration and shall review bills submitted by
vendors prior to directing bills to an applicant. Any applicant may
request the Environmental Code Officer establish an estimated
nonbinding budget for any permit application. If the Environmental
Code Officer establishes such a budget, and if it appears that the
budget will be exceeded, the Environmental Code Officer shall notify
the applicant with that information and shall provide any opportunity to
discuss a revised budget.
(f)
Sec. 34-214 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-215
CHCT:389
Sec. 34-215. Forms. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-115, 11-6-2002]
All applications, motions, proposed findings, documents, petitions, briefs,
complaints, responses to complaints and, to the extent practicable, written
testimony filed with the Board, (all hereinafter referred to as "form"), except
for documents not susceptible of reproduction in the manner provided or for
other good cause shown, shall be typewritten or printed on white paper 8 1/
2 inches by 11 inches in size and bound; type matter shall be double spaced.
The first page of each such form shall be headed by the title "State of Maine;
City of Biddeford Environmental Board" and shall have a caption with (1)
the title of the matter, giving the name of the applicant, the activity in issue
and the location (e.g., In the Matter of ABC, Inc., Biddeford, Maine); (2)
the Board's application number (e.g., Biddeford Air Toxics Emissions Permit
Application No. 86); and (3) the title of the form (e.g., petition to intervene).
The final page of the form shall be dated and signed by the applicant,
permit holder, respondent or his attorney or representative. Such signature
shall constitute a certification by such person that he or she has personally
examined and is familiar with the form, that based on his inquiry of those
persons immediately responsible for obtaining information on the form, and
to the best of his knowledge and information he believes the information
is true, accurate and complete, and that it is not interposed for delay. If a
form is not signed or is signed with intent to defeat this section, it may be
stricken as false and the action may proceed as though the form had not
been served and filed.
Sec. 34-216. Service and filing of documents. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-116, 11-6-2002]
Service. A copy of every application, motion, petition, brief, or paper
relating to discovery and other document permitted or required to be
filed with the Board pursuant to this article shall be mailed to all parties
in the proceeding or their representatives by ordinary mail unless
otherwise provided in this article.
Any notice required to be given or document filed or served under this
article shall be deemed delivered when deposited in the United States
mail, postage prepaid except as otherwise specified.
(a)
Filing. An original and 12 copies of all applications, and an original
and two copies of all motions, petitions, briefs, complaints, responses to
complaints, reports and other required submissions shall be filed with
the Board by delivery to the City of Biddeford, P.O. Box 586 or 205 Main
Street Suite 101, Biddeford, Maine 04005 by 4:00 p.m. local time on
or before the day the submission is due unless otherwise specified in a
Board order.
(b)
Representatives. The first document filed by any person in a proceeding
shall designate the name and address of a person on whom service may
be made and to whom all correspondence from the Board and staff may
be sent.
(c)
Sec. 34-215 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-216
CHCT:390
Sec. 34-217. Computation and enlargement of time. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 3-117, 11-6-2002]
In computing any period of time provided by this article, the day of the act,
event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is
not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be included,
unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period
runs until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday.
When, by this article or by order of the Board, an act is required to be done
at or within a specified time, the Board may within its discretion at any time
order the period enlarged for a reasonable period for good cause shown.
Sec. 34-218. Orders and decisions effective. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-118, 11-6-2002]
Orders, decisions, notices and other papers issued by the Board shall be
effective upon the presiding officer, or other duly authorized Board member,
signing the written order, decision, notice or paper issued by the Board.
Sec. 34-219. Revocation, modification or suspension of permits.
[Ord. No. 2002.112, § 3-119, 11-6-2002]
Any person aggrieved, including the code enforcement officer, may petition
the Board to revoke, modify or suspend a permit. The petition must be
addressed to the Board and must state which of the criteria listed below is
being invoked. It must specifically describe the factual basis for the petition
and generally describe and summarize what evidence will be offered to
support the petition. The petition, once filed, may be supplemented only as
permitted by the Board. The petitioner must serve a copy of the petition on
the permit holder at the time the petition is filed with the Board.
No later than 30 days following the filing of a petition to revoke, modify
or suspend, and after providing the petitioner and the permit holder
opportunity to comment, the Board shall issue an order specifying the
schedule and procedure for Board consideration of the petition. The Board
Service of papers by the Board. For purposes of this article, the Board
shall assure that all orders, decisions, notices and other papers issued
by the Board are mailed within two days of issuance upon all parties,
and further assure that a Board decision on an application pursuant
to Section 34-205(d) and on a petition for reconsideration pursuant to
Section 34-213(1) shall be served upon the applicant and interveners by
certified mail, return receipt requested, by hand delivery or by private
express courier.
(d)
Facsimile and electronic mail. The Board shall accept facsimile or
electronic mail as a substitute for initial filing of an original document,
provided that the original document is filed with the Board no later than
three business days following the initial filing.
(e)
Sec. 34-216 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-219
CHCT:391
shall utilize the administrative procedures set forth in this division as
appropriate. If the Board determines that a petition on its face does not
warrant further consideration, the Board may dismiss it. After a hearing, the
Board may deny the petition or modify in whole or in part any permit, issue
an order prescribing necessary corrective action, or revoke or suspend a
permit when the Board finds that:
Sec. 34-220. Petition to add, delete or modify a pollutant. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 3-120, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-221. Criteria for permit approval. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 3-121, 11-6-2002]
The permit holder has violated any condition of the permit, Board order
or this article;
(1)
The permit holder has obtained a permit by misrepresenting or failing
to disclose fully all relevant facts;
(2)
The permit holder has experienced permit deviations which threaten an
actual or potential substantial and immediate threat to public health or
the environment;
(3)
The permit fails to include any standard or limitation legally required
on the date of issuance;
(4)
Modification or amendment of a permit is necessary to ensure
compliance with applicable standards, limits or requirements; or
(5)
There has been a material change in any condition or circumstance that
requires modification of the terms of the permit.
(6)
Any interested person may petition the Biddeford Environmental Board
to add, delete, or modify a regulated air toxic pollutant or to modify a
parameter for any substance or compound named on the list described
in Table I. Within 30 days of reviewing the petition, the Board shall
determine whether to grant or deny the petition. If the Board denies the
petition, the Board shall notify the petitioner of its decision in writing
and shall state its reasons for denial. If the Board grants the petition,
it shall notify petitioner, publish notice of its decision as provided in
Section 34-202, and shall direct ECO to incorporate the change into
Table I.
(a)
The Board may elect to hold a public hearing on any petition submitted
pursuant to Section 34-220(a) and such public hearings shall be noticed
and conducted as provided in Division 3 of this article.
(b)
The standard for granting or denying a petition under this section shall
be as set forth in Section 34-330.
(c)
The Board shall grant an application for a permit if the following
criteria have been met:
(a)
Sec. 34-219 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-221
CHCT:392
Sec. 34-222. through Sec. 34-240. (Reserved)
The Board has received a complete application pursuant to this
division.
(1)
The regulated source or process has completed any applicable air
toxics compliance determination required under the article.
(2)
The emission of all regulated toxic air pollutants will not violate
the City of Biddeford ambient air limits for air toxics or can be
controlled or reduced so as not to violate the same.
(3)
The Board shall grant an application for a temporary permit if the
following criteria have been met:
The Board has received a complete application pursuant to this
division.
(1)
The emission of all regulated toxic air pollutants will not violate
the City of Biddeford ambient air limits for air toxics or can be
controlled or reduced so as not to violate the same.
(2)
(b)
Sec. 34-221 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-222
CHCT:393

DIVISION 4
AIR TOXICS CONTROL REGULATIONS
Subdivision
I.
General
Provisions
Sec. 34-241. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-101, 11-6-2002]
This article shall apply to the owner of any new, modified, or existing
stationary source, area source, or process which emits a regulated toxic
air pollutant into the ambient air and for which stationary source or
process:
Is classified as a minor source under 06 096 CMR 115 and requires
a license to operate issued under that chapter;
(1)
Is classified as a major source under 06 096 CMR 140 and requires
a license to operate issued under that chapter and/or under Title V
of the Clean Air Act; or
(2)
For purposes of establishing an inventory of emissions of regulated
air toxics in Biddeford by stationary and area sources, emits any
regulated air toxic into the ambient air in excess of the facility
threshold limits established in Table I of this article.
(3)
(a)
Any stationary source, area source, or process which meets the criteria
of (a), above, shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this
division for a particular regulated toxic air pollutant where the
emissions of such pollutant are or result from any of the following
sources or activities:
(1) A mobile source;
(2) A normal agricultural operation;
The application of a pesticide regulated pursuant to 7 M.R.S.A.
§ 606 et seq.
(3)
The combustion of one or more of the following fuels:
a. Coal;
b. Natural gas;
c. Wood; or
d. Virgin petroleum products; or
(4)
A gasoline dispensing or storage facility or cargo truck as regulated
pursuant to 06 096 (Code of Maine Regulations) 118;
(5)
(b)
Sec. 34-241 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-241
CHCT:395
Photographic process equipment by which an image is reproduced
upon material sensitized to radiant energy;
(6)
Activities such as copying and duplication activities performed in
an office, and use of typewriters, printers, blueprinting and pens;
(7)
Interior maintenance activities, such as janitorial cleaning and the
use of cleaning products and air freshener, other than cleaning of
any process equipment or devices and except as allowed under
Subsection (b)(18) below;
(8)
(9) The use of bathroom and locker room ventilation;
The activities of maintenance, including welding, gluing, painting
of process equipment and soldering, but excluding VOC degreasing
operations;
(10)
First aid or medical care provided at the facility, including related
activities such as sterilization and medicine preparation;
(11)
Laundry operations, other than dry-cleaning, to service uniforms or
clothing used at the facility;
(12)
Architectural maintenance activities conducted to take care of the
buildings and structures at the facility, including repainting,
resurfacing, roofing and sandblasting;
(13)
Exterior maintenance and repair activities conducted to take care
of the grounds of the facility, including lawn care;
(14)
Food preparation, including barbecuing for service facility
cafeterias and dining rooms, but excluding such activities which
are connected to preparation of packaged food for off-site
consumption;
(15)
The use of portable space heaters which can be carried and
relocated by an employee;
(16)
(17) (Reserved)
The venting of particulate emissions from processes equipped with
removal equipment and which are vented inside the building;
(18)
The use of laboratory ventilation hoods and exhaust systems for
educational and research and development activities, excluding
hoods used for any production processes, unless otherwise
regulated under Section 112 of the Clean Air Act;
(19)
The use of laboratory ventilation hoods and exhaust systems used
by hospitals and medical care facilities used for medical purposes;
(20)
The use of consumer products in a manner consistent with how the
general public would use the product;
(21)
Sec. 34-241 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-241
CHCT:396
Sec. 34-242. Permit requirements. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-102,
11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-243. through Sec. 34-250. (Reserved)
Subdivision
II.
Application
and
Notification
Procedures
Sec. 34-251. Application procedures for new sources and processes.
[Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-201, 11-6-2002]
The use of fire control equipment, including maintenance and
employee training.
(22)
All new, existing and modified devices or processes subject to this
division shall comply with the requirements of this division.
(a)
Any owner of a stationary source or process subject to this division
shall obtain Biddeford air toxics permit. The permit shall cover only the
devices, processes, and emissions which are subject to regulation under
this division.
(b)
Notwithstanding any other provision of Section 34-242, no permit shall
be required for a device or process for which the sum of all uncontrolled
regulated emissions is less than the facility threshold limits set forth in
Table I for the applicable regulated air toxic pollutant(s);
(c)
Notwithstanding any other provision of Section 34-242, no permit shall
be required for a device or process for which the owner or facility
operator is required to report emissions of regulated air toxics for
the purpose of establishing an inventory of all stationary and/or area
sources of air toxics in Biddeford.
(d)
A stationary source or process which has not begun construction within
the City of Biddeford prior to the effective date of this article shall be
deemed to be a new source or process when submitting an application
for a permit under this article. The owner of a new stationary source
or process requiring a permit under this division shall submit an
application for a temporary permit in accordance with the application
requirements contained in Section 34-201. The application may be
submitted prior to completing and submitting an air toxics compliance
determination required under this division.
(a)
The owner of a new stationary source or process which had not
commenced operation prior to the effective date of this article shall not
operate the new stationary source or process until a temporary permit
is issued.
(b)
Sec. 34-241 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-251
CHCT:397
Sec. 34-252. Application procedures for existing sources and
processes. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-202, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-253. Application procedures for modified sources and
processes. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-203, 11-6-2002]
The owner of a new stationary source or process shall receive a
Biddeford air toxics permit to replace the temporary permit upon
completion of air toxics compliance demonstration under this division.
(c)
A stationary source or process which has begun construction within
the City of Biddeford, or is operating pursuant to a license, permit or
permit application shield, prior to the effective date of this article shall
be deemed to be an existing source or process when submitting an
application for a permit under this article. The owner of an existing
source or process requiring a permit under this division shall submit
to the City no later than six months following the Board's approval of
the permit application forms, an application for a Biddeford Air Toxics
Emissions Permit, including notice to the Board to that the facility is
prepared to undertake an air toxics compliance evaluation. Upon timely
submission of the application, the owner shall operate the existing
device or process under the facility's existing licenses and permits
issued by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection and U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency until such time as the Biddeford
Environmental Board has acted upon the application.
(a)
Upon issuance by the Board of a permit to an existing source which is
unable to demonstrate compliance with all applicable ambient air limits
at the time of issuance, the Board shall include a compliance plan and
schedule for achieving compliance based upon public health, economic
impact and the commercial availability of appropriate controls, not to
exceed three years.
(b)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a source operating
under the terms of a compliance plan and schedule for compliance
shall not be subject to penalties during the period for compliance
approved by the Board for emissions exceeding the established ambient
air limits in Table I. This provision does not preclude the enforcement,
including for penalties, for violations of other terms and conditions of a
permit during the period for compliance, and nothing in this provision
is intended to prevent state and federal enforcement of any emission
standard or limit imposed under applicable state and federal law.
(c)
The owner of an existing source or process requiring a modification of
a permit issued under this division which is not a minor modification,
shall submit an application for a permit modification in accordance with
Section 34-201.
(a)
The owner shall not begin construction of the modification of the
stationary source or process until a modified or amended permit is
issued.
(b)
Sec. 34-251 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-253
CHCT:398
Sec. 34-254. Notification procedures for minor modifications. [Ord.
No. 2002.112, § 4-204, 11-6-2002]
The owner of a stationary source or process which operates pursuant to
a permit issued under this article may undertake a minor modification
without approval by the Board as follows:
Sec. 34-255. through Sec. 34-260. (Reserved)
Subdivision
III.
Air
Toxics
Compliance
Determination
Sec. 34-261. Methods for determining emissions. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-301, 11-6-2002]
The owner of a modified stationary source or process shall receive
an amendment to a Biddeford air toxics permit upon approval of the
modification by the Board.
(c)
The owner shall submit notification of the minor modification to the
ECO no later than five business days following initial operation of
the minor modification and furnish supporting information and
documentation as may be reasonably requested.
(1)
For such minor modifications resulting in the emission of any regulated
air toxic pollutant not previously identified on the facility's permit above
the established facility threshold limit, the owner shall perform an air
compliance demonstration prior to operating the minor modification.
If the modification complies with the ambient air limits established
on Table I the owner may operate the minor modification provided
that written notice to the ECO consistent with the requirements of
Paragraph (1) above. If the modification would result in an excedance
of either of the ambient air limits established in Table I, a permit
modification application shall be submitted to the ECO prior to
operating the modification.
(2)
For the purposes of determining actual emissions for compliance with
this division and with the requirements of Division 5 and for inventory
purposes, a stationary source shall determine its actual emissions using
any of the following methods:
The use of published emission factors including EPA's Compilation
of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, AP-42, as revised.
(1)
The use of mass balance calculations following accepted
engineering principles, or
(2)
(a)
Sec. 34-253 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-261
CHCT:399
Sec. 34-262. Emissions testing. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-302,
11-6-2002]
The use of published engineering calculations and accepted
mathematical models, or
(3)
The use of emission tests following accepted OSHA and NIOSH test
methods, or
(4)
The use of emission test methods approved by EPA or Maine DEP,
or
(5)
The use of alternative methods approved by the ECO in conjunction
with the operating conditions specified on any permit issued
pursuant to this division; or
(6)
The use of reported test data in conjunction with the operating
conditions specified on any permit issued pursuant to this division,
where such test data was collected through the use of test methods
approved by the ECO.
(7)
The owner or operator may quantify the actual mass emission rate of
any substance:
(1) For which an emission factor is available,
(2) Which is likely to be emitted from the stationary source or process,
Which is identified on an OSHA compliant Material Data Safety
(MSDS) Sheet for a particular material or product, or
(3)
By other methods approved by the ECO. For purposes of this
provision, an owner or operator shall be entitled to rely upon the
information contained on an OSHA compliant MSDS sheet.
(4)
(b)
In accordance with the MDEP air emission compliance test protocol and
40 CFR Part 60 or other method approved or required by the ECO, the
facility shall perform emissions testing to demonstrate compliance with
the applicable ambient air limits under circumstances representative of
the facility's process and operating conditions:
Within 60 calendar days of receipt of a written notification to
test from the ECO, if visible emissions, equipment operating
parameters, ECO inspection, air monitoring or other cause indicate
to the ECO that equipment may be operating out of compliance
with ambient air limits or permit conditions; or
(1)
Pursuant to any other requirement of a permit issued under this
article to perform emissions testing.
(2)
(a)
Such testing shall be by qualified persons selected by the regulated
source and all costs associated with such testing shall be borne by
the regulated source. A notice for a regulated source to undertake
(b)
Sec. 34-261 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-262
CHCT:400
Sec. 34-263. Methods for determining compliance. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-303, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-264. Air dispersion modeling analysis. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 4-304, 11-6-2002; Ord. No. 2005.37, 5-17-2005]
If air dispersion modeling analysis is selected, the owner shall conduct air
dispersion modeling analysis demonstrating that the concentration of actual
emissions of each regulated toxic air pollutant is below the corresponding
ambient air limit at or beyond the compliance boundary in accordance with
Table I. Any models approved for use by the U.S. EPA and Maine DEP, or
otherwise approved by the ECO shall be used for demonstrating compliance
under this method.
Sec. 34-265. De minimus emission level method. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-305, 11-6-2002; Ord. No. 2005.37, 5-17-2005]
In determining compliance with any permit issued in connection with this
division using the de minimus emissions level method, annual emissions
calculations shall be based on the actual annual emissions of each regulated
pollutant and shall be compared to the annual de minimus level facility
threshold limit appearing on Table I. Hourly emission calculations shall
be based on the actual hourly emissions averaged over a twenty-four-hour
period and shall be compared to the twenty-four-hour de minimus level.
an emissions test shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by a
plain statement describing the reasons for the proposed test. Nothing
in this section shall prevent the City from undertaking an emissions
test performed by the City's consultants and at the City's expense upon
prior notice to the regulated facility.
The owner of any stationary source or process for which a permit is
required and which emits a regulated toxic air pollutant shall determine
compliance with the ambient air limits by using one of the following
methods:
(1) Air dispersion modeling analysis;
(2) De minimus emission level demonstration;
(3) In stack concentration method, and
(4) Alternative method.
(a)
Upon request by the ECO or the Board, the owner of any stationary
source or process which emits a regulated toxic air pollutant shall
provide documentation of compliance with the ambient air limits to the
Board.
(b)
Sec. 34-262 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-266
CHCT:401
Sec. 34-266. In-stack concentration method. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 4-306, 11-6-2002; Ord. No. 2005.37, 5-17-2005]
If the in-stack concentration method is selected, the owner shall perform a
calculation demonstrating that the adjusted in-stack concentration of each
regulated toxic air pollutant, on an actual emission basis, as determined by
the following calculations, is below the corresponding ambient air limit in
Table I, where:
"X" means:
For devices or processes emitting from one stack, the emission rate
of a regulated toxic air pollutant in pounds per hour; or
a.
For devices or processes emitting from more than one stack, the
sum of emission rates of each regulated toxic air pollutant from
each stack in pounds per hour;
b.
(1)
"Y" means the emission rate of a regulated toxic air pollutant in grams
per second as determined by dividing X by 7.94, as in the formula
below:
Y = X/7.94
(2)
"Z" means the emission rate of a regulated toxic air pollutant in
micrograms per second as determined by multiplying Y by 1,000,000 as
in the formula below:
Z = Y x 1,000,000
(3)
"A" means:
For devices or processes emitting from one stack, the stack volume
flow in actual cubic feet per minute; or
a.
For devices or processes emitting from more than one stack, the
sum of stack volume flows from each stack in actual cubic feet per
minute;
b.
(4)
"B" means the stack volume flow in actual cubic meters per second as
determined by dividing A by 2119, as in the formula below:
B = A/2119
(5)
To calculate the in-stack concentration of a regulated toxic air pollutant
in micrograms per cubic meter from a device or process either emitting
from a single stack or from more than one stack, Z shall be divided by
B, as in the formula below:
IC = Z/B
(6)
To calculate the adjusted in-stack concentration of a regulated toxic air
pollutant in micrograms per cubic meter from a device or process either
(7)
Sec. 34-266 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-266
CHCT:402
Sec. 34-267. Alternative methods. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-307,
11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-268. through Sec. 34-280. (Reserved)
Subdivision
IV.
Classification
of
Regulated
Toxic
Air
Pollutants
emitting from a single stack or from more than one stack, the in-stack
concentration shall be divided by 100, as in the formula below:
Adjusted In-stack Concentration = IC/100
Any person may submit a request to the Board for approval of the use
of a method of determining compliance that is an alternative to the
methods specified in this part.
(a)
Any person making such a request shall submit the following
information to the Board:
A description of the proposed alternate method and each stationary
source or process to which the proposed alternate method will be
applied;
(1)
The identity, location and description of the facility at which the
alternate method is proposed to be used;
(2)
The name, chemical abstracts service (CAS) registry number,
classification and ambient air limits for each regulated toxic air
pollutant emitted from each stationary source or process subject to
this division; and
(3)
Technical data and information demonstrating that the results of
the proposed alternate method are no less precise and accurate
than those of the methods specified in this part.
(4)
(b)
Within 60 days of receipt of a request, the Board shall approve the
use of the proposed alternate method and notify the person requesting
approval of the decision provided that:
The request contained all of the information required in Subsection
(b), above; and
(1)
The results of the proposed alternate method are no less precise
than those methods specified in this part.
(2)
(c)
Sec. 34-266 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-281
CHCT:403
Sec. 34-281. Classification of air toxic pollutants. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-401, 11-6-2002]
The Board shall classify each regulated toxic air pollutant as a Class I
regulated toxic air pollutant, Class II regulated toxic air pollutant, or Class
III regulated toxic air pollutant, in accordance with this article.
Sec. 34-282. Class I regulated air toxic pollutants. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-402, 11-6-2002]
The Board shall classify a regulated toxic air pollutant as a Class I regulated
toxic air pollutant if it meets at least one of the following criteria:
Sec. 34-283. Class II regulated air toxic pollutants. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-403, 11-6-2002]
The Board shall classify a regulated toxic air pollutant as a Class II
regulated toxic air pollutant if it does not qualify as a Class I regulated toxic
air pollutant and meets at least one of the following criteria:
It is a Class A, Class B1, or Class B2 carcinogen, as described in 51
Federal Register 34,000 (1986);
(1)
It is a Category A1 or A2 carcinogen, as described in Threshold Limit
Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents and Biological
Exposure Indices, as published by the American Conference of
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) (2001 Edition);
(2)
It has been demonstrated through at least one study conducted in
accordance with generally accepted scientific principles, that it is
capable of inducing reproductive or developmental effects in
experimental laboratory animals at doses less than or equal to 500 mg/
kg; or
(3)
It has an acute toxicity where the:
a. Oral LD-50 is less than or equal to 50 mg/kg;
b. Inhalation LC50 is less than or equal to 200 ppm; or
c. Dermal LD50 is less than or equal to 200 mg/kg.
(4)
It is a Class C carcinogen, as described in 51 Federal Register 34,000
(1986);
(1)
It is a Category A3 carcinogen, as described in Threshold Limit Values
for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents and Biological Exposure
Indices, as published by the ACGIH (2001 Edition);
(2)
It has been demonstrated through at least one study conducted in
accordance with generally accepted scientific principles, that it is
capable of inducing reproductive or developmental effects in
experimental laboratory animals at doses greater than 500 mg/kg;
(3)
Sec. 34-281 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-283
CHCT:404
Sec. 34-284. Class III regulated air toxic pollutants. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-404, 11-6-2002]
The Board shall classify a regulated toxic air pollutant as a Class III
regulated toxic air pollutant if it is any regulated toxic air pollutant other
than a regulated toxic air pollutant classified as Class I or Class II.
Sec. 34-285. through Sec. 34-295. (Reserved)
Subdivision
V.
Designation
of
Safety
Factors
Sec. 34-296. Designation of safety factors. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 4-501, 11-6-2002]
For the purpose of providing adequate protection to sensitive populations,
the Board shall designate a safety factor to each regulated toxic air
pollutant as follows:
Sec. 34-297. Designation of time adjustment factors. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-502, 11-6-2002]
For the purpose of considering that certain chemicals have differing effects
over time, the Board shall designate a time adjustment factor according to
It has an acute toxicity where the:
a. Oral LD50 is greater than 50 mg/kg but less than 500 mg/kg;
Inhalation LC50 is greater than 200 ppm but less than 2,000 ppm;
or
b.
c. Dermal LD50 is greater than 200 mg/kg but less than 1,000 mg/kg;
(4)
It has been demonstrated through at least one study conducted in
accordance with generally accepted scientific principles, that it induces
mutagenic effects; or
(5)
It has been demonstrated through at least one study conducted in
accordance with generally accepted scientific principles, that it
produces adverse chronic noncarcinogenic systemic effects.
(6)
(1) For a Class I regulated toxic air pollutant, the safety factor shall be 100;
For a Class II regulated toxic air pollutant, the safety factor shall be 71;
and
(2)
For a Class III regulated toxic air pollutant, the safety factor shall be
24.
(3)
Sec. 34-283 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-297
CHCT:405
the characteristics of the regulated toxic air pollutant. The time adjustment
factor shall be used to determine the ambient air limit according to Section
34-298.
Sec. 34-298. Criteria for time adjustment factors. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-503, 11-6-2002]
The Board shall designate the time adjustment factors according to the
following criteria:
Sec. 34-299. through Sec. 34-310. (Reserved)
Subdivision
VI.
Determination
of
Ambient
Air
Limits
Sec. 34-311. Determination of twenty-four-hour ambient air limits.
[Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-601, 11-6-2002]
For regulated toxic air pollutants that have an occupational exposure
limit which is intended to primarily prevent irritation or discomfort, or
for which there are essentially no known cumulative effects resulting
from extended exposures to such pollutants at concentration levels at
or near the occupational exposure limit, the time adjustment factor
shall be 1.0;
(1)
For regulated toxic air pollutants that have an occupational exposure
limit which is intended to prevent acute exposure effects, the time
adjustment factor shall be 2.0;
(2)
For regulated toxic air pollutants that have a ceiling limit value set as
an occupational exposure limit which was not intended to be exceeded
at any time, the time adjustment factor shall be 2.5; and
(3)
For regulated toxic air pollutants that have an occupational exposure
limit which is set either by technological feasibility or commonly
recognized good hygiene practice, or which present cumulative health
hazards and have an occupational exposure limit intended to prevent
excessive accumulation in the body from extended periods of exposure,
or which present both acute and cumulative health hazards, the time
adjustment factor shall be 2.8.
(4)
Where there is a reference concentration limit established by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency for a regulated toxic air pollutant
which causes developmental or reproductive effects, the twenty-fourhour
ambient air limit shall be the reference concentration limit.
(a)
Sec. 34-297 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-311
CHCT:406
Sec. 34-312. Calculation of twenty-four-hour ambient air limits.
[Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-602, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-313. Determination of annual ambient air limits. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-603, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-314. Calculation of annual ambient air limits. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-604, 11-6-2002]
Sec. 34-315. Calculation of twenty-four-hour de minimus emissions.
[Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-605, 11-6-2002]
To calculate the twenty-four-hour de minimus emission level for a regulated
toxic air pollutant in pounds per hour, the twenty-four-hour ambient air limit
shall be divided by 10680.8.
Where there is no reference concentration limit, the twenty-four-hour
ambient air limit shall be a modified occupational health standard as
determined by the calculation specified in Section 34-312 below.
(b)
OEL means the occupational exposure limit for the regulated toxic air
pollutant.
(a)
(b) SF means the safety factor as determined by Section 34-296.
TAF means the time adjustment factor as determined by Section
34-298.
(c)
To calculate the twenty-four-hour ambient air limit for a regulated
toxic air pollutant, occupational exposure limit shall be divided by the
product of the safety factor and the time adjustment factor, as in the
formula below:
AAL (24 hr.) = OEL/(SF x TAF)
(d)
Where there is a reference concentration limit established by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the annual ambient air limit shall be
the reference concentration limit.
(a)
Where there is no reference concentration limit, the annual ambient air
limit shall be a modified occupational health standard as determined by
the calculation specified in Section 34-314, below.
(b)
"OEL" means the occupational exposure limit for the regulated toxic air
pollutant.
(a)
(b) "SF" means the safety factor as determined by Section 34-296.
To calculate the annual ambient air limit for a regulated toxic air
pollutant, the occupational exposure limit shall be divided by the
product of 4.2 and the safety factor, as in the formula below:
AAL (annual) = OEL/(SF x 4.2)
(c)
Sec. 34-311 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-316
CHCT:407
Sec. 34-316. Calculation of annual de minimus emissions. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-606, 11-6-2002]
To calculate the annual de minimus emission level for a regulated toxic air
pollutant in pounds per year, the annual ambient air limit shall be multiplied
by 3.281.
Sec. 34-317. through Sec. 34-325. (Reserved)
Subdivision
VII.
The
List
Naming
All
Regulated
Toxic
Air
Pollutants
And
Other
Information
Sec. 34-326. List establishing regulated air toxics. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-701, 11-6-2002]
The Board shall establish one list containing the following information:
(1) The chemical name of each regulated toxic air pollutant;
The chemical abstracts service number of each regulated toxic air
pollutant;
(2)
(3) The classification for each regulated toxic air pollutant;
The twenty-four-hour ambient air limit for each regulated toxic air
pollutant;
(4)
(5) The annual ambient air limit for each regulated toxic air pollutant;
(6) The time adjustment factor for each regulated toxic air pollutant;
The occupational exposure limit for each regulated toxic air pollutant
where there is one established;
(7)
The facility threshold limit for each regulated toxic air pollutant in
accordance with the limit established by Maine Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to 06 096 CMR 115 (Appendix B).
(8)
The twenty-four-hour de minimus emission level for each regulated
toxic air pollutant; and
(9)
Sec. 34-316 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-326
CHCT:408
Sec. 34-327. Adoption of list establishing regulated air toxic
pollutants. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-702, 11-6-2002]
The lists naming all regulated toxic air pollutants and other information as
described in Table I33 shall be adopted by the Board at the first meeting at
which a quorum is present.
Sec. 34-328. Publication of regulated air toxics list. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 4-703, 11-6-2002]
The list of regulated pollutants, and any additions, deletions, or
modifications to the list and to any AAL established therein shall be
published by the City annually in the form of as fact sheet and shall be
distributed by the Board to the owner of any stationary source or process
permitted under this article. The list shall also be available to any person in
database form.
Sec. 34-329. Additions, deletions, or modification to regulated
compounds. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-704, 11-6-2002]
All additions, deletions and modifications to any part of the list shall be
made through the petition procedure specified in Section 34-221 of this
article.
Sec. 34-330. Petition to add, delete, or modify a regulated
compound. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-705, 11-6-2002]
The annual de minimus emission level for each regulated toxic air
pollutant.
The list known as Table I shall consist of all of the compounds
for which the Maine Department of Environmental Protection has
established a facility threshold limit for hazardous air pollutants
pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 590 and 06 096 CMR 115 (Appendix B),
as amended, or their equivalents as listed by ACGIH, and any other
substances and compounds which have been added pursuant to
the applicable provisions of this article. The list shall be appended
hereto upon adoption by the Biddeford Environmental Board.
a.
(10)
If a person wishes to make an addition, deletion or modification to
either list, the person shall petition the Board pursuant to Section
34-221 at any time to add or delete a substance or compound or to
modify a parameter for any substance or compound named on the list
described in Table I.
(a)
Where data limitations exist which prevent the derivation of an ambient
air limit, a person intending to use a substance or compound named on
the list shall petition the Board in accordance with (c), below.
(b)
33.Editor's Note: Table I is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 34-326 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-330
CHCT:409
Petitions shall be submitted in writing to the Board in accordance with
Section 34-221 and shall contain the following information:
The specification of one or more of the following proposed actions:
a. Add a substance or compound to the list;
b. Delete a substance or compound from the list;
Modify the classification of a regulated toxic air pollutant
named on the list;
c.
Modify or add an ambient air limit of a regulated toxic air
pollutant named on the list;
d.
Modify a time adjustment factor of a regulated toxic air
pollutant named on the list;
e.
Modify an occupational exposure limit of a regulated toxic air
pollutant named on the list; or
f.
Modify a de minimus emission level of a regulated toxic air
pollutant named on the list; and
g.
(1)
A statement of the reason(s) with data and documentation which
support the proposed revision to the list based on generally
accepted scientific principles which demonstrate:
For each proposed addition to the list, that the substance or
compound is known to cause or can reasonably be anticipated
to cause in humans as a result of exposure to such substance
or compound, any of the health effects as listed below:
1. Acute;
2. Chronic;
3. Mutagenic;
4. Reproductive; or
5. Developmental;
a.
For each proposed deletion from the list, that the substance
or compound cannot reasonably be anticipated to cause in
humans as a result of exposure to such substance or
compound, any of the health effects as listed in Subsection
(c)(2)a., above; or
b.
For each modification to the list, that the parameter in question
causes the substance or compound to be:
In the case of a petition for stricter regulatory control
of the substance or compound, known to cause or can
reasonably be anticipated to cause any of the health
1.
c.
(2)
(c)
Sec. 34-330 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-330
CHCT:410
Sec. 34-331. Decision on whether to grant or deny petition. [Ord.
No. 2002.112, § 4-706, 11-6-2002]
The Environmental Board shall grant or deny the petition in accordance
with Section 34-221 based on whether the proposed revision ensures the
promotion of public health.
Sec. 34-332. through Sec. 34-340. (Reserved)
Subdivision
VIII.
Variance
Procedure
Sec. 34-341. Variance. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 4-801, 11-6-2002]
effects as listed in Paragraph a, above in humans, as a
result of exposure to the regulated toxic air pollutant at
such parameter; or
In the case of a petition for more lenient regulatory control
of a substance or compound, not reasonably anticipated to
cause any of the health effects as listed in Paragraph a,
above in humans, as a result of exposure to the regulated
toxic air pollutant at such parameter.
2.
Any person who owns or is in control of any stationary source or
process for which a City of Biddeford air toxics emissions permit was
granted may apply to the Board for a variance from any requirement
under this article or under a permit issued pursuant to this article,
except as otherwise provided for the addition, deletion, and
modification of an ambient air limit established under this article. The
petition must be accompanied by such information and data as the
Board may reasonably require. The Board may grant the variance, with
or without conditions, following a hearing, if it finds that:
Any emission of a regulated air toxic pollutant occurring or
proposing to occur under the variance will not threaten or cause
imminent or serious harm to public health, welfare or safety.
(1)
The enforcement of the requirement(s) for which the variance is
sought would produce serious hardships on the petitioner.
(2)
The variance will not cause or contribute to a violation of any other
applicable provision of state or federal law, or of any other state
or federal permit or license issued to the petitioner, and any other
ordinance of the City of Biddeford.
(3)
(a)
In determining under what conditions and to what extent the variance
may be granted, the Board shall give due recognition to the progress
which the person requesting the variance shall have made in reducing
and eliminating the emission of regulated air toxics, the character
(b)
Sec. 34-330 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-341
CHCT:411
Sec. 34-342. through Sec. 34-350. (Reserved)
and degree of injury to, or interference with, the health and physical
property of the people; and the social and economic value of the source
of the emissions.
Any variance granted hereunder on the ground that there is no
practical means known or available for the adequate prevention,
abatement or control of the air pollution involved, is to be in effect
only until the necessary means for the prevention, abatement or control
become known and commercially available and subject to the taking
of such reasonable substitute or alternate measures as the Board may
prescribe.
(c)
Any variance may be renewed, following a hearing, on terms and
conditions and for periods which would be appropriate on initial
granting of a variance. No variance shall be construed to relieve the
petitioner receiving it from liability imposed by state or federal law or
maintenance of a nuisance.
(d)
Sec. 34-341 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-342
CHCT:412
DIVISION 5
MONITORING, RECORDKEEPING AND REPORTING
Subdivision
I.
Short
Title
and
Definitions
Sec. 34-351. Short title. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-101, 11-6-2002]
This division shall be known and may be cited as "Biddeford Air Toxics
Emissions Ordinance: Monitoring, Recordkeeping and Reporting."
Sec. 34-352. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-102, 11-6-2002]
The provisions of this section shall be applicable to any stationary source
or process subject to the requirement to obtain a Biddeford air toxics
permit under Division 4 and to any stationary and area source and process
which emits a regulated air toxic pollutant for purposes of establishing an
inventory of such emissions.
Sec. 34-353. through Sec. 34-360. (Reserved)
Subdivision
II.
Recordkeeping
Requirements
Sec. 34-361. General recordkeeping requirements. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 5-201, 11-6-2002]
General recordkeeping requirements for process operations. The owner
or operator of each process operation shall keep monthly records or
records for a time period as approved by the Board of raw material
utilization in accordance with the following:
Records shall be kept regarding the total quantities of all raw
materials utilized in each process which are required to calculate
emissions, verify applicability and compliance with all emission
limitations, or to verify production capacities and quantities; and
(1)
All relevant material safety data sheets and certified product data
sheets.
(2)
Sources operating one or more processes which emit air pollutants
through more than one emission point shall record the hours of
operation of each process so that the distribution of the raw
materials or emissions among such emission points can be
estimated. Where the ECO determines that two or more production
(3)
(a)
Sec. 34-351 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-361
CHCT:413
lines are manufacturing similar products using the same
equipment, the same venting and exhaust systems and the same
raw materials, the production shall be considered a single process.
General recordkeeping requirements for combustion devices.
The owner or operator of a combustion device not exempt under
Section 34-241(b) shall maintain monthly records or records for
a time period as approved by the Biddeford Environmental Board
of representative fuel characteristics and utilization, including
primary, secondary, tertiary and auxiliary fuels in accordance with
the following:
For applicable solid fuels, any fuel mixture, including coal,
refuse-derived fuel ("RDF"), solid waste, hazardous waste, and
biomedical waste:
1. Consumption;
2. Fuel type;
3. Ash content;
4. Sulfur content as percent sulfur by weight of fuel; and
5. BTU content per pound of fuel;
6. Ultimate fuel analysis;
Metal and other toxic species as specified by the Board.
All such solid fuel and waste fuel analysis is to be
performed using a sampling and analysis plan approved
by the ECO.
7.
a.
(1)
(b)
General recordkeeping requirements for sources with continuous
emissions monitoring systems.
The owner or operator of a stationary source, with a certified
continuous emissions monitoring system subject to Maine Code
of Regulations shall maintain records in accordance with the
provisions of 06 096 CMR 117 and all applicable federal
regulations.
(1)
The owner or operator of a stationary source with a non-certified
continuous emissions monitoring system that does not meet the
requirements of 06 096 Code of Maine Rules 117, shall maintain
records in accordance with the following:
Measurements of emissions as output on an instrument
recorder if applicable, or as manually recorded on log sheets
as part of a data collection procedure;
a.
(2)
(c)
Sec. 34-361 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-361
CHCT:414
Sec. 34-362. Additional recordkeeping requirements. [Ord. No.
2002.112, § 5-202, 11-6-2002]
The owner or operator of any stationary source, area source, or device
subject to this division shall maintain additional records, as required by the
Board for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with this article.
Sec. 34-363. through Sec. 34-370. (Reserved)
Subdivision
III.
Reporting
Requirements
Sec. 34-371. General reporting requirements. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 5-301, 11-6-2002; Ord. No. 2006.37, 6-6-2006]
Number of hours of operation of the process or combustion
device on which the continuous emissions monitor is located;
b.
Number of hours of downtime of the continuous emissions
monitoring system during the time period when the process or
combustion device is in operation; and
c.
d. Frequency and results of calibrations performed.
The owner or operator of any stationary source, area source or device
subject to this division shall submit an annual emissions report.
(a)
The annual emissions report pursuant to Subsection (a) above, shall
include the following information:
The actual emissions of the stationary source, area source or device
and the methods used in calculating such emissions in accordance
with the procedures specified in Section 34-372;
(1)
For process operations, all information in accordance with Section
34-361(a);
(2)
For combustion devices, all information in accordance with Section
34-361(b); and
(3)
The actual annual emissions speciated by individual regulated toxic
air pollutants.
(4)
(b)
The annual emissions report pursuant to Subsection (a) above, shall
be submitted to the Board on or before April 1, 2003, and every year
thereafter by the same date covering emissions for the prior calendar
year.
(c)
The owner or operator of any stationary and area source or process
which emits any regulated air toxic pollutant above the facility
threshold limits established in Table I of this article shall report such
(d)
Sec. 34-361 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-371
CHCT:415
Sec. 34-372. Additional reporting. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-302,
11-6-2002]
The owner or operator of any stationary source or process subject to the
permitting requirement under this article shall submit additional reports,
required by the Board, for the purpose of demonstrating compliance with
all requirements of this article.
Sec. 34-373. through Sec. 34-380. (Reserved)
Subdivision
IV.
Recordkeeping
and
Reporting
Requirements
for
Permit
Deviations
Sec. 34-381. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-401, 11-6-2002]
The purpose of this subdivision is to establish the recordkeeping and
reporting requirements for a facility owner or operator, in the event of a
permit deviation.
Sec. 34-382. Recordkeeping requirements. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 5-402, 11-6-2002]
In the event of a permit deviation, the owner or operator of the affected
stationary source, process, or air pollution control equipment shall:
emissions to the Biddeford Environmental Code Officer in such manner
and in such form as required by the City consistent with the applicable
provisions of this article.
Investigate and take corrective action immediately upon discovery of
the permit deviation to restore the affected device, process, or air
pollution control equipment to within allowable permit levels; and
(1)
Record the following information:
a. The permit deviation;
b. The probable cause of the permit deviation;
c. The date of the occurrence;
d. The duration;
e. The specific device that contributed to the permit deviation; and
f. Any corrective or preventative measures taken.
(2)
Sec. 34-371 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-383
CHCT:416
Sec. 34-383. Reporting requirements. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-403,
11-6-2002]
If the permit deviation referenced in Section 34-382 does not cause
excess emissions, but continues for a period greater than nine
consecutive days, the source shall notify the ECO by telephone or fax on
the 10th day of the permit deviation, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or
state or federal legal holiday, in which event, the ECO shall be notified
on the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or state or federal legal
holiday, of the subsequent corrective actions to be taken.
(a)
In the event of a permit deviation that causes excess emissions, the
owner or operator of the affected device, process, or air pollution
control equipment shall:
Notify the ECO of the permit deviation and excess emissions by
telephone or fax, within 24 hours of discovery of the permit
deviation, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or state or federal legal
holiday, in which event, the ECO shall be notified on the next day
which is not a Saturday, Sunday, or state or federal legal holiday;
and
(1)
Submit a written report, in accordance with Subsection (d) below,
to the ECO within 10 days of discovery of the permit deviation
reported in Subsection (b)(1), above.
(2)
(b)
In the event of a permit deviation caused by a failure to comply with
the data availability requirements of continuous emissions monitor the
owner or operator of the source shall:
Notify the ECO of the permit deviation by telephone or fax, within
10 days of discovery of the permit deviation; and
(1)
Report the permit deviation to the ECO, as part of the excess
emissions report submitted in accordance with this section.
(2)
(c)
The written report, pursuant to Subsection (b)(2) above, shall include
the following information:
(1) Facility name;
(2) Facility address;
(3) Name of the responsible official employed at the facility;
(4) Facility telephone number;
(5) Date(s) of the occurrence;
(6) Time of the occurrence;
(7) Description of the permit deviation;
(8) The probable cause of the permit deviation;
(d)
Sec. 34-383 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-383
CHCT:417
Sec. 34-384. through Sec. 34-390. (Reserved)
Subdivision
V.
Continuous
Emissions
Monitoring
Reporting
Sec. 34-391. Recordkeeping. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-501,
11-6-2002]
Any source subject to the requirements of this division shall maintain
records of emission measurements, continuous monitoring system
performance testing measurements, performance evaluations, calibration
checks, and adjustments and maintenance performance on each monitoring
system and any other records required pursuant to 40 CFR Part 51,
Appendix P. Such records shall be maintained on site for at least five years
and must be available to the Board upon written or oral request.
Sec. 34-392. Reporting. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-502, 11-6-2002]
(9) Corrective action taken to date;
(10)Preventative measures taken to prevent future occurrences; and
Date and time that the device, process, or air pollution control
equipment returned to operation in compliance with an enforceable
emission limitation, or operating condition;
(11)
The specific device, process or air pollution control equipment that
contributed to the permit deviation;
(12)
The type and quantity of excess emissions emitted to the
atmosphere due to the permit deviation, if applicable; and
(13)
The calculation or estimation used to quantify the excess
emissions, if applicable.
(14)
All sources required by state or federal requirements to operate a
CEMS shall provide the Board with emission reports for opacity excess
emission and gaseous excess emissions on a quarterly basis within 30
days of the last date of the reporting period. These reports shall be
in a format approved by the Board and shall include the following
information:
(1) The name of the air contaminant emission standard exceeded:
(2) The air contaminant emission standard;
The amount of air contaminant emitted in excess of the applicable
emission standard expressed in the units of the standard;
(3)
(a)
Sec. 34-383 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-392
CHCT:418
Sec. 34-393. Direct reporting. [Ord. No. 2002.112, § 5-503,
11-6-2002]
Any source subject to the requirements of this division shall at its own cost
and in consultation with the ECO place a CEM (read out) at a location in
the offices of the ECO at the ECO's designation. Emission monitoring data
shall be linked to City computers, and continuously transmitted as required
under the permit to operate. The source's next annual fee due under Section
34-214 of this article shall be reduced by an amount equal to the costs of the
equipment and of establishing transmission of the data in complying with
this section.
Sec. 34-394. through Sec. 34-400. (Reserved)
Subdivision
VI.
Record
Retention
and
Availability
Sec. 34-401. Record retention and availability. [Ord. No. 2002.112,
§ 5-601, 11-6-2002]
Date and time of commencement and completion of each time
period of excess emission;
(4)
Specific cause of the excess emission and the corrective action
taken;
(5)
Date and times of each period where the CEMS was not
operational, and the total percentage of the source operating time
when the CEMS was not operational;
(6)
Specific cause of each period where the CEMS was not operational,
and the corrective action taken;
(7)
Date and times of each period where the CEMS was out of control
and the total percentage of the source's operating time when the
CEMS was out of control; and
(8)
Specific cause of each out-of-control period and the corrective
action taken.
(9)
When no excess emissions have occurred and the CEMS have not been
inoperative, repaired, or adjusted, such information shall be provided
in a quarterly report.
(b)
Any owner or operator of a source or device subject to this chapter shall
keep the required records on file for a minimum of five years.
(a)
Sec. 34-392 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-401
CHCT:419
Sec. 34-402. through Sec. 34-449. (Reserved)
Facilities subject to the requirements of this article, shall maintain
records in accordance with the applicable method used to demonstrate
compliance pursuant to Division 5.
(b)
Subject to Section 34-204 of the article, all data submitted to the Board
and ECO shall be available to the public.
(c)
Sec. 34-401 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-402
CHCT:420
ARTICLE V
BLASTING
Sec. 34-450. Title. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
This article shall be known as the "City of Biddeford Blasting Ordinance."
Sec. 34-451. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
The purpose of this article is to protect the public's health, safety, and
general welfare by regulating and controlling blasting operations within
the City, without causing undue financial and administrative hardship to
blasting operators.
Sec. 34-452. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007; Ord. No.
2007.93, 9-18-2007]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRBLAST — An airborne shock wave resulting from the detonation of
explosives. The movement of overburden or the release of expanding gas
into the air resulting from the detonation of explosives may also cause
airblast. Airblast may or may not be audible.
APPLICANT — The person, company or corporation responsible for
managing and/or conducting of a blasting operation.
BLASTING — Any activity entailing the use of explosives for the purpose
of producing an explosion to demolish structures or to fragment rock for
mining, quarrying, excavation, or construction. Related terms are as defined
in the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code and NFPA 495 Explosive
Materials Code.
BLASTING OPERATION — Includes all blasting anticipated to be
undertaken during the completion of a contract or series of contracts, for
demolition, excavation, construction, and development. A blasting operation
includes all work involving the preparation, drilling, loading and detonation
as well as the excavation and clean up of the blasted area.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy. For application of this Code, each portion of a
building completely separated from other portions by firewalls complying
with BOCA standards shall be considered as a separate building.
DECIBEL — The unit of sound pressure commonly used to measure airblast
from an explosion. The decibel scale shall be logarithmic.
EMERGENCY — A sudden or unexpected occurrence involving a clear and
imminent danger, demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss
of, or damage to, life, health, property, or essential public services.
Sec. 34-450 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-452
CHCT:421
EMERGENCY BLASTING OPERATION — An immediate blasting operation
necessary to prevent or mitigate loss of, or damage to, life, health, property,
or essential public services.
EXPLOSIVES — Any substance, chemical compound, or mechanical mixture
that is commonly used for the purpose of producing an explosion for
blasting, as defined by this article. Initiating devices (detonators,
detonating cords, etc.) are also included in this definition.
FLYROCK — Rock that is propelled through the air or along the ground
because of the detonation of explosives.
GROUND VIBRATIONS — The shaking of ground caused by the blast wave
emanating from the detonation of an explosive.
HERTZ — A term used to express the frequency of ground vibrations and
airblast. One hertz is one cycle per second.
INDEPENDENT FIRM — A bona fide company approved by the Fire
Department who is not affiliated with the applicant but is contracted to
impartially render services. In order to qualify as an independent firm, such
firm shall verify the following:
LEVEL 1 BLASTING OPERATION — Blasting operations involving less than
250 cubic yards of material to be removed.
LEVEL 2 BLASTING OPERATION — Blasting operations involving more
than 250 or more cubic yards of material to be removed.
PARTICLE VELOCITY — A measure of ground vibration. Particle velocity
describes the velocity at which a particle of ground vibrates when excited
by a force producing ground motion such as an earthquake or an explosion,
measured in inches per second.
The company that has been incorporated for a minimum of one fiscal
year.
(1)
The company holds general liability, workers compensation and auto
liability insurance.
(2)
The company and/or its principal has a minimum of three years
experience in the use and theory of seismology, as well as structural
engineering as it relates to vibratory energies.
(3)
The company and its principal are active members of an accepted
blasting and/or vibration related organization.
(4)
The principal or a member of management holds an engineering or
seismographic certificate of graduation.
(5)
The company is established as a neutral consultant that the City may
depend on for consultation.
(6)
The company has seismographic instrumentation and photographic
instruments not owned and registered to the blasting company or its
affiliates.
(7)
Sec. 34-452 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-452
CHCT:422
SEISMOGRAPH — An instrument that measures and records earthborn
vibration induced by the detonation of explosives. The instrument shall
produce a direct printout of ground motion frequency, acceleration, particle
velocity and amplitude, or produce a record from which any of these
parameters can be calculated.
Sec. 34-453. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
This article shall apply to all blasting operations related to demolition,
excavation, construction and development within the City. Emergency
blasting operations shall be subject to this article, except that with respect
to performance standards (Section 34-457), only those identified in Section
34-457(9) of this article shall apply.
Sec. 34-454. Permit. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Sec. 34-455. Authority. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Sec. 34-456. Application requirements. [Ord. No. 2007.38,
6-19-2007]
A permit shall be obtained from the Biddeford Fire Department prior to
any blasting with explosive devices or materials for any purpose within
the boundaries of the City.
(a)
(b) All blasting permits shall expire one year from date of issuance.
(a) This article is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001.
All blasting permits shall be approved, approved with conditions, or
denied by the Biddeford Fire Chief, or their designee. Generally,
permits for blasting operations shall be reviewed as follows:
Emergency and Level 1 blasting operations: The Fire Chief, or
their designee, shall review applications for emergency blasting
operations and for the removal of less than 50 cubic yards of
material per blasting operation.
(1)
Level 2 blasting operations: The City Planner, City Engineer, and
Fire Chief shall review applications for the removal of more than
50 cubic yards of material per blasting operation.
(2)
(b)
Based on the reliability of the quantity estimate, the location of the
project, and other factors that may warrant additional review, the Fire
Chief, or their designee, in consultation with the City Planner and City
Engineer, may elevate a Level 1 blasting operation to a Level 2 blasting
operation application.
(c)
Application forms for blasting permits may be obtained from the
Biddeford Fire Department (Alfred Street Central Station). Applications
will be accepted from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday to Friday,
(a)
Sec. 34-452 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-456
CHCT:423
excluding holidays. Two complete applications, including all submittal
requirements, are required.
All applications shall be accompanied with the following:
(1) Name of applicant;
(2) Name of property owner;
(3) Name of the general contractor or quarry operator;
Name and qualifications of the person or company to perform the
blasting;
(4)
(5) Documentation of State of Maine certification;
(6) Documentation of insurance;
Location of blasting operations, including a map of the subject
property, and the blast area for which the permit is requested;
(7)
Estimate of the number of cubic yards of material to be removed by
blasting;
(8)
Estimated number of blasts required to complete the blasting
operation;
(9)
Description of the project for which the blasting is being
undertaken; and
(10)
(11)Projected dates work is to be undertaken.
(b)
No permit shall be issued, without the following having been submitted:
Evidence that notification published in a newspaper of general
circulation at least 10 calendar days prior to the intended date of
the commencement of the blasting operations [in accordance with
the applicable requirements of Sections 34-457(c) or 34-457(i)].
(1)
Evidence that notification of abutters has been sent by United
States Postal Service (USPS) certified mail at least 10 calendar
days prior to the intended date of the commencement of the
blasting operations [in accordance with the applicable
requirements of Sections 34-457(c) or 34-457(i)].
(2)
Evidence that preblast surveys were offered to abutters [in
accordance with Section 34-457(d)].
(3)
Evidence that drinking water well tests were offered to abutters [in
accordance with Section 34-457(e)].
(4)
(c)
Upon submittal of a two complete applications and all submittal
requirements outlined in Subsections (b) and (c), the Biddeford Fire
Chief, or their designee, shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
(d)
Sec. 34-456 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-456
CHCT:424
Sec. 34-457. Performance standards. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007;
Ord. No. 2007.93, 9-18-2007]
the application for a blasting permit within four working days (Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays).
Fees required. Applications for a Level 1 blasting operation shall be
accompanied with a fee of $50. Applications for a Level 2 blasting
operation shall be accompanied with a fee of $200.
(e)
Hours of operation. Blasting operations, other than the blasting itself,
shall be limited to between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, and 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., Saturday. Blasting
itself shall not occur prior to 8:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday.
(a)
Liability insurance. Blasting contractors and/or applicants shall carry
general liability insurance in accordance with the following:
The amount insured must be a minimum amount of $1,000,000
combined single limit per occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate.
(1)
The insurance policy must contain specific reference to blasting as
an activity covered by the insurance.
(2)
The policy shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its agents
and/or representatives, employees, and residents from and against
any or all claims, damages, losses and expenses including legal
fees arising out of or resulting from performance of the work,
provided that such claim, damage, loss or expense is attributable
to bodily injury or death, or to injury to or destruction to tangible
personal or real property, including the loss of use, resulting in
whole or in part from the blasting activity by any negligent act or
omission of the contractor or any of its officers, agents, employees,
representatives, subcontractors, and/or anyone directly or
indirectly employed by any of them or anyone for whose acts any
of them would be liable regardless of whether it is caused in part
by a party indemnified hereunder and the contractor shall, at its
own expense, defend and protect said indemnified parties against
all such claims and demands.
(3)
The City shall be named as a certificate holder to ensure the
liability insurance is maintained throughout the duration of the
blasting operation. The certificate must provide that the City of
Biddeford shall be notified at least 10 days prior to any
cancellation.
(4)
(b)
Notification requirements:
Abutter notice contents: The abutter notice shall include the
blasting schedule, a description of the blasting signals to be used
during the operation, an address and telephone number where
property owners may request further information and additional
(1)
(c)
Sec. 34-456 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-457
CHCT:425
notification, information about the no-cost preblast survey required
below, and the offer to provide further information, upon written
request by the affected party, with a copy of such request provided
to the Fire Department.
Newspaper notice contents: The newspaper notice shall include the
blasting schedule, a description of the blasting signals to be used
during the operation, an address and telephone number where
property owners may request further information and additional
notification.
(2)
Level 1 blasting operations: The applicant shall notify all
landowners and owners of public water and sewer within 250 feet
of the proposed blasting operation. Notice shall be sent by United
States Postal Service (USPS) certified mail at least 10 calendar
days prior to the intended date of the commencement of the
blasting operations. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper
of general circulation at least 10 calendar days prior to the
intended date of the commencement of the blasting operations.
(3)
Level 2 blasting operations: The applicant shall notify all
landowners and owners of public water and sewer within 500 feet
of the proposed blasting operation. Notice shall be sent by United
States Postal Service (USPS) certified mail at least 10 calendar
days prior to the intended date of the commencement of the
blasting operations. Notice shall also be published in a newspaper
of general circulation at least 10 calendar days prior to the
intended date of the commencement of the blasting operations.
(4)
City notification: After first receiving a blasting permit, any person
intending to conduct blasting operations shall first notify the Fire
Department that a blasting operation is planned. Such notification
shall be received at least 24 hours prior to the planned detonation
and shall give the time of the planned detonation (within two
hours) and location where the blasting is to be done. Additional
notification shall be received at least one hour prior to the planned
detonation and shall give the time (within 30 minutes) of the
planned detonation. The notification may be given orally over the
telephone; however, the burden of proof as to whether the
notification was in fact received rests with the person responsible
for the blasting operation.
(5)
Prior to any blast, the person responsible for the blasting operation
shall inform all property owners, who have requested in writing to
be so informed as per Section 34-455(c)(1), of the impending blast.
Such notification shall be given by telephone 24 hours prior to the
blasting operation stating the time of the blast within one hour. The
burden of proof as to whether the notification was in fact received
rests with the person responsible for the blasting operation.
(6)
(d) Preblast survey requirements:
Sec. 34-457 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-457
CHCT:426
Level 1 blasting operations: The applicant will offer to hire an
independent firm to perform preblast surveys on all buildings
within 250 feet of the blasting area. The survey shall include a
written description and either a video or photographic
documentation of any preexisting conditions on the inside and
outside of each building. At least three documented attempts must
be made to physically offer the survey before the landowner may
be deemed a non-respondent.
(1)
Level 2 blasting operations: The applicant will offer to hire an
independent firm to perform preblast surveys on all buildings
within 500 feet of the blasting area. The survey shall include a
written description and either a video or photographic
documentation of any preexisting conditions on the inside and
outside of each building. At least three documented attempts must
be made to physically offer the survey before the landowner may
be deemed a nonrespondent.
(2)
All preblast survey documentation shall be held by the independent
firm, and following completion of the blasting operation, upon
request, shall be made available to the landowner at the expense of
the applicant within 14 days of such a request.
(3)
Water tests:
The applicant will offer to hire an independent water testing
company to perform water tests of all drinking water wells within
500 feet of the blasting area. The test shall document the flow
rate of the well prior to blasting, as well as the levels of coli
form bacteria, e-coli, nitrate, pH, copper, iron chloride, manganese,
arsenic, calcium, and sodium. At least three documented attempts
must be made to physically offer the water test before the abutter
may be deemed a non-respondent.
(1)
The water tests shall be held by the independent water testing
company, and upon request, shall be made available to the
landowner at the expense of the landowner within 14 days of such
a request.
(2)
(e)
Monitoring:
Instrumentation: All seismographs used for compliance with this
section shall meet the following specifications:
a. Seismic frequency range: two to 200 Hz (+/- three Hz).
b. Acoustic frequency range: two to 200 Hz (+/- one dB).
c. Velocity range: 2/100 to four inches per second.
d. Sound range: 110 to 140 dB linear.
e. Transducers: three mutually perpendicular axes.
(1)
(f)
Sec. 34-457 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-457
CHCT:427
f. Recording: provide time-history waveform.
Calibration: must be laboratory calibrated as often as
necessary, but at least once every 12 months according to the
manufacturers recommendations. A copy of the instruments
calibration schedule/requirement and the latest calibration
certification must be available with any and all seismographs
on site.
g.
Level 1 blasting operations: Either an independent firm, retained
at the sole cost and expense of the applicant, or the applicant
themselves, shall monitor airblast and vibration for Level 1 blasting
operations. All instrumentation shall be in compliance with the
specifications outlined in this article. Instrument(s) shall be
installed at the closest point of the building in greatest proximity
to the shot to be recorded. A sketch showing the blast site, its
relation to adjacent buildings, the location of the seismograph(s)
and pertinent distances will also be required. Reports containing
pertinent information and seismograph printouts for each shot
shall be submitted weekly to the Fire Department, the Code
Enforcement Office and the blaster.
(2)
Level 2 blasting operations: An independent firm, retained at the
sole cost and expense of the applicant, shall monitor airblast and
vibration for Level 2 blasting operations. No fewer than two
seismographs shall be employed to monitor airblast and vibration.
The independent firm is required to record each shot, document
the location of surrounding buildings, their distances and relation
to the blast site, analyze readings for compliance, and report
results to the blaster following each detonation. Reports containing
pertinent information and seismograph printouts for each shot
shall be submitted weekly to the Fire Department, the Code
Enforcement Office and the blaster.
(3)
Ground vibration criteria: Ground vibration from all blasting
operations shall be measured in terms of peak particle velocity
(inches per second) and frequency (Hertz). The permissible
maximum ground vibration at any adjacent building shall conform
to the values established in USBM RI 8507, a copy of which is
available at the Fire Department.
(4)
Airblast criteria: Airblast at any building from all blasting
operations shall not exceed the values established in USBM RI
8485, a copy of which is available at the Fire Department.
(5)
Records maintenance: Persons responsible for blasting operations shall
maintain a record of each blast. All records shall be retained for at least
five years following the cessation of blasting operations, copies of which
shall be provided to the code enforcement office and Fire Department
within 10 days of request.
(g)
Sec. 34-457 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-457
CHCT:428
Such written records shall contain the following:
Level 1 blasting operations:
(1) Name of person responsible for the blasting operation.
(2) Location, date(s), and time of blast.
(3) Name of blaster.
(4) Type of material blasted.
(5) Number of holes, burden and spacing.
(6) Diameter and depth of holes.
(7) Types of explosives used.
(8) Amount of explosives used.
(9) Whether mats or other protections were used.
Seismograph and airblast readings: when and where measured.
Level 2 blasting operations:
(1) The same records as required for Level 1 blasting operations.
(2) Maximum amount of explosives per delay period of eight
milliseconds or greater.
(3) Maximum number of holes per delay period of eight
milliseconds or greater.
(4) Method of firing and type of circuit.
(5) Weather conditions (including such factors as wind direction,
cloud cover, etc.).
(6) Height or length of stemming.
(7) Type of detonators used and delay periods used.
(10)
Renotification: If a blasting operation pursuant to an issued permit is
suspended in an area for 90 days or longer, renotification in accordance
with the standards contained in Section 34-455(c) is required. Preblast
surveys are not required with the renotification, unless the blasting
operations have been suspended for more than six months.
(h)
Emergency blasting operations:
The Fire Chief, or their designee, shall determine whether the
need for a blasting operation qualifies as an emergency blasting
operation, as defined in Section 34-452.
(1)
If determined to be an emergency blasting operations, such
operation shall be exempt from these regulations, except that a
permit is still required and the operation is subject to the
performance standards in this section.
(2)
(i)
Sec. 34-457 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-457
CHCT:429
Sec. 34-458. Conflict. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Blasting in the City shall be conducted in compliance with all pertinent
sections of the City Code of Ordinances and, except as superseded by the
provisions of this article, the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code and
NFPA 495 Explosive Materials Code as adopted by the State of Maine.
In any particular instance where these regulations are in conflict with any
other rules, regulations, or ordinances of the City the more restrictive
regulation or provision shall prevail.
Liability insurance: All requirements, as outlined in Section
34-457(b), shall apply.
(3)
Monitoring: The requirements for a Level 1 blasting operation, as
outlined in Section 34-457(f), shall apply.
(4)
Records maintenance: The requirements for a Level 1 blasting
operation, as outlined in Section 34-457(g), shall apply.
(5)
Notification requirements:
Notice contents: The notice outlined in this section shall
include the blasting schedule, a description of the blasting
signals to be used during the operation, an address and
telephone number where property owners may request further
information and additional notification.
a.
The person, company or corporation responsible for managing
and/or conducting of a blasting operation shall notify all
landowners and owners of public water and sewer within 250
feet of the proposed blasting operation. Notice shall be handdelivered
at least 12 hours prior to the planned detonation and
shall give the time of the planned detonation (within two hours)
and location where the blasting is to be done.
b.
The person, company or corporation responsible for managing
and/or conducting of a blasting operation shall notify the Fire
Department at least four hours prior to the planned detonation
and shall give the time (within two hours) and location where
the blasting is to be done. Additional notification shall be
received at least one hour prior to the planned detonation
and shall give the time of the planned detonation (within 30
minutes) and location where the blasting is to be done. The
notification may be given orally over the telephone; however,
the burden of proof as to whether the notification was in fact
received rests with the person responsible for the blasting
operation.
c.
(6)
Sec. 34-457 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-459
CHCT:430
Sec. 34-459. Appeal of denial of a blasting permit. [Ord. No.
2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Where the Fire Chief or their designee has denied a blasting permit under
this article, the applicant may appeal the denial to the City Council within
30 days of the Fire Department's decision by filing a written notice of appeal
with the City Clerk.
Sec. 34-460. Conditions. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Upon issuance of any blasting permit, the Fire Department may prescribe
any reasonable conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize
adverse effects upon the neighborhood or community.
Sec. 34-461. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Any material misstatement or omission of information required by this
article or the violation of this article or any condition attached to a permit
granted under this article shall constitute a land use violation and be
penalized in accordance with Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Sec. 34-462. Severability. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
If any provision of this article is declared unconstitutional or held invalid, it
shall not affect any other section, clause, or provision thereof, but the same
shall remain in full force and effect.
Sec. 34-463. through § 34-475. (Reserved)
Sec. 34-459 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-463
CHCT:431

ARTICLE VI
POST-[CAOdNopStTeRdU8C-4T-I2O0N0 9STBOyROMrdW. NAToE. R20 D0I9S.5C4H]ARGE
DIVISION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 34-476. Purpose.
Sec. 34-477. Objectives.
The objectives of this article are to:
Sec. 34-478. Applicability.
The purpose of this Post-Construction Stormwater Management
Ordinance, (the article) is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Biddeford through review and
approval of post-construction stormwater management plans and
monitoring and enforcement of compliance with such plans as required
by federal and state law.
(a)
This article establishes methods for post-construction stormwater
management in order to comply with minimum control measures
requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, of federal regulations and
of Maine's Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems General
Permit.
(b)
Reduce the impact of post-construction discharge of stormwater on
receiving waters; and
(1)
Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollution, wherever possible, through use of best management
practices as promulgated by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to its Chapters 500 and 502 Rules, and ensure that
these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat
to public safety.
(2)
This article applies to all new development and redevelopment within
the City that discharges stormwater to the City's municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) and to associated stormwater management
facilities.
(a)
Exception: This article does not apply to new development or
redevelopment on a lot, tract or parcel where that lot, tract or parcel
is part of a subdivision that is approved under this article. Said lot,
tract or parcel shall not require separate review under this article, but
shall comply with the post-construction stormwater management plan
requirements for that approved subdivision.
(b)
Sec. 34-476 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-479
CHCT:433
Sec. 34-479. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the terms listed below are defined as
follows:
APPLICANT — A person with requisite right, title or interest or an agent
for such person who has filed an application for new development or
redevelopment that requires a post-construction stormwater management
plan under this article.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the state. BMPs
also include treatment requirements, treatment devices and structures,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
CITY — The City of Biddeford.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq., also known as the "Clean Water Act"), and any subsequent
amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Construction activity including one acre or
more of disturbed area. Construction activity also includes activity with less
than one acre of total land disturbed area if that area is part of a subdivision
that will ultimately disturb an area equal to or greater than one acre.
DISCHARGE — Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying,
dumping, disposing or other addition of pollutants to waters of the state.
"Direct discharge" or "point source" means any discernible, confined and
discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated
animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which
pollutants are or may be discharged.
DISTURBED AREA — Clearing, grading and excavation. Mere cutting of
trees, without grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure of soil is
not considered "disturbed area." "Disturbed area" does not include routine
maintenance but does include redevelopment. "Routine maintenance" is
maintenance performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, and original purpose of land or improvements thereon.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Code Enforcement Officer or other
person(s) or department designated by the City to administer and enforce
this article.
MUNICIPAL PERMITTING AUTHORITY — The municipal official or body
that has jurisdiction over the land use approval or permit required for a new
development or redevelopment.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or MS4 — Conveyances
for stormwater, including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made
channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and
Sec. 34-479 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-479
CHCT:434
combined sewers) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or sewage
district, fire district, state agency or federal agency or other public entity
that discharges directly to surface waters of the state.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or by the Maine Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable
on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any construction activity on unimproved premises
and for purposes of this article includes "redevelopment" defined below.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, town, Quasimunicipal
Corporation, state agency or federal agency or other legal entity.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue,
sewage, refuse, effluent, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals,
biological or radiological materials, oil, petroleum products or by-products,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt and industrial,
municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — BMPs and
associated inspection and maintenance procedures for the stormwater
management facilities employed by a new development or redevelopment to
meet the standards of this article and approved by the municipal permitting
authority.
PREMISES — Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips,
located within the City from which discharges into the storm drainage
system are or may be created, initiated, originated or maintained.
QUALIFIED POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER INSPECTOR — A
person who conducts post-construction inspections of stormwater
management facilities and meets the following qualifications:
The Inspector shall not have any ownership or financial interest in the
property being inspected nor be an employee or partner of any entity
having an ownership or financial interest in the property; and
(1)
The Inspector shall also meet the following or similar criteria as
approved by the City Engineer, who shall maintain a list of approved
qualified Post-Construction Stormwater Inspectors:
Have a working knowledge of Chapter 500, Stormwater
Management Rules and Maine's Stormwater BMP Manual; and
a.
Have a college degree in environmental science, civil engineering,
or comparable expertise, or shall have completed the training for
and be certified by the MeDEP as an Inspector of Long-Term
Maintenance and Inspections of Stormwater BMP's; and
b.
(2)
Sec. 34-479 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-479
CHCT:435
REDEVELOPMENT — Construction activity on premises already improved
with buildings, structures or activities or uses, but does not include such
activities as exterior remodeling of structures.
REGULATED SMALL MS4 — Any small MS4 regulated by the State of
Maine General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (General Permit), including all
those located partially or entirely within an urbanized area (UA) and those
additional small MS4s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the
General Permit have been designated by the DEP as regulated small MS4s.
SMALL MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM or SMALL MS4
— Any MS4 that is not already covered by the Phase I MS4 stormwater
program, including municipally owned or operated storm sewer systems,
state or federally owned systems, such as colleges, universities, prisons,
Maine Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike Authority road
systems and facilities, and military bases and facilities.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The City's municipal separate storm sewer
system, including the City's regulated small MS4 and areas outside the
City's urbanized area that drain into the regulated small MS4.
STORMWATER — Any stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface
runoff and drainage; "stormwater" has the same meaning as "storm water."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any parking areas, catch
basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and related
structures that are part of the post-construction stormwater management
plan for a new development or redevelopment.
URBANIZED AREA (UA) — The areas of the State of Maine so defined by
the latest decennial census by the United States Bureau of the Census.
Have a demonstrated practical knowledge of stormwater hydrology
and stormwater management techniques, including the
maintenance requirements for stormwater management facilities;
and
c.
Have the ability to determine if stormwater facilities are
performing as intended.
d.
Sec. 34-479 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-479
CHCT:436
DIVISION 2
MANAGEMENT PLAN
Sec. 34-480. Plan required.
Sec. 34-481. Performance standards.
Except as provided in Section 34-478(b) above, no applicant for a
building permit, subdivision approval, site plan approval or other
zoning, planning or other land use approval for new development to
which this article is applicable shall receive such permit or approval
for that new development unless the municipal permitting authority
for that new development also determines that the applicant's postconstruction
stormwater management plan for that new development
meets the requirements of this article.
(a)
At the time of application, the applicant shall notify the municipal
permitting authority if its post-construction stormwater management
plan includes any BMP that will discharge to the City's MS4 and shall
include in this notification a listing of which BMP will so discharge.
(b)
The applicant shall make adequate provision for the management of the
quantity and quality of all stormwater generated by a new development
through a post-construction stormwater management plan. This postconstruction
stormwater management plan shall be designed to meet
the standards contained in the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection's Chapters 500 and 502 Rules and shall comply with the
practices described in the manual Stormwater Management for Maine,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection,
January 2006, which hereby are incorporated by reference pursuant to
30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003.
(a)
The applicant shall meet the quantity and quality standards above
either on site or off site. Where off-site facilities are used, the applicant
must submit to the City documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency
by the City's attorney, that the applicant has a sufficient property
interest in the property where the off-site facilities are located, by
easement, covenant or other appropriate legal instrument, to ensure
that the facilities will be able to provide post-construction stormwater
management for the new development and that the property will not be
altered in a way that interferes with the off-site facilities.
(b)
Where the applicant proposes to retain ownership of the stormwater
management facilities shown in its post-construction stormwater
management plan, the applicant shall submit to the City
documentation, approved as to legal sufficiency by the City's attorney,
that the applicant, its successors, heirs and assigns shall have the
legal obligation and the resources available to operate, repair, maintain
and replace the stormwater management facilities. Applications for
new development or redevelopment requiring stormwater management
facilities that will not be dedicated to the City shall enter into a
(c)
Sec. 34-480 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-481
CHCT:437
maintenance agreement with the City. A sample of this maintenance
agreement is attached as Appendix 1 to this article.34
Whenever elements of the stormwater management facilities are not
within the right-of-way of a public street and the facilities will not be
offered to the City for acceptance as public facilities, the municipal
permitting authority may require that perpetual easements not less
than 30 feet in width, conforming substantially with the lines of existing
natural drainage, and in a form acceptable to the City's attorney, shall
be provided to the City allowing access for maintenance, repair,
replacement and improvement of the stormwater management
facilities. When an offer of dedication is required by the municipal
permitting authority, the applicant shall be responsible for the
maintenance of these stormwater management facilities under this
article until such time (if ever) as they are accepted by the City.
(d)
In addition to any other applicable requirements of this article and
the City's Municipal Code, any new development which also requires
a stormwater management permit from the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) under 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D shall
comply with the rules adopted by DEP under 38 M.R.S.A. § 420-D,
Subsection 1, as the same may be amended from time to time, and the
applicant shall document such compliance to the municipal permitting
authority. Where the standards or other provisions of such stormwater
rules conflict with municipal ordinances, the stricter (more protective)
standard shall apply.
(e)
The applicant shall be responsible for all costs, including but not limited
to attorney's fees incurred during the review of all documents by the
City Attorney.
(f)
34.Editor's Note: Appendix 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 34-481 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-481
CHCT:438
DIVISION 3
PLAN COMPLIANCE
Sec. 34-482. Demonstration of compliance.
Any person owning, operating, leasing or having control over stormwater
management facilities required by a post-construction stormwater
management plan approved under this article shall demonstrate compliance
with that Plan as follows:
Sec. 34-483. Right of entry.
In order to determine compliance with this article and with the postconstruction
stormwater management plan, the enforcement authority may
enter upon property at reasonable hours with the consent of the owner,
occupant or agent to inspect the stormwater management facilities.
Sec. 34-484. Annual report.
Beginning July 1, 2009, and each year thereafter, the City shall include the
following in its Annual Report to the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection:
That person or a qualified post-construction stormwater inspector hired
by that person shall, at least annually, inspect the stormwater
management facilities, including but not limited to any parking areas,
catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes and
related structures, in accordance with all municipal and state
inspection, cleaning and maintenance requirements of the approved
post-construction stormwater management plan.
(1)
If the stormwater management Facilities require maintenance to
function as intended by the approved post-construction stormwater
management plan, that person shall take corrective action(s) to address
the deficiency or deficiencies.
(2)
That person shall employ a qualified post-construction stormwater
inspector to provide, on or by March 1 of each year, a completed and
signed certification to the enforcement authority in a form identical to
that attached as Appendix 1 to this article or in a similar form approved
by the City Engineer, certifying that the stormwater management
facilities have been inspected, and that they are adequately maintained
and functioning as intended by the approved post-construction
stormwater management plan, or that they require maintenance or
repair, describing any required maintenance and any deficiencies found
during inspection of the stormwater management facilities. If the
stormwater management facilities require, maintenance or repair of
deficiencies in order to function as intended by the approved postconstruction
stormwater management plan, the person shall provide
a record of the required maintenance or deficiency and corrective
action(s) taken.
(3)
Sec. 34-482 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-484
CHCT:439
The cumulative number of sites that have stormwater management
facilities discharging into their MS4;
(1)
A summary of the number of sites that have stormwater management
facilities discharging into their MS4 that were reported to the City;
(2)
The number of sites with documented functioning stormwater
management facilities; and
(3)
The number of sites that required routine maintenance or remedial
action to ensure that stormwater management facilities are functioning
as intended.
(4)
Sec. 34-484 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-484
CHCT:440
DIVISION 4
ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES
Sec. 34-485. Compliance required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of or to fail
to comply with any of the requirements of this article or of the postconstruction
stormwater management plan. Whenever the enforcement
authority believes that a person has violated this article or the postconstruction
stormwater management plan, the enforcement authority may
enforce this article in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Sec. 34-486. Notice of violation.
Sec. 34-487. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article or the post-construction stormwater
management plan shall be subject to fines, penalties and orders for
injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the City's attorney's fees and
costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day that such
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any
person who violates this article or the post-construction stormwater
management plan also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties,
damages and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys' fees and costs,
incurred by the City for violation of federal and state environmental laws
Whenever the enforcement authority believes that a person has violated
this article or the post-construction stormwater management plan, the
enforcement authority may order compliance with this article or with
the post-construction stormwater management plan by written notice
of violation to that person indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without
limitation:
The abatement of violations, and the cessation of practices or
operations in violation of this article or of the post-construction
stormwater management plan;
(1)
At the person's expense, compliance with BMPs required as a
condition of approval of the new development, the repair of
stormwater management facilities and/or the restoration of any
affected property; and/or
(2)
The payment of fines, of the City's remediation costs and of the
City's reasonable administrative costs and attorneys' fees and
costs.
(3)
(a)
If abatement of a violation, compliance with BMPs, repair of stormwater
management facilities and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
abatement, compliance, repair and/or restoration must be completed.
(b)
Sec. 34-485 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-487
CHCT:441
and regulations caused by or related to that person's violation of this article
or of the post-construction stormwater management plan; this responsibility
shall be in addition to any penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under
this chapter.
Sec. 34-488. Consent agreement.
The Enforcement Authority may, with the approval of the municipal officers,
enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address timely
abatement of the violation(s) of this article or of the post-construction
stormwater management plan for the purposes of eliminating violations of
this article or of the post-construction stormwater management plan and of
recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
Sec. 34-489. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation or suspension notice may appeal
the determination of the enforcement authority to the Board of Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of the City's Zoning Ordinance.35 The notice
of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of violation. The Board of Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on
the appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal.
The Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the
enforcement authority. A party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of
Appeals may appeal that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45
days of the date of the Board of Appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of
the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Sec. 34-490. Additional enforcement measures.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the Board
of Appeals, within 45 days of a decision of the Board of Appeals affirming
or modifying the enforcement authority's decision, then the enforcement
authority may direct that the City's attorney file an enforcement action in a
Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure.
35.Editor's Note: See Part III, Land Development Regulations, of this Code.
Sec. 34-487 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-490
CHCT:442
DIVISION 5
SEVERABILITY; STATUTORY AUTHORITY
Sec. 34-491. Severability.
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, clauses, sentences, or
paragraphs or application of this article.
Sec. 34-492. Statutory authority.
The City of Biddeford enacts this Post-Construction Stormwater
Management Control Ordinance (the article) pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3001 (municipal home rule ordinance authority), 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 (the
Wastewater Discharge Law), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (the Clean Water Act),
and 40 CFR Part 122 [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's regulations
governing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)].
The Maine Department of Environmental Protection, through its
promulgation of the General Permit for the Discharge of Stormwater from
Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems, has listed the City of
Biddeford as having a regulated small municipal separate storm sewer
system (Small MS4); under this General Permit, listing as a regulated small
MS4 necessitates enactment of this article as part of the City's Stormwater
Management Program in order to satisfy the minimum control measures
required by Part IV D 5 (Post-construction stormwater management in new
development and redevelopment).
Sec. 34-493. through Sec. 34-549. (Reserved)
Sec. 34-491 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-493
CHCT:443

ARTICLE VII
[Adopted D2-o2w1n-2to0w17n BAyntOi-rBdl.i gNhot. 2017.12]
Sec. 34-550. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Biddeford Downtown Anti-Blight
Ordinance."
Sec. 34-551. Policy.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence of blighted premises
in the downtown of Biddeford will adversely affect property values and
development within the downtown and threatens the health, safety, general
welfare and economic well-being of its residents and commercial interests.
It is further found that blighted properties can be rehabilitated,
reconstructed, demolished and/or reused so as to provide decent, safe
and sanitary housing and/or commercial use, and that such rehabilitation,
reconstruction, demolition and/or reuse would assist to eliminate, remedy
and prevent the adverse conditions described above.
Sec. 34-552. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to:
Sec. 34-553. Creating or maintaining blighted premises prohibited.
No owner, agent, tenant or person in control of real property located in the
downtown of the City of Biddeford shall allow, create, maintain, cause to be
created or maintained, or allow to exist any blighted premises.
Sec. 34-554. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Any building, structure, premises or any part
of a structure that is a separate unit, in which any of the following or
any combination of the following conditions exist (the following list is
illustrative, not exhaustive):
(a) Define, prohibit and abate blighted premises;
Protect, preserve and promote public health, safety, general welfare
and economic well-being; and
(b)
Preserve and protect property values and promote development within
the downtown and the City of Biddeford.
(c)
It is a substantial factor causing obvious depreciation to property
values in the downtown;
(1)
It is not being maintained and/or has been unoccupied for at least 90
days and contributes to downtown decay/blight as evidenced by the
(2)
Sec. 34-550 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-554
CHCT:445
DILAPIDATED — A building or structure, or part thereof, that would not
qualify for a certificate of occupancy if applied for, or which is deemed an
unsafe structure as defined by the State Building Code, and any dwelling
or unit which is designated as unfit for human habitation as defined in the
State Building Code and/or the Code of Ordinances of the City of Biddeford.
DOWNTOWN — An area encompassed by the Zoning District identified as
MSRD-1.
ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW — The view available, from private or public
property or public rights-of-way, from average grade surrounding the
property.
PERSON — Any man, woman, family, corporation, or other legal entity
capable of owning or possessing real property.
PREMISES — Any lot or part thereof or parcel or plot of land, either
occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling structure, and
includes any such building, accessory structure or other structure thereon,
or any part thereof. The term "premises," where the context requires, shall
be deemed to include any buildings, dwellings, parcels, land or structures
contained within the scope of this article.
STRUCTURE — Anything built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything
constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, including
decks, stacks, satellite dishes, and antennas, exclusive of fences, and poles,
wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated with service drops,
as well as guying and guy anchors, as well as sidewalks, driveways, parking
lots, and field or garden walls or embankment retaining walls.
existence of one or more of the following conditions in ordinary public
view:
(a) Missing or boarded windows or doors;
(b) Collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor;
(c) Seriously damaged or missing siding of four square feet or more;
(d) Buildings in need of painting or sealing;
(e) Fire damages;
(f) A structurally faulty foundation or foundations; and/or
Physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation, garbage, or
trash;
(g)
It is a factor creating a substantial and unreasonable interference with
the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other space within the
building or of other premises within the downtown as documented by
neighborhood complaints.
(3)
Sec. 34-554 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-554
CHCT:446
UNIT — Any space within a building that is or can be rented by or to a single
person or entity for its sole use, and is intended to be a single and distinct
space.
UNOCCUPIED — A period of 90 days or longer during which a building or
structure, or part thereof, or land is not legally occupied as documented by
the Code Enforcement Office.
Sec. 34-555. Applicability.
This article applies to all premises within the City of Biddeford downtown
as defined above.
Sec. 34-556. Responsibility for compliance.
Any person owning premises subject to this article or legally responsible for
maintaining the premises, including the agents thereof, shall be jointly and
severally obligated to comply with the provisions of this article and subject
to the penalties for violation hereof.
Sec. 34-557. Complaints.
Complaints may be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and/or their
designee and must be in writing and signed and dated by the complainant.
Sec. 34-558. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer is charged with the enforcement of this
article. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce
the provisions of this article and any rules or regulations promulgated
under this article. The Code Enforcement Officer shall order any person
who violates this article to abate such violation within two years, unless
such a violation is considered an immediate threat to the health, safety,
and general welfare of the public, in which case such abatement shall
be conducted within an acceptable time frame as determined by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
(a)
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be hereby authorized and
empowered to issue notices of violation for violations of this article.
Notices of violation shall be sent to the property owner and/or the
person responsible for maintaining the premises, and if the notice of
violation is a result of a complaint pursuant to Sec. 34-557, shall also
be sent to the complainant. Such notices shall be sent by certified mail
or delivered in person and shall include the following:
(1) A description of the violation(s) of this article.
An outline of the process by which the property owner and/or the
person responsible for maintaining the premises can determine
what remedial actions are recommended by the Biddeford Historic
Preservation Commission;
(2)
(b)
Sec. 34-554 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-558
CHCT:447
Sec. 34-559. Violations and penalties.
Sec. 34-560. Hearing and appeal procedure for notices of violation.
A description of the remedial action(s) which, if taken, would affect
the compliance with the provisions of this article;
(3)
A date by which the violation(s) must be corrected in order to avoid
penalty and enforcement pursuant to this article;
(4)
A statement that the penalties and enforcement provisions of this
article will take effect the day after the compliance date if
compliance has not been accomplished;
(5)
A statement that outlines the appeals process afforded through this
article.
(6)
Historic Preservation Commission review is required for all properties
receiving a notice of violation pursuant to the article. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall review all proposed remedial actions
and shall issue a certificate of appropriateness only once it is satisfied
with what is proposed. Further, additional recommendations for
improvements in order to abate violations of this article may be
included in such a certificate of appropriateness and may be included
as conditions to the required abatement at the discretion of the Code
Enforcement Officer.
(c)
Action upon noncompliance. Any owner, person responsible for
maintaining the premises, or agent of a blighted premises who fails
to abate any such blight commits a civil violation pursuant to City of
Biddeford Code of Ordinances, Chapter 1 (General Provisions), Sec.
1-12 (General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations).
(a)
Conference granted to owner or agent. Any owner or agent who
receives a notice of violation issued pursuant to Sec. 34-558 above
shall, upon request, be granted a conference with the official(s) who
issued the notice of violation as soon as practicable. A request for
a conference shall in no way stay the abatement order. However, a
hearing request made pursuant to Sec. 34-560 herein shall stay an
abatement order.
(b)
Any person notified in accordance with Sec. 34-558 may appeal the
notice of violation(s) within 30 days to the Biddeford Zoning Board of
Appeals as an administrative appeal as outlined in Article IX of the
Biddeford Land Development Regulations.
(a)
Any appeals shall be heard by the Biddeford Zoning Board of Appeals
at its next earliest available scheduled meeting.
(b)
Sec. 34-558 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-561
CHCT:448
Sec. 34-561. Severability.
If any provision of this article is declared unconstitutional or held invalid, it
shall not affect any other section, clause, or provision thereof, but the same
shall remain in full force and effect.
Sec. 34-561 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 34-561
CHCT:449
Chapter 38
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 38, Fire Prevention and Protection, adopted 11-17-1998,
as amended, was repealed 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.78.]
Chapter 40
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements — See Ch. 6.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 46.
Streets, sidewalks and other public
places — See Ch. 62.
Sec. 34-561 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 34-561
CHCT:450
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 40-1. through Sec. 40-24. (Reserved)
Sec. 40-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-1
CHCT:451

ARTICLE II
CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS
Sec. 40-25. Definitions. [Ord. of 12-17-1996]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CURFEW HOURS — 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, or Thursday until 5:00 a.m. of the following day, and 12:01 a.m.
on any Saturday or Sunday, until 5:00 a.m.
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN — A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.
MINOR — Any person under 17 years of age.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation
operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.
PARENT — A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent
of another person, or at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities and shops.
REMAIN — To linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do
so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
Sec. 40-26. Offenses. [Ord. of 12-17-1996]
A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.
(a)
Sec. 40-25 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-26
CHCT:453
Sec. 40-27. Defenses. [Ord. of 12-17-1996]
A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any
place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during
curfew hours.
(b)
The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits to
an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises
of the establishment during curfew hours.
(c)
It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (b) that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
(2)
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity without any detour or stop;
(4)
(5) Involved in an emergency;
On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain
to the police department about the minor's presence;
(6)
Either (i) attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the
City of Biddeford, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor, or (ii) within 45 minutes
after the termination of an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the
City of Biddeford, a civic organization, or another similar entity
that takes responsibility for the minor, going to or returning home
from such activity.
(7)
Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly;
(8)
Exercising rights protected under Article I, Sections 2, 3, 4 or 5 of
the Maine Constitution; or
(9)
Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority
removed in accordance with Title 15, Section 3306A of the Revised
Statutes.
(10)
(a)
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 40-26(c) that the owner,
operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police
(b)
Sec. 40-26 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 40-27
CHCT:454
Sec. 40-28. Enforcement. [Ord. of 12-17-1996]
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in
Section 40-27(a) present.
Sec. 40-29. Penalties. [Ord. of 12-17-1996]
A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate
offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is
committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $25 and not more than $100.
Sec. 40-30. Severability. [Ord. of 12-17-1996]
That the terms and provisions of this article are severable and are governed
by Chapter 1 of the Biddeford Code of Ordinances, as amended.
Sec. 40-31. Effective date. [Ord. of 12-17-1996]
That this article shall take effect in accordance with the provisions of
Section 2.11(c) of the Charter of the City of Biddeford.
Sec. 40-32. through Sec. 40-40. (Reserved)
department that a minor was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
Sec. 40-27 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-32
CHCT:455

ARTICLE III
DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
Sec. 40-41. Permission required to discharge firearms near
residences. [Ord. of 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 2002.62, 10-1-2002]
It is unlawful for a person to shoot or discharge a firearm of any kind or
description in the City within 100 yards of a residential dwelling without
the permission of the owner, or in his absence an adult occupant of that
dwelling as set forth in 12 M.R.S.A. § 7406(13).
Sec. 40-42. Discharge of firearm in reckless manner. [Ord. of
5-20-1997; Ord. No. 2002.62, 10-1-2002]
It is unlawful for a person to shoot or discharge a firearm of any kind
or description in the City in a reckless manner pursuant to 17-A M.R.S.A.
§§ 208-A and 211.
Sec. 40-43. Discharge of firearm in "no firearms discharge zone".
[Ord. No. 2002.62, 10-1-2002; Ord. No. 2003.29, 3-18-2003]
It is unlawful for a person to discharge a firearm as defined in Section 40-45
in or into the "No discharge of firearms zone" in described Section 40-45.
Sec. 40-44. Exceptions. [Ord. of 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 2002.62,
10-1-2002; Ord. No. 2003.29, 3-18-2003; Ord. No. 2006.5, 4-4-2006]
The provisions of Sections 40-42 through 40-43 shall not apply in the
following cases.
(1) Approved firearms range.
(2) Raccoon hunting at night with a .22 long rifle caliber firearm.
(3) Trappers tending their traps.
(4) Military funerals or reviews.
(5) Memorial events.
(6) Law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties.
(7) In the destruction of a dangerous animal as authorized by law.
(8) Hunters retrieving a wounded bird or animal.
Hunting of wildlife pursuant to a depredation permit issued by the
Maine State Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife allowing
the removal of wildlife causing property damage, and with written
permission from the Chief of Police.
(9)
(a)
Nothing in this section shall infringe upon the statutory right of a
person to act in self defense as set forth in the Maine Revised Statutes.
(b)
Sec. 40-41 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-45
CHCT:457
Sec. 40-45. Definitions. [Ord. of 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 2002.62,
10-1-2002; Ord. No. 2003.29, 3-18-2003]
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings.
APPROVED FIREARMS RANGE — An approved firearms range having a
backstop constructed of logs or timbers at least 12 inches in diameter with
an earth barrier behind or an earth barrier of suitable materials with no less
than a 45° slope. There shall be a natural obstruction of trees or terrain to
the rear of the backstop. The target area shall be placed no less than three
feet from the top and sides of the backstop. The range widths of the target
shall be no less than 15 feet, for 50 yards; 25 feet for 100 yards; and 50 feet
for 200 yards. No range shall be situated less than 100 feet from the nearest
roadway. No shooting is allowed between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
These regulations do not apply to indoor shooting ranges.
FIREARM — Any weapon whether loaded or unloaded, which is designed
to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive, and includes any such
weapon commonly referred to as a pistol, revolver, rifle, gun, machine gun,
or shotgun. A weapon which can be made into a firearm by the insertion of
a firing pin, or other similar thing, or repair, is a firearm.
MUZZLE-LOADING FIREARM — A rifle or smooth-bored firearm, patch and
ball only, that is loaded through the muzzle with powder or priming charge
or flint, match or wheel lock mechanism.
NO DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS ZONE — That part of the City encompassed
within the following boundaries:
Beginning at a point on the border between Biddeford and Saco in the Saco
River, said point also being at or near the Main Street Bridge;
Thence running in a generally southeasterly direction, along the border
between Biddeford and Saco to a point on the border that would intersect
to a straight line drawn from the center line easterly most side of the West
Brook outlet;
Thence running in a generally southwesterly direction to a point 50 feet
upland and parallel to the mean high water line of the main body of the
Saco River to a point, said point being on the easterly most side of the West
Brook outlet;
Thence running in a generally southeasterly direction, 50 feet upland and
parallel to the mean high water line of the main body of the Saco River to
a point, said point being the rock jetty at Hills Beach.
Thence running in a generally southeasterly direction, 50 feet upland and
parallel to the mean high water line of the Atlantic Ocean, to the opening
to the Biddeford Pool, more commonly known as "The Gut";
Thence running in a generally counter clockwise direction, 50 feet upland
and parallel to the mean high water line of the Biddeford Pool to the
opening to the Atlantic Ocean known as "The Gut";
Thence running in a generally northeasterly direction, 50 feet upland and
parallel to the mean high water line of the Atlantic Ocean to East Point;
Sec. 40-45 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 40-45
CHCT:458
Thence running in a generally southwesterly direction, 50 feet upland and
parallel to the mean high water line of the Atlantic Ocean to the Little
River;
Thence running in a generally northerly direction, 50 feet upland and
parallel to the mean high water line of the navigable portion of the Little
River;
Thence running 50 feet, more or less, to the mean high water line of the
Little River;
Thence running in a generally southwesterly direction, along the mean
high water line of the Little River to a point, said point being the
intersection of the mean high water line and the extension of the Biddeford-
Kennebunkport Town line;
Thence running northwesterly along extension of the Biddeford-
Kennebunkport Town Line and the Biddeford-Kennebunkport Town Line,
each in part to a point, said point being the intersection of the Biddeford-
Kennebunkport Town Line and the right-of-way line on the westerly side of
Pool Street, also known as State Route 9;
Thence running along the last mentioned right-of-way line in varying
directions, to a point, said point being the intersection of the right-of-way
on the southerly side of Pool Street and the southerly right-of-way line of
Meetinghouse Road;
Thence running in a generally northwesterly direction, along the southerly
right-of-way line of Meetinghouse Road, to a point, said point being the
intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Meetinghouse Road and
the right-of-way line on the southerly side of Pool Street;
Thence running in a generally northwesterly direction, along the right-ofway
line on the southerly side of Pool Street to a point, said point being the
intersection of the right-of-way line on the southerly side of Pool Street and
the easterly bank of west Brook;
Thence running in a generally southwesterly direction, along the easterly
bank of West Brook to Wilcox Pond;
Thence running in a generally southerly direction, along the easterly shore
line of Wilcox Pond to the easterly bank of West Brook.
Thence running in a generally southerly direction, along the easterly bank
of West Brook to a point 1,200 feet, more or less, northeasterly of the end
of Granite Street Extension;
Thence running southwesterly parallel to Granite Street Extension, 1,800
feet, more or less, to a point 900 feet, more or less, southerly of the rightof-
way at the end of Granite Street Extension;
Thence running in a generally westerly direction, perpendicular to the last
mentioned line in a northwesterly direction, 2,250 feet, more or less, to the
southerly bank of the southern leg of Richardson Brook;
Thence running along the southerly bank of the southern leg of Richardson
Brook to Richardson Brook;
Sec. 40-45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-45
CHCT:459
Thence running in a generally northerly direction, along the bank of the
southerly side of Richardson Brook to a point, said point being the
intersection of the bank on the westerly side of Richardson Brook and
the southwesterly right-of-way line of Precourt Street, also known as the
Turnpike Connector;
Thence running northwesterly along the southwesterly right-of-way line
of Precourt Street to a point, said point being the intersection of the
southwesterly right-of-way line of Precourt Street and the southerly rightof-
way line of Alfred Street, also known as State Route 111;
Thence running in a westerly direction, along the southerly right-of-way
line to a point, said point being the intersection of the southerly right-ofway
line of Alfred Street and the westerly right-of-way line of Interstate 95,
also known as the Maine Turnpike;
Thence running in a northerly direction, along the westerly right-of-way
line of Interstate 95 to a point, said point being the intersection of the
westerly right-of-way line of Interstate 95 and the mean high water line of
the Saco River;
Thence running in a generally easterly direction, along the mean high
water line of the Saco River to a point on the westerly side of the boat
launch at Rotary Park;
Thence running on a perpendicular line to the border between Biddeford
and Saco in the Saco River.
Thence running in a generally easterly direction along the border between
Biddeford and Saco in the Saco River to the point of beginning.
Thence running in a northerly direction to a point, said point being the
mean high water line at the western point of Spring Island;
Thence running in a generally clockwise direction, along the mean high
water line of the Saco River to the easterly point of Spring Island;
Thence running in a southerly direction, to a point on the mean high water
line on the southerly bank of the Saco River;
Thence running in a generally southeasterly direction, along the mean high
water line of the Saco River to a point, said point being the intersection of
the mean high water line and southeasterly edge of the Main Street Bridge;
Thence running at or near the southeasterly edge of the Main Street
Bridge, 50 feet more or less, in a southwesterly direction to the point of
beginning.
This description is intended to describe that portion shown as a "No
discharge zone" on a map entitled "Proposed Firearms Ordinance
Boundaries," dated: January 9, 1997, revised: March 4, 2003, Scale: 1” =
2,000', and Prepared By: The City of Biddeford Engineering Department.
This Plan is recorded with the City of Biddeford Engineering Department,
Plan TD-1169
SHOTGUN — A rifled or smooth bore firearm designated to shoot shot
shells, e.g., 10, 12, 16, 20, 28 gauge .410 caliber.
Sec. 40-45 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 40-46
CHCT:460
Sec. 40-46. Penalties. [Ord. of 5-20-1997; Ord. No. 2002.62,
10-1-2002]
A person who violates any of the provisions of this section is subject to a fine
of not less than $500, plus costs, which fines shall be recovered in a civil
action to the use of the City.
Sec. 40-47. Committee review. [Ord. No. 2003.29, 3-18-2003]
At such time as a review is conducted of the Discharge of Firearms
Ordinance, an ad hoc committee will be convened, appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the City Council, to participate in the review process.
Sec. 40-48. through Sec. 40-50. (Reserved)
Sec. 40-46 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-48
CHCT:461

ARTICLE IV
PUBLIC URINATION OR DEFECATION
Sec. 40-51. Public urination or defecation. [Ord. of 8-4-1998(1)]
No person shall urinate or defecate in any street, park or other public place
except in facilities specifically provided for this purpose. A person found
guilty of violating this section shall be subject to a fine of $100.
Sec. 40-52. through Sec. 40-69. (Reserved)
Sec. 40-51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-52
CHCT:463

ARTICLE V
USE OF CITY-OWNED OR ACQUIRED PROPERTY
Sec. 40-70. Restricted access. [Ord. No. 2006.57, 8-1-2006]
Whenever a parcel of land, along with any structures and appurtenances
thereto is acquired by the City of Biddeford through foreclosure, purchase,
or otherwise, the City Manager is authorized to restrict access and use
of the said property by others, and have it so posted. Once posted to
the satisfaction of the Police Chief, the Police Department will prosecute
trespassers, and may cause the removal, at the owner's expense, of property
including vehicles, not permitted on the site.
Sec. 40-71. through Sec. 40.79. (Reserved)
Sec. 40-70 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-71
CHCT:465

ARTICLE VI
Offenses Against Public Safety
[Added 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.26]
Sec. 40-72. Sale and use of consumer fireworks prohibited.
Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in this section:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Shall have the same meaning as in 27 CFR
555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are
tested and certified by a third-party testing laboratory as conforming
to United States Consumer Product Safety Commission standards, in
accordance with 15 U.S.C., Chapter 47. "Consumer fireworks" does not
include the following products:
DISPLAY — An entertainment feature where the public or a private
group is admitted or permitted to view the display or discharge of
fireworks or special effects.
(1) Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire
Marshal by rule; and
(2)
Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this section, "sky
rockets and bottle rockets" mean cylindrical tubes containing not
more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as defined by the
State Fire Marshal by rule, with a wooden stick attached for
guidance and stability that rise into the air upon ignition and that
may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height of
flight.
(3)
(a)
Prohibition. No person shall use, possess with the intent to use, sell,
possess with the intent to sell or offer for sale consumer fireworks in the
City of Biddeford. [NOTE: State law prohibits the sale and possession of
all fireworks, with the exception of consumer fireworks. See 8 M.R.S.A.
§ 223. By prohibiting the sale and use of consumer fireworks, the City is
effectively prohibiting the use of all fireworks in the City of Biddeford.]
(b)
Exception. This section does not apply to a person issued a fireworks
display permit by the City of Biddeford and/or the State of Maine
pursuant to 8 M.R.S.A. § 227-A.
(c)
Penalties.
Any person who uses consumer fireworks or possesses consumer
fireworks with the intent to use in the City of Biddeford shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $200 and not more than $400,
plus costs. For second and subsequent offenses, a fine of not less
than $300 and not more than $600 per violation, plus costs, shall
be imposed.
(1)
(d)
Sec. 40-72 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-72
CHCT:467
Any person who sells consumer fireworks or possesses consumer
fireworks with the intent to sell in the City of Biddeford shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $500, plus costs. For second and
subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than $1,000 per violation,
plus costs, shall be imposed.
(2)
Seizure and disposal of fireworks. The City may seize consumer
fireworks that the City has probable cause to believe are used,
possessed or sold in violation of this section and shall forfeit seized
consumer fireworks to the state for disposal.
(e)
Sec. 40-72 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 40-72
CHCT:468
Chapter 42
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 46. Streets, sidewalks and other public
places — See Ch. 62.
Sec. 40-72 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 40-72
CHCT:469

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 42-1. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 14-1; Ord. No. 2002.42,
5-23-2002; Ord. No. 2002.121, 11-6-2002]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COMPRESSION RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE — Frequently called a "Jake
brake" or "Jacobs brake," is an engine braking mechanism installed on some
diesel engines. When activated, it opens exhaust valves in the cylinders
after the compression cycle, releasing the compressed air trapped in the
cylinders, and slowing the vehicle.[Added 8-21-2012 by Ord. No.
2012.64]
CROSSWALK — The portion of a way at an intersection that is included
within extensions of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the way beginning at the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edge
of traversable ways; or at an intersection or elsewhere that is distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the way
surface.
CURB — The outer edge of a defined sidewalk, or either edge of the wrought
and usually traveled part of a way.
LOADING ZONE — A parking area reserved exclusively for use in the
active loading or unloading of a vehicle that is displaying commercial,
apportioned, other commercial vehicle registration plates, or with a permit
issued by the Chief of Police for that purpose.[Amended 10-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018.112]
OPERATOR — An individual who drives or is in control of a vehicle or who
is exercising control over or steering a towed vehicle.
OVERTIME PARKING — Parking of a vehicle in excess of the posted time
limit.
OWNER — A person holding title to a vehicle or having exclusive right to
use of the vehicle for a period of 30 days or more.
PARKING — Permitting a vehicle to remain standing on a public way or
public street, excepting a mere momentary stoppage for a necessary
purpose.
PARKING AREA — An area designed for use as access or parking for patrons
and customers of establishments to which the public is invited.
PEDESTRIAN — A person on foot or an operator of a wheelchair or a fourwheeled
or three-wheeled motorized wheelchair.
PICKUP TRUCK — A truck with a registered gross vehicle weight of 6,000
pounds or less.
Sec. 42-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-1
CHCT:471
PUBLIC WAY — A way, owned and maintained by the state, county or a
municipality, over which the general public has a right to pass.
SEMITRAILER — A vehicle without motive power, designed for being drawn
by a motor vehicle, and designed so that some part of its weight and its load
rests upon or is carried by that motor vehicle.
STREET or HIGHWAY — A public way.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances either singly or together using a public way for travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — A sign, a signal, a marking or a device
placed or erected by a public body or official to regulate, warn or guide
traffic.
TRAILER — Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle not operated on tracks and
so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily to carry property.
TRUCK TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used exclusively to draw
other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than a part of the
weight of the vehicle and the load drawn.
VEHICLE — A device for conveyance of persons or property on a way.
Vehicle does not include conveyances propelled or drawn by human power
or used exclusively on tracks or snowmobiles or an electric personal
assistive mobility device as defined in Title 29-A of the Maine Revised
Statutes.
WAY — The entire width between boundary lines of a road, highway,
parkway, street, or bridge used for vehicular traffic, whether public or
private.
Sec. 42-2. Suspension of chapter provisions. [Code 1975, § 14-2]
Any of the provisions of this chapter may be temporarily suspended by the
Chief of Police to meet special needs or emergencies.
Sec. 42-2.1. Temporary rules. [Added 3-16-2010 by Ord. No.
2010.21; amended 4-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.14; 10-2-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018.120]
The Chief of Police may place, or cause to have placed, appropriate signs
establishing temporary rules regulating traffic, to include, but not be limited
to: traffic flow, traffic direction, rules of the road, and parking for the
purpose of trial and evaluation for a period not to exceed three days. A
temporary rule for the purposes of trial and evaluation that exceeds three
days must be approved by the Policy Committee or a committee specifically
delegated to address such matters, prior to implementation, and shall not
exceed 90 consecutive days. These rules shall become effective immediately
upon the placing of appropriate signage.
Sec. 42-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-3
CHCT:472
Sec. 42-3. Vehicles prohibited from public beaches; exceptions.
[Code 1975, § 14-4]
Pursuant to the authority in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3009, no vehicles, including
automobiles, dune buggies, motorcycles, minibikes, motorbikes and
motorcarts, shall be operated on the public beaches of the City at Fortunes
Rocks, Biddeford Pool and Hills Beach sections, so-called, with the
exception of the following:
Sec. 42-4. Riding certain vehicles two abreast. [Code 1975, § 6-18]
Operators of bicycles, motorcycles, mopeds, motor bicycles or motor
tricycles shall not ride two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of such vehicles.
Sec. 42-5. Bicycles. [Code 1975, §§ 6-20, 6-21]
Sec. 42-6. Skateboards prohibited on roadways, sidewalks and other
public places. [Ord. of 5-21-1996; Ord. No. 2006.100, 11-21-2006]
Property owners and/or residents of Basket Island who have a right-ofway
to such island from Hills Beach.
(1)
(2) Lobster fishermen to retrieve their lobster traps (pots) washed ashore.
Individuals engaged in collecting kelp (seaweed) as part of their
livelihood.
(3)
Parking. No person shall park a bicycle upon a public street other than
upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to
support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb in such manner
as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(a)
Warning device required. No person shall ride a bicycle upon any street
or other public way unless a suitable bell or other signaling device is
attached to such bicycle.
(b)
No person riding upon a skateboard in a public place shall travel within
200 feet of a notice posted conspicuously in the public place that
forbids the use of skateboards. Persons found in violation of this section
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth below.
(a)
No person may ride upon a skateboard, roller skates, and in-line roller
blades in or on any municipally owned or controlled property, including
parking lots, posted conspicuously to prohibit such riding.
(b)
No person riding upon a skateboard, roller skates, and in-line roller
blades shall ride on or upon any public way in such a manner as to
interfere with any pedestrian thereon.
(c)
A person riding upon a skateboard, roller skateboard, roller skates,
and in-line roller blades shall observe all traffic signs, stop at all stop
signs, and observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto
(d)
Sec. 42-3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-6
CHCT:473
Sec. 42-7. General parking prohibitions. [Ord. of 12-15-1998(2)]
Except in cases of emergency, no vehicle shall be parked at any of the
following places:
Sec. 42-8. Parking Authority. [Added 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.75]
and cross the street only when safe to do so, without interference with
the normal flow of vehicular traffic.
A person riding upon a skateboard, roller skates, and in-line roller
blades on a public roadway shall ride single file.
(e)
No person riding upon a skateboard, roller skates, and in-line roller
blades may attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle upon a
public way.
(f)
Penalties.
Persons 17 years or older. A person who is 17 years of age or
older, and commits a violation of this section, may be issued a civil
summons which will order the violator to appear at district court.
If found guilty, the violator will be fined not more than $50 for the
first offense, and not more than $100 for a second or subsequent
offense.
(1)
Persons under 17 years. A person who is under 17 years of age
and commits a violation of this section shall, on the first offense
be, given a warning, unless the area is posted conspicuously
prohibiting such conduct. On a first offense, where the area has
been posted conspicuously to forbid the use of skateboards, roller
blades, in line skates, or any other similar device, a police officer
may impound the skateboard, roller blades, in line skates or other
similar device for a period of three days. On a second or subsequent
offense, the skateboard roller blades, in line skates or other similar
device, shall be impounded for five days, and 10 days for any
subsequent offense. A juvenile who is charged with a violation of
this section may request a hearing with the Police Department's
juvenile officer. Said hearing shall be scheduled for the juvenile
officer's next working day.
(2)
(g)
(1) At white, black or other colored lines, as designated on curb.
(2) Within 10 feet of a hydrant or fireplug.
Within 20 feet of a crosswalk. [Amended 9-15-2015 by Ord. No.
2015.59]
(3)
(4) Within 20 feet of an intersection of streets.
(5) In front of a private driveway.
(6) Upon a sidewalk or other pedestrianway.
Sec. 42-6 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-8
CHCT:474
Sec. 42-9. through Sec. 42-30. (Reserved)
The City Council may establish rules, regulations and/or other
restrictions for parking; or the City Council may delegate authority
by Council Order. Any rules, regulations and/or other restrictions so
promulgated shall have the full force and effect of an ordinance, except
that the delegated authority is limited to the following:
Creation, elimination or relocation of disability parking spots under
Sec. 42-100.
(1)
Creation, elimination or otherwise amending of limited parking
under Secs. 42-56, 42-60, 42-90, 42-91, 42-92, 42.93, and 42.94 to
include: timed parking, loading zones, dropoff zones, taxi or bus
parking, etc.
(2)
Creation, elimination or otherwise amending limited parking zones
within the municipal surface parking lots identified under Sec.
42-62, e.g., timed parking and the charging of a fee for its use.
(3)
(a)
Any changes to the parking regulations identified herein shall require
only one vote by the Parking Authority to become effective.
(b)
Sec. 42-8 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-9
CHCT:475

ARTICLE II
OPERATION
Sec. 42-31. U-turn prohibited. [Code 1975, § 14-22]
No driver of a vehicle shall make a U-turn at the intersection of any street
and Main Street, from the Main Street bridge to the intersection of Main
Street and Bradbury Street.
Sec. 42-32. Right turn on red light prohibited. [Ord. No. 2002.13,
2-19-2002]
Pursuant to its authority under 29-A M.R.S.A. the City Council does hereby
prohibit a right turn on a red light at the following intersection(s):
Hill Street at Main Street
When establishing this prohibition, the City Council considered the
following factors, as required under 29-A M.R.S.A. 2057(2):
Sec. 42-33. Use of compression release engine brakes prohibited;
exemptions. [Added 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.65]
Sec. 42-34. through Sec. 42-49. (Reserved)
The proximity to that light of schools, fire stations, residences or
institutions for the blind;
(1)
(2) The number of pedestrians using the intersection; and
(3) The complexity of the intersection.
It is a traffic violation for the operator of a motor vehicle equipped with
a compression release engine braking system (jake brake) to activate or
use this braking system within the City of Biddeford between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(a)
The following vehicles are exempt: Fire Department vehicles, or
vehicles used in emergency construction or repair work by state,
municipal or public utilities are exempt.
(b)
Sec. 42-31 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-34
CHCT:477

ARTICLE III
PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING
Sec. 42-50. Medical service provider exempt from parking
restrictions. [Ord. No. 2002.81, 9-3-2002]
The police chief, upon application, may issue a placard to an organization or
agency, to include but not limited to, visiting nurse services, that provides in
home medical services. The placard may only be used when the authorized
person is in the actual performance of a medical visit to a subscribing in
home patient. When used, the placard must be displayed by hanging it from
the rear view mirror so that it may be viewed from the front and rear when
the vehicle is occupying a parking space that is designated as "No Parking"
or which otherwise prohibits vehicles from utilizing the space.
A vehicle displaying a placard in accordance with this Section is exempt
from the parking restrictions imposed under the provisions of this chapter.
Except that a vehicle shall not remain in a designated "No Parking" zone for
longer than one hour, or parked in an area that would otherwise create a
traffic hazard or a risk to public safety.
Sec. 42-51. Disability parking. [Code 1975, § 14-48.1; Ord. of
11-4-1992, § 14-48.1; Ord. of 8-15-1995; Ord. of 9-20-1995; Ord. of
12-15-1998(3); Ord. of 12-15-1998(4); Ord. No. 2001.28, 4-17-2001;
Ord. No. 2006.105, 12-5-2006]
Any vehicle parked, or standing, whether attended or unattended, in a
duly marked and designated disability parking space, without displaying
the required disability plate or placards, in accordance with 29-A M.R.S.A.
§ 521, shall be in violation of the City's parking ordinances and assessed a
penalty as provided in Section 42-64.
Sec. 42-52. Double parking. [Code 1975, § 14-40]
No vehicle shall stop and double park a vehicle lengthwise on any public
street except in case of accident or emergency.
Sec. 42-53. Parking in relation to curb. [Code 1975, § 14-41]
All vehicles shall be parked within 12 inches of the curb. Except on streets
where parking is permitted only on the lefthand side thereof, no vehicle
shall be parked with its left side to the curb.
Sec. 42-54. Parking within designated spaces. [Code 1975, § 14-49]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article for any
person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name
of or operated by such person to be parked across any line or marking of
a parking space or in such position that such vehicle shall not be entirely
within the limits of such parking space.
Sec. 42-50 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-55
CHCT:479
Sec. 42-55. Restrictions on common carriers of passengers. [Code
1975, § 14-29; Ord. of 6-7-1994, § 14-29]
Conditioned upon the payment of all license fees and other use charges
as provided in this Code, and such further rules and regulations relative
to such use as the Mayor and City Council shall promulgate, all operators
of motor vehicles of common carriers of passengers shall park, except
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., such vehicles only within
the designated areas set forth in Section 42-94. Nothing in this section
shall restrict any public automobile from parking on any public way while
actually hired or employed. No public automobile, while awaiting hire or
employment, shall be left unattended by its owner or his servants for a
longer period than 1/2 hour. No other vehicle shall park on any of the streets
designated as public auto stands.
Sec. 42-56. Taxi parking. [Ord. of 8-4-1992, § 14-67; amended
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.100]
(Reserved)
Sec. 42-57. Truck tractor and trailer parking restricted; parking of
trucks and certain other vehicles in residential zones prohibited.
[Code 1975, § 14-5; Ord. of 10-3-1995; amended 8-19-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014.71]
Sec. 42-58. Time limit for parking during winter months. [Code
1975, § 14-42; Ord. of 10-15-1991, § 1(14-42)]
Between November 1 and April 1, no vehicle may remain parked on any
public way for more than 48 hours. Any vehicle remaining parked in
violation of this section shall be subject to being towed at the owner's
expense.
No truck tractor or trailer shall be parked on any of the streets in the
City between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(a)
No person shall park any motor vehicle or combination of vehicles
on any public street, public way, or publicly owned property which
exceeds 23 feet in length in any area zoned residential pursuant to
the Zoning Ordinance, unless such vehicle is engaged in making a
delivery, accepting or discharging passengers, loading or unloading
cargo, or providing governmental, utility, emergency or other services
to abutting properties. This prohibition does not apply to vehicles
engaged in the construction, repair, or maintenance of public streets,
public ways or publicly owned property.
(b)
No person shall park any camper, recreational vehicle, trailer, or similar
vehicle whether attached or not attached to another vehicle, upon any
public street for more than 24 hours in any seven-calendar-day period.
(c)
Sec. 42-55 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-59
CHCT:480
Sec. 42-59. Snow emergency parking ban. [Ord. of 10-15-1991,
§ 2(14-42.1); amended Ord. of 2-16-1999(3); Ord. No. 2006.105,
12-5-2006; 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.6; 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.101
The following provisions shall apply during snow emergencies as declared
by the Director of Public Works:
Sec. 42-60. Time limit on loading and unloading. [Code 1975,
§ 14-44]
No vehicle shall be allowed to remain backed up to the curb except when
actually loading or unloading, and then only for a reasonable time, not
exceeding 10 minutes.
When the Director of Public Works deems it necessary to allow for
the safe and efficient removal of snow and ice from the public ways
within the City, the Director may declare that a snow emergency exists.
The Director of Public Works will announce the snow emergency by
notifying the local radio and television media, and request that they
make periodic announcements of the parking ban. The Director will
state in his notice that during the hours of the emergency, parking
of motor vehicles is prohibited on any way or municipal parking lot
within the jurisdiction of the City, except that the municipal parking
lots at the Community Center (Myrtle Street side only), Clifford Park
East Biddeford Little League parking lot (on Hill Street), Public Access
parking lot (on Pool Street) and Sullivan Street parking lot are open
for parking during the period of the emergency at no fee; and the Foss
Street Parking Lot, Washington Street Parking Lot, Gas House Parking
Lot, and the Water Street Parking Lot are open for parking during the
period of the emergency on a pay-per-use permit-only basis. [Amended
12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.149]
(1)
For permit-only lots, a permit may be obtained through self-service
kiosks, mobile app when available or through the City Clerk’s office.
The form of permit to be displayed shall be the license plate referenced
on the valid vehicle registration, appropriately recorded during the
permitting process, and properly attached to the vehicle. Municipal
parking permit holders must comply with all snow emergency parking
ban notices and instructions regardless of the nature of the parking
permit. [Amended 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.149]
(2)
A vehicle parked in violation of the declared snow emergency shall be
towed at the owner's expense.
(3)
Vehicles parked in the Foss Street and Washington Street, Clifford Park,
Community Center, Gas House and Water Street municipal parking lots
as authorized by this section must be removed prior to 7:00 a.m. on the
day of the end of the snow emergency, and these municipal parking lots
may not be used until they have been cleared of snow.
(4)
Sec. 42-59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-61
CHCT:481
Sec. 42-61. Parking on public way for purpose of sale or repair
prohibited. [Code 1975, § 14-47; amended 8-19-2014 by Ord. No.
2014.72]
Sec. 42-62. Identification and use of municipal parking lots. [Code
1975, § 14-62; Ord. of 7-16-1991; Ord. of 12-17-1996; Ord. of
5-5-1998(1); Ord. of 7-21-1998(1); Ord. of 8-4-1998(2); Ord. of
12-15-1998(4); Ord. of 12-15-1998(5); Ord. of 2-16-1999(3); Ord.
No. 2002.65, 7-2-2002; Ord. No. 2003.35, 3-4-2003; Ord. No.
2005.25, 4-19-2005; Ord. No. 2006.105, 12-5-2006; Ord. No.
2007.47, 6-2-2007; Ord. No. 2008.61, 9-2-2008; 5-21-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013.39; 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.76; 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.102; 11-26-2018; 1-10-2019; 2-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019.5]
The following is a list of the municipal parking lots along with a description
of their location and authorized use. For the purposes of this chapter, all
municipal parking lots are considered as public ways as defined in M.R.S.A.
§ 29-A. No vehicle shall remain parked in a municipal public parking lot for
more than 48 consecutive hours. A vehicle parked in violation of this section
may be towed at the owner's expense.
No dealer or seller of a motor vehicle or owner, lessee or tenant of
any garage used for the storage or repairing of motor vehicles shall
be allowed or permitted to occupy any part of the public way for the
purpose of display, or for sale or exchange, or to repair any motor
vehicle, and shall not use any public way or street for parking of motor
vehicles used in or connected with his business.
(a)
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purpose of:
(1) Displaying it for sale.
Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except for repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
(2)
(3) Advertising.
Storage. "Storage," as used herein, shall mean parking a vehicle
continuously upon any street in the same place for more than 10
consecutive days.
(4)
(b)
Sec. 42-61 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-62
CHCT:482
Alfred Street Parking Lot, also known as the Blue Lot, refers to the City
municipal parking lot that is adjacent to the 39 Alfred Street Police Station,
and is bordered by Alfred Street, Foss Street, and the property line at 1
Pool Street and further described as Map 38, Lot 404.
Rows 2, 3 and 4 shall be reserved for permit parking available for
monthly (Monday through Friday) permits, monthly (24/7) permits
and the remainder available for short-term and monthly (nights
and weekend) permits, with the remainder available for short-term
parking on a rolling basis. Row 1, which is adjacent to, and is
parallel to, the police station, is reserved for police parking only.
The first two spaces in Row 1 are reserved for, and shall be posted
and clearly marked as, handicap parking; the first two spaces in
Row 2 are reserved for thirty-minute parking while conducting
police business.
City Hall Parking Lot shall be designated as the ways and parking
spaces bordered by City Hall from Adams Street thence southerly along
City Hall, thence westerly along the rear of City Hall and City Theater,
thence westerly along properties identified as Map 38, Lots 134 and
134-1, thence easterly along property identified as Map 38, Lot 194,
thence easterly along South Street to the Civil War Memorial traffic
island, thence easterly on the northerly edge of the Civil War Memorial
traffic island, thence northerly on the westerly edge of the Civil War
Memorial traffic island, thence northerly along Adams Street to City
Hall.
(1) No vehicle shall be parked in the area designated as the City Hall
parking lot between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., unless
such vehicle displays an official parking pass issued by the City
Clerk, and displayed in a manner determined by the Clerk.
(2) The City Clerk may issue official parking passes to municipal
officials and employees.
(3) Two spaces shall be posted and clearly marked and reserved for
disability parking. One of the spaces shall be van accessible.
(4) The area of the City Hall parking lot that is immediately adjacent
to the Civil War Memorial, and is bordered by South Street, shall
have one space marked and reserved for the City Clerk; one space
marked and reserved for the City Manager; one space marked
and reserved for the Mayor; with the remaining parking spaces
reserved for use by municipal vehicles only between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
(5) The area of the City Hall parking lot that is immediately adjacent to
the City Hall building, and that is bordered by Adams Street, shall
be designated and marked as follows: two spaces reserved for use
by municipal vehicles only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. Monday through Friday, with the remaining spaces as onehour
parking for use by the general public to conduct business at
City Hall.
Sec. 42-62 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-62
CHCT:483
(6) The three parking stalls in the area of the City Hall parking lot that
is closest to the rear entrance to City Hall building, and to City
Theater, shall be limited to one-hour parking and reserved for City
business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday.
Clifford Park Parking Lot is a City public parking lot that is located on Pool
Street and is further identified as Map 39, Lot 334, with a physical address
of 130 Pool Street.
One space shall be posted and clearly marked as reserved for
disability parking.
No vehicle shall remain parked in this parking lot longer than 24
consecutive hours.
Community Center Parking Lots refers to the City public parking lots at
the J. Richard Martin Community Center, located at 189 Alfred Street as
identified on Map 34, Lot 228, and further described as the parking lot
which is adjacent and parallel to the Community Center, and Myrtle Street
on the east side; and the parking lot which is adjacent and parallel to the
Community Center, and Clark Street on the west side.
Two spaces which shall be posted and clearly marked as handicap
parking, located on the Clark Street side, at or near the handicap
ramp, which is located at the northwest corner of the Community
Center building.
Two spaces which shall be posted and clearly marked as handicap
parking, located on the Myrtle Street side, at or near the rear of the
Community Center building on the southeast corner.
Two spaces which shall be posted and clearly marked as ten-minute
limited parking from 6:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday through
Friday, for YMCA Daycare, one located on left side of the main
entrance to the Daycare 10 feet from the concrete curb and one
located on right side of the main entrance to the Daycare.
Downtown Parking Lot, also known as the Yellow Lot, refers to the City
public parking lot located at 17 — 21 Franklin Street and further described
as Map 38, Lots 389 and 390.
The lot shall be reserved for hourly permit-only parking with the
first two hours for any vehicle of any calendar day at no charge.
Two spaces which shall be posted and clearly marked as handicap
parking.
Federal Street Parking Lot, also known as the Green Lot, is located on the
corner of Franklin Street and Federal Street behind 25 — 27 Washington
Street, and is exclusive of a strip of land located between 5 — 13
Washington Street and 25 — 27 Washington Street, and further described
as Map 38, Lot 353-1.
Sec. 42-62 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-62
CHCT:484
The lot shall be reserved for long-term permit-only parking
available for monthly (Monday through Friday) permits, monthly
(24/7) permits, monthly (nights and weekend) permits, with the
remainder available for short-term parking on a rolling basis,
except that eight spaces located adjacent to 5 Washington Street
and further described as Map 38, Lot 352, shall be available as
dedicated parking spaces.
Foss Street Parking Lot, also known as the Purple Lot, refers to the City
public parking lot located at the formerly known street address numbers 5,
7, and 15 to 21 Foss Street, and as further described on City Tax Map 39,
Lots 80 and 84.
The lot shall be designated for long-term permit-only parking
available for monthly (Monday through Friday) permits, monthly
(24/7) permits, monthly (nights and weekend) permits, with the
remainder available for short-term parking on a rolling basis.
No vehicle shall remain parked in this parking lot longer than 24
consecutive hours without a valid permit.
Franklin Street Parking Lot, also known as the Green Lot, refers to the
City public parking lot located at the corner of Franklin Street, Washington
Street and Federal Street, parallel to Jefferson Street, and further
described as Map 38, Lots 354, 355 and 360.
The lot shall be designated as permit-only parking available for
monthly (Monday through Friday) permits, monthly (24/7) permits
and the remainder available for short-term and monthly (nights
and weekend) permits, with the remainder available for short-term
parking on a rolling basis, except that up to four spaces located
adjacent to 42 Franklin Street, with an additional six spaces located
directly in front of 42 Franklin Street, and further described as Map
38, Lot 364, shall be available as thirty-minute parking spaces.
Ten spaces shall be posted and clearly marked as reserved for
use by courthouse employees on scheduled court days, Monday
through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
No vehicle shall remain parked in this parking lot longer than 24
consecutive hours without a valid permit.
Gas House Parking Lot, also known as the Maroon Lot, is a City public
parking lot that is located on Water Street and is situated between
Mechanic's Park and the Waste Water Treatment Facility, and further
described as Map 41, Lot 16.
The lot shall be designated as permit-only parking available for
monthly (Monday through Friday) permits, monthly (24/7) permits,
monthly (nights and weekend) permits, with the remainder
available for short-term parking on a rolling basis. One space shall
be posted and clearly marked as reserved for disability parking.
No vehicle shall remain parked in this parking lot longer than 24
consecutive hours without a valid permit.
Sec. 42-62 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-62
CHCT:485
Washington Street Parking Lot, also known as the Red Lot, refers to
the City public parking lot located at 75 Washington Street and is more
specifically identified as Map 38, Lot 312.
The lot shall be designated as permit-only parking available for
monthly (Monday through Friday) permits, monthly (24/7) permits,
monthly (nights and weekend) permits, with the remainder
available for short-term parking on a rolling basis.
No vehicle shall remain parked in this parking lot longer than 24
consecutive hours without a valid permit.
Wastewater Treatment Facility Parking Lot, also known as the Brown Lot,
refers to the City public parking lot located at the intersection of Water
Street and Pike Street, and is more specifically identified as Map 41, Lot 1.
The lot shall be designated as permit-only parking available for
monthly (Monday through Friday) permits, monthly (24/7) permits,
monthly (nights and weekend) permits, with the remainder
available for short-term parking on a rolling basis.
No vehicle shall remain parked in this parking lot longer than 24
consecutive hours without a valid permit.
Parking spaces marked and dedicated to short-term parking of 30 minutes
or less shall be so marked and shall not require a permit within the
designated permit-only parking lots.
For permit-only lots, a permit may be obtained through self-service kiosks,
a mobile app when available or through the City Clerk's office. The form
of permit to be displayed shall be the license plate referenced on the valid
vehicle registration, appropriately recorded during the permitting process,
and properly attached to the vehicle.
Sec. 42-63. DPW Director to designate no-parking areas for solid
waste pickup.36 [Added 6-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.48]
In order to accommodate and facilitate the removal of household solid waste
and qualified recycling material at roadside, the Director of Public Works
may designate streets or areas as "No Parking" for certain designated hours
during Monday through Friday for the purpose of household solid waste
removal and the pickup of qualified recycling material. Those areas so
designated shall be posted with the restricted parking, and violators may be
towed.
Sec. 42-64. Fees for parking violations. [Code 1975, § 14-51; Ord.
No. 11-17-1997(1); Ord. of 7-7-1998(1); Ord. No. 2006.98,
11-21-2006]
Fees for parking violations shall be set as follows: [Amended 6-6-2017
by Ord. No. 2017.50]
(a)
36.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 42-63, Parking by permit only, added 8-17-2010 by Ord. No.
2010.83, was repealed 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.37.
Sec. 42-62 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-64
CHCT:486
Sec. 42-65. Parking regulations for Biddeford School Department
property. [Ord. No. 2001.21, 3-20-2001]
The Biddeford School Committee shall by resolve, designate parking areas
that are in or on the property owned by the City, and under the jurisdiction
and control of the Biddeford School Department, as "No Parking" or "No
Parking Tow Zone" or "Parking by Permit Only" or "Restricted Parking"
or any other similar restriction so imposed, and deemed necessary for
the control of vehicle parking on school grounds. All areas so designated
must be clearly marked and posted, and shall be enforced by the Police
(1) Parking in snow removal or plowing area: $40.
(2) Parking in fire lane: $40.
(3) Overtime parking: $25.
(4) Parking in a truck zone and/or loading/unloading zone: $30.
(5) Double parking: $40.
(6) Parking in no parking, etc., area: $40.
(7) Parking in front of fire hydrant: $40.
(8) Blocking driveway (upon complaint): $40.
(9) Parking on sidewalks: $35.
(10)Parking facing traffic: $25.
Parking in a permit-only zone: $35. [Amended 2-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019.2]
(11)
Parking in a disability-designated area: traffic infraction.37
All parking fines left unpaid after 30 days shall be doubled.
(12)
A vehicle with three or more outstanding parking violations issued by
the Police Department, and found to be in violation of any of the City
parking ordinances, will be subject to towing or immobilized by the use
of an auto boot. The vehicle will not be released to the owner or agent
of the owner until the violations and tow charges are paid.
(b)
It will be prima facie evidence that the registered owner of the vehicle
committed the parking violation.
(c)
The maximum fee that may be charged by a towing company for a
vehicle requested to be towed by the Police Department will be at the
direction of the Chief of Police.
(d)
37.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (a) (13), which listed the fee for failure to purchase a
permit for permit-required municipal lots, and which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 2-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2019.2.
Sec. 42-64 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-65
CHCT:487
Department in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Violators are
subject to fines in accordance with Section 42-64.
Sec. 42-66. Beach permit parking regulations enumerated. [Added
8-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.70]
In order to assure that the residents of the City shall have access to the
beaches of Biddeford, that those beaches and the adjacent areas shall not
become overcrowded, and in order to preserve the health and safety of the
beach areas for the residents of those parts of the City, it is established that:
Parking at those areas designated by Subsection (9) during the period
from June 15 to Labor Day and between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. shall be by permit only. There shall be no parking in the
aforementioned areas after 9:00 p.m. and until 5:00 a.m.
(1)
For the purpose of this section, the word "resident" shall meet one of
the following criteria:
(a) Person who pays real estate property taxes to the City;
(b) Person who is a registered voter in the City;
Person who can provide a vehicle registered both in the City and
the State of Maine. All residents of the City may obtain parking
permits for compliance with this section for a fee of $25 for the
first vehicle, $15 per additional vehicle registered at the same
address, $15 for residents 65 and older, payable to the City Clerk.
Proof of eligibility will be the burden of the applicant. [Amended
12-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.114; 6-6-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.53]
(c)
(2)
Persons ineligible under Subsection (2) may obtain a parking permit
to be in compliance with this section for a fee of $125 for a season
permit; $65 for a seven-day permit; $40 for a three-day permit; and
$20 for a one-day permit from either the office of the City Clerk or
from parking kiosks. The seven-day and three-day permits are valid
in consecutive days only, and are not transferable from one vehicle to
another. [Amended 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.53; 9-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018.104]
(3)
For residents, after presenting the registration of the vehicle upon
which the permit is to be applied, permits issued under this section
shall be recorded and shall be registered by the owner's name and
vehicle registration plate number. These permits shall read in part, "All
Parking At Your Own Risk."
Season permits shall be valid from June 15 to Labor Day; seven-day and
three-day permits shall be valid only for the consecutive dates specified
on the permits. [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.104]
(4)
Sec. 42-65 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-66
CHCT:488
Sec. 42-67. through Sec. 42-85. (Reserved)
The form of permit to be displayed shall be the license plate referenced
on the valid vehicle registration, appropriately recorded during the
permitting process, and properly attached to the vehicle. [Amended
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.104]
(5)
Permits obtained by fraudulent means are invalid. Invalidation of a
permit sticker may lead to further liability as provided by this section.
[Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.104]
(6)
Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine
of $50 for each separate offense. Failure to obtain a permit and illegal
parking are separate offenses. Vehicles illegally parked will be towed at
the owner's expense. [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.104]
(7)
No vehicle shall be eligible for a parking permit under this section if
that vehicle is greater than seven feet in height and/or 20 feet in length.
The length of a vehicle shall include any attached appurtenances such
as trailers. Permits issued under this section shall apply to motorized
vehicles only. [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.104]
(8)
Those areas of the City of Biddeford to be restricted by this section are
as follows: [Amended 4-18-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.29; 9-18-2018
by Ord. No. 2018.104]
Biddeford Pool Bathhouse Parking Lot (Gilbert Boucher Memorial
Park): On the lower portion of the parking lot, parking is restricted
for holders of resident parking permits only from 8:00 a.m. until
12:00 noon; anyone holding a nonresident permit is permitted to
park at those locations after 12:00 noon. The holders of resident or
nonresident parking permits may park in the upper portion of the
parking lot during those times that a beach permit is required.
(a)
Middle Beach Lot (across from Bridge Road): Parking is restricted
for holders of resident parking permits only from 8:00 a.m. until
12:00 noon; anyone holding a nonresident permit is permitted to
park at those locations after 12:00 noon.
(b)
Curbside parking on Fortunes Rocks Road along Etherington's
Pond as follows:
1. Ocean side: westerly from a point 50 feet westerly of pole J30 to
a point 20 feet westerly of pole J37.
(c)
(9)
Persons renting seasonal sites at a tent and trailer park shall be
considered nonresidents.
(10)
Sec. 42-66 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-67
CHCT:489

ARTICLE IV
SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS
Sec. 42-86. Traffic standards used as guideline in establishing onstreet
parking.38 [Added 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.38]
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 42-90 of this chapter, on-street
parking shall be determined using the standards established under Chapter
62, Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places, Article IV, Streets, Division
1, Generally, Section 62-81, Definitions, "City Roads," Subsections (1)
through (4), and Table A, Minimum Roadway Construction Standards, as
guidelines.
Sec. 42-87. Yield signs. [Code 1975, § 14-77]
There shall be a yield-right-of-way sign erected at the following
intersections in the City:
Alfred Street at Main Street
Arena Drive, slip lane at its intersection with Pomerleau Street [Added
4-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.16]
Cole Road at Southern Maine Medical Center driveway, sign to be erected
on City land at hospital driveway
Judge Street at Clifford Street, sign to be erected on Judge Street
Pine Street at Elm Street [Added 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.10]
Sec. 42-88. One-way streets. [Code 1975, § 14-78; Ord. of
6-19-1990; Ord. of 5-21-1991(1); Ord. of 12-17-1996; Ord. of
2-4-1997(1); Ord. of 6-17-1997; Ord. of 7-7-1998(2); Ord. of
10-20-1998(2); Ord. No. 2000.39, 4-18-2000; Ord. No. 2005.33,
5-3-2005; Ord. No. 2007.46, 6-2-2007; Ord. No. 2007.57, 8-7-2007;
Ord. No. 2008.88, 11-18-2008]
The following streets are designated as one-way streets for the specified
distance:
Acorn Street [Repealed 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.104]
Cross Street, from High Street to Pike Street
Franklin Street, from Main Street to Alfred Street [Amended 2-16-2010
by Ord. No. 2010.7]
Hazel Street [Repealed 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.116]
South Street, from Jefferson Street to Adams Street
Wentworth Street, from South Street to Mason Street
West Street [Repealed 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.6]
38.Editor's Note: Former Section 42-86, adopted as § 14-76 of the 1975 Code, which
contained provisions on speed limits, was repealed by Ord. of 6-4-1996.
Sec. 42-86 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:491
Sec. 42-89. Stop intersections. [Code 1975, § 14-79; Ord. of
9-4-1990(1); Ord. of 12-4-1990; Ord. of 2-5-1991; Ord. of
11-3-1993(1); Ord. of 12-21-1993(1); Ord. of 7-16-1996; Ord. of
1-21-1997(1); Ord. of 7-3-1997; Ord. of 8-19-1997(1), (2); Ord. of
7-7-1998(3); Ord. of 7-21-1998(2); Ord. of 7-21-1998(3); Ord. of
7-21-1998(4); Ord. of 10-20-1998(2); Ord. of 2-16-1999(4); Ord. of
5-18-1999(1); Ord. No. 99.90, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 2000.39,
4-18-2000; Ord. No. 2000.83, 8-1-2000; Ord. No. 2004.28,
4-20-2004; Ord. No. 2004.102, 11-3-2004; Ord. No. 2007.46,
6-2-2007; Ord. No. 2007.57, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2007.59, 8-7-2007]
The following street intersections are hereby designated as stop
intersections. Unless otherwise indicated, stop signs shall be erected on the
right hand side of the first-named street at the indicated intersection:
Abby Lane at Deer Run Drive
Acorn Street at Hill Street [Added 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.105]
Adams Street at Jefferson Street
Adams Street at Main Street
Alden Drive at Plymouth Drive
Alexander Drive at Cathedral Oaks Drive
Alison Avenue at Granite Street
Amherst Street at Elm Street
Amherst Street at May Street
Andrews Road at Alfred Street
Arena Drive at Pomerleau Street (does not include slip lane, which is
controlled with a yield sign) [Added 4-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.15]
Ashland Avenue at Forest Street
Atlantic Avenue at Granite Street
Bacon Street at Alfred Street
Bacon Street at High Street
Bacon Street at Hill Street
Bald Avenue at West Street
Barra Road at Alfred Street
Bay Street at Ocean Avenue
Bay Street at Seventh Street
Bayberry Road at Granite Point Road
Bayview Avenue at Fairfield Street
Beacon Avenue at Elm Street
Beacon Avenue at May Street
Beaudoin Avenue at Elm Street
Sec. 42-89 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:492
Belmont Avenue at Prospect Street
Ben Avenue at Granite Street
Benson Road at West Street
Bergeron Lane at Granite Street
Bernard Avenue at Harold Avenue
Bernard Avenue at West Street
Birch Street at Alfred Street
Birch Street at Graham Street
Birch Street at Green Street
Birch Street at Hill Street
Blue Spruce Lane at Sea Spray Drive
Bond Street at Granite Street Extension
Booth Street at Grayson Street
Booth Street at Precourt Street
Bracket Street at Graham Street
Brackett Point Road at Granite Point Road
Brackett Street at West Myrtle Street
Bradbury Street at Main Street
Bradbury Street at Mason Street
Bradbury Street at South Street
Breakwater Avenue at Hill's Beach Road
Breton Street at Bond Street
Briarwood Drive at South Street
Briarwood Drive at State Street
Bridge Road at Fortunes Rocks Road
Bridge Road at Pool Street
Bristol Street at Pool Street
Brook Street at South Street
Buckley's Court at Freeman Street
Buckley's Court at Pike Street
Burleigh Lane at Guinea Road
Buzzel Road at River Road
Cadorette Avenue at Clifford Street
Cadorette Avenue at Miller Avenue
Calixte Lane at Granite Street
Carver Street at Elm Street
Cathedral Oaks Drive at South Street
Sec. 42-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:493
Center Street at Jefferson Street
Chapel Street at Hill Street
Chadwick Place at Elm Street
Charles Avenue at Vital Avenue
Cherry Lane at Elm Street
Clarendon Street at Hill Street
Clarendon Street at Prospect Street
Clark Street at Alfred Street
Clark Street at Prospect Street
Cleaves Street at Water Street
Cliff Lane at Village Lane
Clifford Street at George Street
Clifford Street at Pool Street
Clifford Street at Water Street
Cole Road at Alfred Street
Cole Road at Elm Street
Colonial Drive at May Street
Congress Street at Granite Street
Cornish Avenue at Dearborn Avenue
Cornish Avenue at Mt. Pleasant Street
Cote Circle at West Street
Cottage Street at Granite Street
Cottage Street at Hill Street
Crescent Street at Graham Street
Crescent Street at Green Street
Crescent Street at Jefferson Street
Crescent Street at South Street
Crestwood Drive at Sokokis Road
Cross Street at Pike Street
Cutts Street at Bradbury Street
Cutts Street at Elm Street
Cutts Street at Western Avenue
Dale Circle at Graham Street
Dartmouth Street at Elm Street
Dartmouth Street at May Street
Dearborn Avenue at South Street
Debbie Avenue at West Street
Sec. 42-89 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:494
Decary Road at Pool Street
Deer Run Drive at Cathedral Oaks Drive
Dental Avenue at Alfred Street
Dental Avenue at Graham Street
Diamond Street at Elm Street
Drapeau Street at Elm Street
Drapeau Street at Morin Street
Dupont Avenue at Hill Street
Dupont Avenue at Prospect Street
Edwards Avenue at Alfred Street
Eighth Street at Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard
Eighth Street at Ocean Avenue
Elizabeth Road at Fortunes Rocks Road
Emery Street at Bacon Street
Emery Street at Main Street
Emmons Place at Graham Street
Evanthia Drive at Guinea Road
Evanthia Drive at West Street
Fairfield Street at Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard
Fall Street at Hill Street
Fall Street at Prospect Street
Fall Street at Summer Street
Federal Street at Washington Street
Fernande Avenue at Cole Road
Fernande Avenue at Janelle Street
Ferry Lane at Sokokis Road
Fieldcrest Drive at Guinea Road
Fifth Street at Ocean Avenue
First Street at Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard
First Street at Ocean Avenue
FOAV Court at Bacon Street
Fogg Avenue at Graham Street
Folsom Drive at Georgetown Drive
Forest Street at Elm Street
Forest Street at West Street
Fortunes Rocks Road at Pool Street
Foss Street at Birch Street
Sec. 42-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:495
Foss Street at Main Street
Foss Street at Pool Street, sign at both entrances
Foss Street at Summer Street
Fourth Street at First Street
Fourth Street at Ocean Avenue
Fourth Street at Seventh Street
Fox Farm Road at Oak Ridge Road
Fox Hollow Drive at South Street
Franklin Street at Alfred Street
Free Street at Congress Street
Free Street at Hill Street
Freeman Street at Clifford Street
George Street at Cleaves Street
George Street at Pool Street
Georgetown Drive at West Street
Gertrude Avenue at Harding Street
Gertrude Avenue at West Street
Gilbert Place at Mile Stretch Road
Glaude Avenue at Village Lane
Glenview Drive at South Street
Golden Avenue at Hill's Beach Road
Gove Street at Judge Street
Gove Street at Simard Avenue
Graham Street at Alfred Street
Graham Street at Birch Street
Graham Street at Union Street
Graham Street Extension at West Street
Granite Point Road at Pool Street
Granite Street at Hill Street
Granite Street at West Street
Granite Street Extension at West Street
Gray's Lane at Elm Street
Grayson Street at Elm Street
Grayson Street at Hill Street
Green Street at Center Street
Green Street at Crescent Street
Green Street at Mason Street
Sec. 42-89 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:496
Green Street at South Street
Green Street at Wentworth Street
Green Street, at the right angle in front of 106 Green Street
Greenfield Lane at West Street
Granite Street at the intersection of the circle
Grenier Avenue at West Street
Guinea Road at Meetinghouse Road
Guinea Road at Oak Ridge Road
Guinea Road at West Street
Haley Circle at Sokokis Road
Harding Street at Graham Street
Harding Street at Prospect Street
Harmon Street at Vine Street
Harold Avenue at Granite Street
Harrison Avenue at Hill Street
Harrison Avenue at Prospect Street
Harvard Street at May Street
Harvard Street at Round Hill
Havey Avenue at Gertrude Avenue
Havey Avenue at Graham Street
Hazel Street at Spruce Street
Hazel Street at St. Mary's Street [Added 11-18-2014 by Ord. No.
2014.120]
Herring Avenue at Graham Street
Herring Avenue Extension at Prospect Street
High Street at Water Street
Highland Street at Main Street
Highland Street at South Street
Hill Street at Landry Street
Hill Street at Main Street
Hill's Beach Road at Pool Road
Hillside Avenue at Hill Street
Hillside Avenue at Prospect Street
Hooper Street at Elm Street
Horrigan's Court at Main Street
Hubert Street at Hill Street
Hubert Street at Raymond Street
Sec. 42-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:497
Ice Area Parking Lot at Pomerleau Street
Indian Ridge Drive at Cathedral Oaks Drive
Inner Circle at Westwood Drive
Island View Drive at Hill's Beach Road
Jacqueline Drive at Granite Street Extension
James Street at Western Avenue
Janelle Street at Cole Road
Janelle Street at Elm Street
Jay Drive at Glaude Avenue
Jay Drive at Village Lane
Jefferson Street at Alfred Street
Jefferson Street at Main Street
Jefferson Street at South Street
John Street at Hill Street
Joshua Drive at Guinea Road
Judge Street at Cleaves Street
Judge Street at Clifford Street
Juniper Lane at Granite Point Road
King Street at Hill Street
King Street at Foss Street
Kossuth Street at South Street
Lafayette Street at Cleaves Street
Lafayette Street at Pool Street
Lambert Street at Alfred Street
Lambert Street at Prospect Street
Lamothe Avenue39 at Elm Street
Lamothe Avenue40 at May Street
Landry Street at Elm Street
Laurier Street at Prospect Street
Lavoie Street at Grayson Street
Ledgemere Drive at Pool Street
Lemieux Street at Forest Street
Lemieux Street at Rathier Street
39.Editor’s Note: Lamothe Street was changed to Lamothe Avenue in this entry pursuant to
Ord. No. 2016.14, adopted 2-2-2016.
40.Editor’s Note: Lamothe Street was changed to Lamothe Avenue in this entry pursuant to
Ord. No. 2016.14, adopted 2-2-2016.
Sec. 42-89 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:498
Leon Street at Hubert Street
Lessard Avenue at Elm Street
Lessard Avenue at May Street
Libby Drive at Pool Street
Liberty Avenue at Prospect Street
Lincoln Street at Elm Street
Lindale Avenue at Elm Street
Little Creek Drive at Guinea Road
Lizotte Avenue at Granite Street Extension
Long Avenue at Hill's Beach Road
Luc Lane at Georgetown Drive
Lunt Street at Main Street
Lynn Avenue at Granite Street
Maddox Pond Road at Fortunes Rocks Road
Main Street at South Street
Maple Street at Elm Street
Maple Street at Pine Street
Maplewood Avenue at Main Street
Maplewood Avenue at South Street
Marblehead Lane at Meetinghouse Road
Marblehead Lane at Pool Street
Marcel Avenue at Landry Street
Marial Avenue at Pool Street
Marion Avenue at Harold Avenue
Marion Avenue at West Street
Marshall Avenue at Alfred Street
Marshall Avenue at Graham Street
Mason Street at Bradbury Street
Mason Street at Elm Street
Mason Street at Green Street
May Street at Alfred Street
May Street at South Street
Mayflower Drive at Colonial Drive
McArthur Way at Elm Street
Meadowview Drive at Granite Street
Medical Center Drive at Alfred Street
Meetinghouse Road at Pool Street
Sec. 42-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:499
Memorial Drive at Colonial Drive
Memorial Drive at Victory Lane
Middle Street at Acorn Street
Middle Street at Pool Street
Mile Stretch Road at Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard [Added 9-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017.95]
Miller Avenue at Clifford Street
Miller Avenue at Simard Avenue
Mitchell Lane at Pike Street
Morin Street at Elm Street
Mountain Road at Precourt Street
Mt. Pleasant Street at Main Street
Mt. Pleasant Street at South Street
Mt. Vernon Street at Alfred Street
Mt. Vernon Street at Foss Street
Mt. Vernon Street at Summer Street
Myrtle Street at Alfred Street
Myrtle Street at Foss Street
Myrtle Street at Summer Street
Myrtle Street at Prospect Street
Newtown Road at Pool Street
Newtown Road at West Street
Ninth Street at Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard
Oak Place at Oak Street
Oak Ridge Road at Guinea Road
Oak Ridge Road at Pool Street
Oak Street at Acorn Street
Oak Street at Granite Street
Oak Street at Pool Street
Oak Street at Vine Street
Oakwood Lane at Birchwood Lane
Oakwood Lane at Waco Drive
Ocean Avenue at Bay Street
Ocean Spray Avenue at Fortunes Rocks Road
Ocean View Drive at Old Pool Road
Old Hollis Road at South Street
Old Pool Road at Bridge Road
Sec. 42-89 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:500
Old Pool Road at Hills Beach Road
Old Town Road at West Street
Orchard Street at Elm Street
Orchard Street at May Street
Paquin Avenue at South Street
Pare Street at May Street
Parent Avenue at Pool Street
Parkview Court at Main Street
Paul Street at Granite Street
Paul Street at Raymond Street, Congress Street at Paul Street
Pearl Street at Elm Street
Pearl Street at Lincoln Street
Penny Avenue at Hill Street
Perreault Street at Elm Street
Peter Pond Lane at Elizabeth Road
Phillips Lane at Chapel Street
Phillips Lane at Pool Street
Pike Street at Pool Street
Pike Street at Water Street
Pine Street [Repealed 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.10]
Pinewood Lane at Oakwood Lane
Pleasant Avenue at Hill's Beach Road
Plymouth Drive at Colonial Drive
Pomerleau Street at Alfred Street
Pomerleau Street at Barra Road
Pomerleau Street Extension [Repealed 4-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.15]
Porter Street at Alfred Street
Porter Street at Foss Street
Porter Street at Prospect Street
Precourt Street at Landry Street
Priscilla Avenue at West Street
Proctor Road at Guinea Road
Prospect Street at Birch Street
Prospect Street at West Street
Quimby Street at Bradbury Street
Quimby Street at South Street
Railroad Avenue at Main Street
Sec. 42-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:501
Rathier Street at Elm Street
Ray Street and the leg of Ray Street entering into Prospect Manor; stop
sign to be placed on three corners
Ray Street, both entrances, at Alfred Street
Ray Street, northeasterly side, at the leg that goes into Prospect Manor
Raymond Street at Hill Street
Ridgeview Drive at Forest Street
Ritz Avenue at Hill Street
River Road at South Street
Riverside Avenue at Cleaves Street
Riverview Terrace at Twin Island Acres
Roberts Street at Alfred Street
Roberts Street at May Street
Roberts Street at Round Hill
Robin Circle at Alison Avenue
Rockwood Drive at Guinea Road
Romeo Lane at West Loop Road
Round Hill at Dartmouth Street
Round Hill at May Street
Rugby Street at Amherst Street
Rugby Street at Dartmouth Street
Scadlock Mills Road at Pool Street
School Street at Pike Street
Seabreeze Avenue at Hill's Beach Road
Seaspray Drive at Granite Point Road
Second Street at First Street
Second Street at Ocean Avenue
Seventh Street at Ocean Avenue
Shaw's Hill Drive at South Street
Sheltra Avenue at Granite Street
Sheltra Avenue at Hill Street
Shevenell Court at Green Street
Simard Avenue at Cleaves Street
Simard Avenue at Cleaves Street
Simard Avenue at Gove Street
Simard Avenue at Pool Street
Sixth Street at Ocean Avenue
Sec. 42-89 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:502
Sky Harbor Drive at Hills Beach Road
Small's Court at Wentworth Street
Smith Street at Elm Street
Smith Street at Lincoln Street
Sokokis Road at Pool Street
South Street at Adams Street
South Street at Jefferson Street
Southgate Avenue at Granite Street
Southgate Avenue at West Street
Southgate Avenue at the crest of Southgate as approaching from Granite
Street at the intersection of the circle
Southgate Circle at Southgate Avenue
Spruce Street at Elm Street
St. Joseph Street at Elm Street
St. Martins Lane at Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard
St. Mary's Street at Main Street
St. Mary's Street at Elm Street
State Street at South Street
Stone Street at Lincoln Street
Stone Street at Pearl Street
Stonecliff Road at Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard
Sullivan Street at Bacon Street
Sullivan Street at Water Street
Summer Street at Alfred Street
Summer Street at Birch Street
Summer Street at Fall Street
Summer Street at Foss Street
Summer Street at Harrison Avenue
Summit Street at Alfred Street
Summit Street at Round Hill
Sunrise Street at Graham Street
Sunset View at Graham Street
Taylor Street at Elm Street
Taylor Street at May Street
Thatcher Brook Drive at Cathedral Oaks Drive
Third Street at First Street
Third Street at Ocean Avenue
Sec. 42-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:503
Thorndike Avenue at Fortunes Rocks Road
Thornton Street at Elm Street
Tibbetts Avenue at Clifford Street
Travers Street at Elm Street
Twin Island Acres at Sokokis Road
Union Street at Alfred Street
Union Street at Elm Street
Union Street at Graham Street
Valerie Circle at Penny Avenue
Victory Avenue at Prospect Street
Victory Lane at May Street
Village Lane at South Street
Vincent Avenue at Granite Street
Vincent Avenue at Hill Street
Vine Street at Granite Street
Vine Street at Oak Street
Vital Avenue at Granite Street Extension
Waco Drive at Elm Street
Wadlin Road at South Street
Washington Street at Alfred Street
Washington Street at Jefferson Street
Washington Street at Main Street
Water Street at Main Street
Wellspring Road at Alfred Street
Wendell Avenue at West Street
Wentworth Court at Wentworth Street
Wentworth Street at Green Street
Wentworth Street at Mason Street
Wentworth Street at Union Street
Wesley Drive at Guinea Road
West Cole Road at Alfred Street
West Cutts Street at Western Avenue
West Loop Road at Cote's Circle
West Loop Road at West Street
West Myrtle Street at Alfred Street
West Myrtle Street at Graham Street
West Street at Guinea Road
Sec. 42-89 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-89
CHCT:504
West Street at Pool Street
Western Avenue at Main Street
Western Avenue at South Street
Western Avenue, two signs, one at each of the S-curves
Westfield Street at Hill Street
Westfield Street at Prospect Street
Westland Avenue at West Street
Westmore Avenue at South Street
Westwood Drive at West Street
Wildbrook Drive at Guinea Road
Willett Street at Granite Street
Willett Street at Hill Street
Williams Court at South Street
Wilson Street at Hill Street
Wilson Street at Prospect Street
Winter Garden at Hill Street
Winter Garden at Summer Street
Winter Street at Prospect Street
Yale Street at May Street
Yates Street at Mile Stretch Road
Sec. 42-90. No parking. [Code 1975, § 14-80; Ord. of 8-15-1989(1);
Ord. of 8-15-1989(2); Ord. of 11-21-1989(1); Ord. of 6-5-1990(1);
Ord. of 6-5-1990(3); Ord. of 6-13-1990; Ord. of 10-2-1990(1); Ord. of
11-20-1990(1); Ord. of 11-20-1990(2); Ord. of 11-20-1990(3); Ord.
of 11-20-1990(4); Ord. of 5-21-1991(2); Ord. of 6-4-1991; Ord. of
10-1-1991(1); Ord. of 3-3-1992; Ord. of 5-19-1992(1); Ord. of
7-7-1992; Ord. of 9-15-1992; Ord. of 1-5-1993(1); Ord. of 1-19-1993;
Ord. of 3-2-1993(1); Ord. of 3-2-1993(2); Ord. of 9-6-1994(1),
§ 14-80; Ord. of 9-6-1994(2), § 14-80; Ord. of 9-6-1994(3), § 14-80;
Ord. of 3-7-1995; Ord. of 9-20-1995; Ord. of 11-8-1995; Ord. of
6-18-1996; Ord. of 12-17-1996; Ord. of 1-21-1997(2); Ord. of
8-19-1997(3); Ord. of 11-5-1997; Ord. of 11-17-1997(2); Ord. of
4-21-1998(6); Ord. of 5-5-1998(2); Ord. of 8-4-1998(3); Ord. of
9-15-1998(1); Ord. of 9-15-1998(2); Ord. of 10-20-1998(2); Ord. of
10-20-1998(3); Ord. of 11-17-1998(2); Ord. of 12-15-1998(4); Ord.
of 12-15-1998(6); Ord. of 12-15-1998(7); Ord. of 12-15-1998(8);
Ord. of 12-15-1998(9); Ord. of 2-16-1999(5); Ord. of 2-16-1999(6);
Ord. No. 99.65, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 99.79, 9-21-1999; Ord. No.
2000.38, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2000.83, 8-1-2000; Ord. No. 2000.84,
8-1-2000; Ord. No. 2000.111, 10-3-2000; Ord. No. 2000.133,
12-19-2000; Ord. No. 2001.29, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 2001.66,
Sec. 42-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:505
7-17-2001; Ord. No. 2001.77, 9-4-2001; Ord. No. 2001.88,
10-16-2001; Ord. No. 2002.14, 2-19-2002; Ord. No. 2002.24,
3-19-2002; Ord. No. 2002.41, 5-23-2002; Ord. No. 2002.53,
6-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002.97, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 2002.111,
11-6-2002; Ord. No. 2002.117, 11-19-2002; Ord. No. 2002.118,
11-19-2002; Ord. No. 2002.119, 11-19-2002; Ord. No. 2002.120,
11-19-2002; Ord. No. 2003.78, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 2003.93,
9-30-2003; Ord. No. 2003.113, 11-18-2003; Ord. No. 2004.28,
4-20-2004; Ord. No. 2004.52, 7-20-2004; Ord. No. 2004.66,
8-17-2004; Ord. No. 2006.80, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 2006.104a,
11-21-2006; Ord. No. 2007.16, 3-20-2007; Ord. No. 2007.3,
1-16-2007; Ord. No. 2007.2, 3-6-2007; Ord. No. 2007.45, 6-2-2007;
Ord. No. 2007.46, 6-2-2007; Ord. No. 2007.57, 8-7-2007; Ord. No.
2007.58, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2007.59, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008.88,
11-18-2008]
There shall be no parking on the following streets for the specified
distance:
Adams Street, even-numbered side (City Hall side), from Main Street
to the intersection of South Street (monument)
Adams Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 500 feet
southwesterly from the intersection with Jefferson Street, thence
southwesterly for a distance of 29 feet
Adams Street, odd-numbered side (hotel side), from alleyway between
the Journal building to Main Street
Adams Street, northwesterly side, across from St. Demetrios Church
from bank curb cut to corner of Adams Street and Jefferson Street
Alfred Street, from the Elm Street intersection, westerly to the
Arundel town line, both sides of the street
Alfred Street, 39 Alfred Street:
Handicapped parking at corner of Bacon Street and Alfred Street
Two spaces for police use only
Alfred Street, even side, from Franklin Street to Jefferson Street
Alfred Street, even side, from Jefferson Street to Washington Street
Alfred Street, northeasterly corner, from Birch Street to a distance of
50 feet from the corner of Birch Street on Alfred Street
Alfred Street, northeasterly side, from 1,000 feet before the entrance
of the turnpike and 1,000 feet beyond the entrance of the turnpike
Alfred Street, odd-numbered side, from Pool Street to the police
facility building to a distance of 255 feet
Alfred Street, odd-numbered side, from Summer Street to Pool Street
Alfred Street, on a curve for a distance of 75 feet on curve and within
lot line
(a)
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:506
Alfred Street, southeasterly corner, from Birch Street back to a
distance of 50 feet from Birch Street on Alfred Street
Alfred Street, southwesterly side, for a distance of 50 feet
southeasterly from Graham Street
Amherst Street, odd-numbered side, from Rugby Street to May Street
Barra Road, both sides, from Alfred Street (Route 111) to the end
Beach Avenue, northeasterly side, from the intersection of Mile
Stretch Road to and including the fenced-in portion of the public
access which leads to the beach, such distance being 230 feet, plus or
minus
Benson Road, both sides, entire width of road at the dead end
Benson Road, both sides, beginning at the dead end of the street,
thence northeasterly for a distance of 70 feet
Birch Street, even-numbered side, from Alfred Street to 50 feet
beyond Prospect Street
Birch Street, even-numbered side, from Graham Street, 220 feet
toward Alfred Street
Birch Street, northerly side, from Alfred Street easterly back to a
distance of 75 feet on Birch Street
Birch Street, northerly side, from Prospect Street back to a distance
of 40 feet heading in an easterly direction on Birch Street
Birch Street, odd-numbered side, from Prospect Street, a distance of
40 feet in a westerly direction on Birch Street, toward Foss Street
Bradbury Street, even-numbered side, from Main Street to South
Street [Added 12-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.121]
Bradbury Street, odd-numbered side, for six feet on either side of the
small driveway (exit) of St. Joseph's Credit Union
Bradbury Street, westerly side, from Main Street to a distance of 50
feet from the corner of Main Street on Bradbury Street
Bradbury Street Extension, northeasterly side, from South Street to
the dead end
Bridge Road, either side, from the bridge to the intersection of Mile
Stretch Road
Bridge Road, northerly side, from Mile Stretch Road to the entrance
of Winter Harbor Lane
Bridge Road, southerly side, from pole J-17 to pole J-12
Brook Street, between signs, beginning 300 feet from the corner of
South Street, for a distance of 30 feet, northeasterly (even-numbered)
side, across from driveway of 13 Brook Street
Buckley's Court, no parking, both sides, from Pike Street to Freeman
Street
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:507
Cardinal Lane, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with Marial
Avenue to dead end [Added 1-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2018.147]
Carver Street, on the even-numbered side, for a distance of 100 feet
from Elm Street
Cathedral Oaks Drive, both sides, beginning at a point 192 feet south
of the intersection with Thatcher Brook Lane, thence southerly for a
distance of 50 feet
Cathedral Oaks Drive, odd-numbered side, beginning at the southeast
corner of the intersection with Indian Ridge Drive at the four-way
intersection of Cathedral Oaks Drive, Alexander Drive, and Indian
Ridge Drive, thence southerly for a distance of 75 feet [Added
11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.76; amended 9-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018.113]
Center Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 100 feet east
from the northeast corner of the intersection with Kossuth Street,
thence easterly for a distance of 42 feet [Added 9-20-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011.64]
Chadwick's Place, even-numbered side, from the intersection with
Elm Street, thence westerly to the end of the Street
Chapel Street, odd-numbered side from the intersection of Chapel/
Sullivan to Philips Lane
Chapel Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Hill Street, thence easterly for a distance of 65 feet [Added 2-2-2016
by Ord. No. 2016.11]
Clark Street, both sides, from curbline of Prospect Street for a
distance of 20 feet
Clark Street, from the curbline of the J. Richard Martin Community
Center entrance, for a distance of 17 feet toward Prospect Street and
16 feet towards Alfred Street
Clark Street, school side, for a distance of 250 feet from Prospect
Street, during school hours
Cleaves Street, on the even-numbered side, from the fire hydrant to a
distance of 15 feet across from Rumery's Boatyard
Cleaves Street, even-numbered side of street, beginning at the
intersection of Cleaves Street and Clifford Street, thence easterly for
a distance of 80 feet
Cleaves Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 105 feet
northwest of the intersection with George Street, thence westerly for
a distance of 125 feet
Cleaves Street, odd-numbered side of street, beginning at the
intersection of Cleaves Street and Water Street, thence easterly for a
distance of 81 feet
Clifford Street, southwest side, from Judge Street to George Street
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:508
Clifford Street, southwesterly side, from Miller Street to Pool Street
Clifford Street, southwesterly (even-numbered side), from Water
Street to George Street heading in a southeasterly direction
Clifford Street, both sides, from George Street to Water Street
Clifford Street, southeasterly side, from Water Street to Tibetts Street
Crescent Street, even-numbered side, from Green Street to South
Street
Cross Street, left side, from High Street to Pike Street
Cutts Street, even-numbered side between Elm Street and Bradbury
Street
Dale Circle, southwesterly side (left side), beginning at the
intersection with Graham Street, thence northwesterly to the dead
end
Dartmouth Street, even-numbered side, from the intersection with
Elm Street, thence westerly to the intersection with May Street
[Added 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.58]
Dartmouth Street, north side (even-numbered side), from the corner
of Elm Street to the second entrance of the York Manor nursing
facility to eliminate the hazard created at the crest of the hill on
Dartmouth Street
Debbie Avenue, easterly side
Decary Road, odd-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Pool Street, thence easterly to the intersection with Pool Street
Dental Avenue, even-numbered side, from Alfred Street to Graham
Street
Dental Avenue, odd-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Alfred Street, thence easterly for a distance of 82 feet
Dental Avenue, odd-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Graham Street, thence westerly for a distance of 40 feet
Dupont Avenue, even-numbered side, from the intersection with
Prospect Street, thence easterly to the intersection with Hill Street
[Added 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.28]
Eighth Street, odd-numbered side, from Fifth Street to Lester B.
Orcutt Boulevard
Elizabeth Road, either side, from Fortunes Rocks Road to Route 9
Elm Street, both sides (Route 1), from the beginning of the Prescott
Metals driveway southerly for a distance of 500 feet
Elm Street, even-numbered side, from the intersection of Elm Street
and South Street back to a distance of 50 feet from the intersection
Elm Street, even-numbered side, from the Saco City line, thence
southerly to the intersection with Main Street. [Added 7-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014.59]
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:509
Elm Street, even-numbered side, from the intersection with St. Joseph
Street, thence southerly to the intersection with South Street.
[Added 7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.60]
Elm Street, odd-numbered side between South Street and Main Street
Elm Street, from the intersection of Main Street and Elm Street to the
intersection of Cutts Street and Elm Street (Steego Auto Parts side)
Elm Street, 150 feet from Five Points to the Tousignant property and
First National Bank property lot line, 325 feet
Elm Street, westerly (even-numbered) side, from the corner of St.
Joseph's Street northerly for a distance of 88 feet
Elm Street [Repealed 7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.62]
Elphis Street, both sides, from Mile Stretch Road to end
Elphis Street, both sides, from Mile Stretch Road to the end of Elphis
Street
Emery Court, lefthand side, heading in a westerly direction from Elm
Street to the end
Emery Street, Main Street to Bacon Street, parking on righthand side
only
Emmons Place, either side, from Alfred Street to Graham Street
Federal Street, both sides, from Washington Street to entrance of
Franklin Street parking lot
Federal Street, northeasterly side
Fifth Street, odd-numbered side, from Seventh Street to Ocean
Avenue
First Street, odd-numbered side, from Ocean Avenue to Lester B.
Orcutt Boulevard
Fortunes Rocks Road, both sides, beginning at the intersection with
Bridge Road and Fortunes Rocks Road, thence southwesterly to the
intersection with Maddox Pond Road [Amended 6-4-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013.56]
Fortunes Rocks Road, both sides, from Elizabeth Road to Seal Lane
Fortunes Rocks Road [Repealed 6-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.49]
Fortunes Rocks Road (tow zone), both sides, from the easterly side of
Maddox Pond Road westerly to utility pole J-47, a distance of 2,500
feet, with the exception of the permit parking areas
Fortunes Rocks Road, even-numbered side, from Maddox Pond Road
to Elizabeth Road [Added 6-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.50]
Foss Street, easterly side (church side), back for a distance of 35 feet
from the intersection of Summer Street and Foss Street
Foss Street, even-numbered side, from Main Street to Pool Street
Foss Street, odd-numbered side, from King Street to Main Street
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:510
Foss Street, odd-numbered side, from Porter Street to Myrtle Street
Fourth Street, odd-numbered side, from First Street to Ocean Avenue
Franklin Street, even-numbered side, from the intersection with Main
Street, thence southwesterly to Federal Street
Franklin Street, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with the
Downtown Parking Lot, thence southwesterly to Alfred Street
Freeman Street, easterly side, from Clifford Street to the end thereof
George Street, northerly (even-numbered) side, for a distance of 115
feet from Clifford Street to driveway entrance
George Street, northerly (even-numbered) side, from Pool Street to
Clifford Street
Golden Avenue, even-numbered side, beginning at the dead end,
thence southwesterly for a distance of 50 feet
Golden Avenue, odd-numbered side, beginning at the dead end,
thence southwesterly for a distance of 50 feet
Gove Street, southwesterly side, from Simard Avenue northwesterly
to Judge Street
Graham Street, easterly (odd-numbered) side, for a distance of 20 feet
northerly and 55 feet southerly from the entrance to the Ledgewood
Apartments
Graham Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the point of 20 feet
from the southwesterly corner of the intersection with Birch Street,
thence southwesterly for a distance of 50 feet from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on school days
Graham Street, even-numbered side, from Birch Street to a distance
of 40 feet
Graham Street, for 20 feet, on either side of the entry of the
Ledgewood Apartments building, namely 9 Graham Street
Graham Street, westerly (even-numbered) side, for a distance of 145
feet from Fogg Avenue
Granite Point Road, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 114
feet northeast from the end of Granite Point Road, thence
northeasterly to the intersection with Pool Street [Added
10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.103]
Granite Point Road, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with
Pool Street thence southwesterly to the end [Amended 10-16-2012
by Ord. No. 2012.103]
Granite Street, westerly (even-numbered) side, from West Street for a
distance of 400 feet northerly
Gray's Lane, even-numbered side, from Elm Street to dead end
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:511
Green Street, even-numbered side, from the southwest corner of the
intersection with South Street, thence southerly to the intersection
with Crescent
Green Street, odd-numbered side, from the southeast corner of the
intersection with South Street, thence southerly to the intersection
with Birch Street
Green Street, odd-numbered side, directly in front of 111 Green
Street for a distance of 40 feet (which is from curb cut to curb cut)
Green Street, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with
Wentworth Street, thence easterly for a distance of 227 feet
Green Street, westerly side, from South Street to Center Street
Hazel Street, both sides, from St. Mary's Street to Spruce Street
[Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.117]
High Street, easterly side, a distance of 65 feet southerly of Water
Street
High Street, easterly side, from the intersection of High Street and
Pool Street back a distance of 25 feet from the corner
High Street, less northwesterly side, from Pool Street to Water Street
High Street, odd-numbered side, being the easterly side, for a
distance of 30 feet from Water Street
Hill's Beach Road, both sides, from Route 9 to 100 feet beyond
Seabreeze Avenue
Hill's Beach Road, odd-numbered side, no parking on any part of the
paved roadway from a point 100 feet southerly of the Edgewater
Place to Sky Harbor Drive [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord. No.
2009.83]
Hill's Beach Road, odd-numbered side, from the first intersection with
Sky Harbor Drive to Fort Hill [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord. No.
2009.84]
Hill's Beach Road, northeasterly, odd-numbered side, from the
westerly intersection of Hill's Beach Road and Sky Harbor Drive to
Fort Hill
Hill's Beach Road, southwesterly, even-numbered, side from a point
100 feet southerly of Seabreeze Avenue to Fort Hill
Hillside Avenue, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 340 feet
northwest from the intersection with Hill Street, thence northwesterly
for a distance of 52 feet, thence southwesterly for a distance of 100
feet, thence northwesterly for a distance of 20 feet. (This is just prior
to and just beyond the S curve.) [Added 10-1-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.78]
Hillside Avenue, even-numbered side, from the intersection with
Prospect Street, thence easterly to the intersection with Hill Street
[Added 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.28]
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:512
Hill Street, either side, from West Street to Landry Street
Hill Street, even-numbered side, from Bacon Street to Pool Street
Hill Street, even-numbered side, from Pool Street to Birch Street
Hill Street, from the intersection of Main Street along southeast side
of Hill Street for 120 feet
Hill Street, odd-numbered side, from Main Street to a point 25 feet up
Hill Street
Hill Street, odd-numbered side, from West Street to Raymond Street
Hill Street, right side, from the corner of Hill Street and Pool Street to
Emery School
Hill Street, right side, from Main Street to Bacon Street
Horrigan's Court, either side
Ivy Street, beginning at the dead end of the street, thence
southwesterly for a distance of 20 feet from November first to May
first
Jefferson Street [Repealed 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.102]
Jefferson Street, from the intersection of Washington Street along the
northeasterly side of Jefferson Street easterly to a point 50 feet east
of the intersection of Jefferson and Washington Streets
Jefferson Street, northeasterly side, from 18 Jefferson Street to
Center Street
Jefferson Street, odd-numbered side, from Alfred Street to South
Street, except for two spaces in front of Mickey's Market and two
spaces in front of the Sandwich Man
Jefferson Street, southwesterly side, from South Street to Alfred
Street
John Street, right side, from the intersection of Hill Street for a
distance of 25 feet
Kossuth Street, southwesterly (even-numbered) side, from Center
Street to South Street
Lafayette Street, westerly (even-numbered) side, from a point 155
feet northerly of Pool Street and running 85 feet
Lamothe Avenue, even-numbered side, beginning at the intersection
with Elm Street, thence westerly to the intersection with May Street
[Added 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.12]
Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard, both sides, beginning at a point 205 feet
east of the intersection with Yates Street, thence southerly to the
intersection with Mile Stretch Road
Lily Pond Avenue, both sides, from the intersection with Fortunes
Rocks Road, both entrances, entire street [Added 1-3-2019 by Ord.
No. 2018.148]
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:513
Lincoln Street, even-numbered side, from Elm Street to the southern
corner of the intersection of Saco Falls Way and Lincoln Street
[Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.105]
Lincoln Street, odd-numbered side, from Main Street to Elm Street
(U.S. Route 1) [Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.105]
Lincoln Street [Repealed 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.105]
Long Avenue, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point from the
intersection with Hills Beach Road, thence northeasterly to the dead
end, no parking on the pavement or any part thereof [Added
1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010.137]
Long Avenue, even-numbered side, beginning at the dead end, thence
southwesterly for a distance of 50 feet, no parking on the pavement,
or any part thereof [Added 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010.137]
Long Avenue, no parking within 50 feet of the dead end to allow for
emergency access to the beach. Vehicles found in violation may be
removed at the owner's expense. [Added 1-4-2011 by Ord. No.
2010.137]
Main Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the northeast corner
of the intersection with St. Mary's Street, thence easterly for a
distance of 80 feet±
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at the southwest corner
of the intersection with Bradbury Street, thence westerly for a
distance of 50 feet±
Main Street, northerly side, from the Rotary Park entrance westerly
to South Street
Main Street, northerly side, for a distance of 50 feet west of the
intersection of Main Street and Elm Street and for a distance of 120
feet east of the intersection
Main Street, southerly side, for a distance of 50 feet west of the
intersection of Main Street and Elm Street and for a distance of 30
feet east of the intersection
Main Street, southerly side, from Maplewood Avenue to Highland
Street, from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., school days only
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at the southwest corner
of the intersection with Elm Street, thence westerly for a distance of
250 feet. [Added 7-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.61]
Main Street, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with South
Street, thence easterly for a distance of 540 feet, no parking
[Amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.64]
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 540 feet east
from the intersection with South Street, thence easterly for a distance
of 525 feet, no parking on any part of the paved roadway [Added
7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.64]
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:514
Main Street, southwesterly side, from Bradbury Street to 30 feet from
the corner of St. Mary's Street
Main Street, odd-numbered side, from Main Street Bridge to Hill
Street
Main Street, odd-numbered side, from Foss Street to Alfred Street
Main Street, even-numbered side, from Laconia Street, thence
westerly for a distance of 40 feet
Main Street, even-numbered side, from the Biddeford Saco American
Legion Memorial Bridge (Lower Main Street) thence westerly for a
distance of 407± feet
Main Street, both sides, from Saco city line to Elm Street, from 1:00
a.m. to 6:00 a.m., year round [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.105]
Maplewood Avenue, westerly side, from the entrance of Steve White
Gym to South Street
Mason Street, odd-numbered side, from Graham Street to Elm Street
Mason Street, odd-numbered side, from Elm Street to Bradbury
Street
Mason Street, odd-numbered side, from Bradbury Street to end
Mason Street, even-numbered side, from Elm Street thence westerly
for a distance of 50 feet
Mason Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the northeast corner
of the intersection with Elm Street, thence southeasterly for a
distance of 92 feet [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.8]
Mason Street extension, southwesterly side, from Elm Street to the
dead end
May Street, easterly side, in front of the Trull Nursing Home, from lot
line to lot line, being 335 feet
May Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
South Street, thence southwesterly for a distance of 375 feet [Added
5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.35]
May Street, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with Yale
Street, thence northerly to Dartmouth Street [Added 4-4-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017.28]
May Street, westerly (even-numbered) side, for 20 feet on either side
of the entrance to Southridge Living Center
McArthur Way, both sides from the intersection of Elm Street to the
end
Mile Stretch Road, both sides, from the intersection of Bridge Road
and Fortunes Rocks Road to the intersection of Lester B. Orcutt
Boulevard and Stone Cliff Road, or to the volunteer fire station
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:515
Mile Stretch Road, left side (marsh side) for a distance of 100 feet
from the intersection of Bridge Road and Mile Stretch Road
Mitchell Lane, even-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Pike Street, thence easterly for a distance of 162 feet
Mitchell Lane, odd-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Pike Street, thence easterly for a distance of 110 feet
Myrtle Street, both sides, from the curbline of Prospect Street for a
distance of 20 feet
Myrtle Street, from the curbline of the J. Richard Martin Community
Center entrance, for a distance of seven feet towards Prospect Street
and 12 feet towards Alfred Street
Myrtle Road, school side, from Prospect Street for a distance of 250
feet, during school hours
Ninth Street, odd-numbered side, from First Street to Lester B.
Orcutt Avenue
Oak Street, easterly side, for a distance of 35 feet from the
intersection of Oak Street and Vine Street back a distance of 35 feet
Ocean Avenue, both sides, from the end of the chain of rocks to First
Street, northerly side; from Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard to First Street,
southerly side
Ocean Avenue, even-numbered side, from the intersection with Lester
B. Orcutt Boulevard, thence southerly to the intersection with
Seventh Street [Added 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.58]
Ocean Avenue, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with Lester
B. Orcutt Boulevard, thence southerly to the intersection with
Seventh Street [Added 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.58]
Old Pool Road, both sides, from the intersection with the Hills Beach
Road, thence easterly for a distance of 500 feet[Added 10-16-2012
by Ord. No. 2012.102]
Orchard Street, northeasterly (even-numbered) side, from Elm Street
to a distance of 300 feet
Orchard Street, odd-numbered side, from Elm Street a distance of
300 feet, being the crest of the small incline at the driveway entry
Parent Street, both sides, from Pool Street a distance of 50 feet
Parkview Court, both sides, from intersection of Main Street to the
end
Parkview Court [Repealed 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.102]
Parkview Court [Repealed 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.102]
Pearl Street, lefthand side, heading in an easterly direction from
Lincoln Street to Smith Street
Penny Avenue, northerly side
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:516
Perreault Street, there is no parking on the even-numbered side of
Perreault Street, from Elm Street to the end
Pierson's Lane, left side, from Bacon Street to Water Street
Pike Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the southeast corner of
the intersection with Mitchell Lane, thence southerly for a distance of
32 feet
Pike Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the northeast corner of
the intersection with Mitchell Lane, thence northerly for a distance of
37 feet
Pike Street, even-numbered side, from Water Street to Pool Street
[Added 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.57]
Pine Street, northerly side, from Elm Street to Pine Street bridge
Pool Beach access road, both sides, from Mile Stretch Road to the
parking area
Pool Road, both sides from a distance of 400 feet in front of the
Masonic Temple
Pool Road, northerly side, from Marial Avenue to the second fire
hydrant from Marial Avenue
Pool Street, both sides, from Foss Street to Alfred Street
Pool Street, both sides, from the intersection with Hills Beach Road,
thence easterly to the Kennebunkport town line [Added 9-18-2018
by Ord. No. 2018.111]
Pool Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Foss Street thence easterly to the intersection with Pike Street
Pool Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Pike Street thence easterly to the intersection with Trix Lane
Pool Street, even-numbered side from Trix Lane to Parkside Drive
Pool Street, northeasterly (odd-numbered) side, northwesterly from
Pike Street for a distance of 35 feet
Pool Street, northerly side, from Lafayette Street to Simard Avenue
Pool Street, odd-numbered side from Lafayette Street to Marial
Avenue
Pool Street, odd-numbered side from northeast corner of Pool Street
and Foss Street, easterly for a distance of 63 feet
Pool Street, southwesterly side, from Alfred Street to Foss Street
Pool Street, southwesterly side, in front of St. Andre's Credit Union,
from entrance to exit
Pool Street, westerly side of northerly leg, for a distance of not less
than 75 feet from the intersection of Hill Street
Prospect Street, east side, from Birch Street a distance of 75 feet,
west side, from Birch Street to end of Prospect Street
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:517
Prospect Street, easterly (odd-numbered) side, from Winter Street to
Clarendon Street
Prospect Street, on the Waterhouse Field side, from Hillside Avenue
to West Street
Round Hill Street, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with May
Street, thence northeasterly to the intersection with Dartmouth
Street [Added 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.59]
St. Mary's Street, odd- and even-numbered sides, from the ninetydegree
angle down to extension leading to railroad tracks to the end
St. Mary's Street, odd-numbered side from the ninety-degree curve,
thence southeasterly for a distance of 87 feet [Added 11-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.86]
St. Mary's Street, odd-numbered side from the ninety-degree curve,
thence southwesterly for a distance of 25 feet [Added 11-17-2009
by Ord. No. 2009.87]
Seabreeze Avenue, both sides beginning from a point at pole J213
thence easterly for a distance of 17 feet
School Street, southwesterly side, from Pool Street to Pike Street
Second Street, odd-numbered side, from First Street to Ocean Avenue
Seventh Street, even-numbered side, from Fourth Street to Ocean
Avenue
Shevenell Court, east side
Simard Avenue, northwesterly side, from Cleaves Street to Pool Street
Small's Court, lefthand side, heading in an easterly direction, from
the beginning to the end
Smith Street, both sides
South Street, even-numbered side, from Adams Street (monument) to
a distance of 177 feet from Adams Street (City Hall side)
South Street [Repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2014.132]
South Street [Added 4-19-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.25; repealed
1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2014.132]
South Street, even-numbered side, from Green Street to William's
Court
South Street, even-numbered side, from a point beginning 236 feet
east of pole J 83, thence to the intersection of Brook Street
South Street, odd-numbered side, from Adams Street (monument)
back for a distance of 70 feet from Adams Street (bank side)
South Street, odd-numbered side, from Green Street to Elm Street
intersection
South Street, odd-numbered side, from Village Lane, thence westerly
for 150 feet, no parking [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.73]
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:518
South Street, odd-numbered side, no parking on any part of paved
roadway from a point 150 feet westerly of Village Lane for a distance
of 240 feet [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.73]
South Street [Repealed 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.102]
South Street [Repealed 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.102]
South Street, both sides, from pole 28 to Maplewood Avenue
South Street, left side, from Elm Street to Bradbury Street
South Street [Repealed 10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.102]
South Street, northerly (even-numbered) side, for a distance of 25
feet east of the easterly side and 25 feet west of the westerly side of
Briarwood Drive
Stone Street, easterly (odd-numbered) side, from the funeral home
driveway south for a distance of 50 feet
Stone Street, both sides, for a distance of 120 feet from Pearl Street
Sullivan Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 287 feet
south from the intersection with Water Street, thence northerly for a
distance of 20 feet
Summer Street, easterly side, from Birch Street to Harrison Avenue
Summer Street, westerly side, from Alfred Street to Prospect Street
Summit Street, even-numbered side, from the intersection with Alfred
Street, thence northerly to the intersection with Round Hill Street
[Added 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.39]
Tibbetts Street, both sides, from the intersection of Clifford Street to
the intersection of Pinette Street
Third Street, odd-numbered side, from First Street to Ocean Avenue
Union Street, righthand side, heading in a westerly direction from
Alfred Street to Elm Street
Victory Avenue, northerly side (Prospect Manor side), from Prospect
Street to Ray Street
Village Lane, even-numbered side, from the intersection with South
Street, thence southerly for a distance of 51 feet [Added 4-21-2015
by Ord. No. 2015.17]
Village Lane, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with South
Street, thence southerly for a distance of 52 feet [Added 4-21-2015
by Ord. No. 2015.17]
Washington Street, beginning at a point on the odd-numbered side of
Washington Street, said point being more specifically identified as
181 feet from CMP Pole No. 11, thence proceeding for a distance of
81 feet
Washington Street, a distance of 10 feet from either side of driveway
entrance to Presidential Apartments located at 80 Washington Street
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:519
Washington Street, northerly side, from Alfred Street to the post
office exit
Water Street, odd-numbered side, from Main Street to White's Wharf
Street
Water Street, righthand side, from High Street to Clifford Street
Water Street, southerly side, from Hill Street for a distance of 73 feet
Water Street, southerly side, between Sullivan Street and High Street
Wellspring Road, either side, from beginning to end
Wendell Avenue, southerly side, for a distance of 100 feet
southwesterly from West Street
Wentworth Lane, both sides, from Elm Street to end, being
Wentworth Street
Wentworth Street [Repealed 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.21]
Wentworth Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the northwest
corner of the intersection with Wentworth Court, thence northeasterly
for a distance of 50 feet [Added 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.49]
Wentworth Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at the intersection
with South Street, thence southerly to the intersection with Mason
Street [Amended 5-5-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.22]
Wentworth Street, odd-numbered side, from South Street back a
distance of 20 feet
West Cutts Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the northeast
corner of the intersection with Harvey Street, thence southerly to the
dead end
West Street [Added 11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.77; repealed
4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.28]
West Street, even-numbered side, from the intersection with Elm
Street, thence easterly to the intersection with Granite Street [Added
4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.28]
West Street [Repealed 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.28]
West Street [Repealed 11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.77]
West Street [Repealed 11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.77]
West Street, even-numbered side, no parking on any part of the paved
roadway from Granite Street to Guinea Road
West Street [Repealed 4-4-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.28]
West Street, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with Elm
Street, thence easterly to the intersection with Granite Street [Added
11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.77]
West Street, odd-numbered side, no parking on any part of the paved
roadway from Granite Street to Guinea Road
Sec. 42-90 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-90
CHCT:520
Sec. 42-90.1. No parking during special events. [Ord. No. 2004.33,
5-4-2004; Ord. No. 2007.128, 1-2-2008]
Western Avenue, southerly side, between the driveways to the
Western Oaks Apartments
Westland Avenue, odd-numbered (southerly) side, for the length of the
street
White's Wharf, both sides, from Water Street to river
Winter Street, even-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Prospect Street, thence easterly for a distance of ±424 feet
Winter Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at the intersection with
Prospect Street, thence easterly for a distance of 111 feet
Yale Street, even-numbered side, from May Street to Round Hill
Street [Added 9-4-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.91]
Yates Street, even-numbered side, from the intersection with Mile
Stretch Road, thence westerly for a distance of 600± feet
A person may not park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle under
that person's control to remain parked on a public highway in a manner
that blocks the entrance to a private driveway or entrance to a place of
business or within two feet thereof without the permission of the owner
of that private driveway, or entrance to a place of business. [Added
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.96]
(b)
There is no parking on the following streets during a special event that
is held at either the Waterhouse Field and/or at the St. Louis Field:
Ashland Avenue, odd-numbered side
Bald Avenue, even-numbered side, from West Street to end
Belmont Avenue, even-numbered side
Belmont Avenue, odd-numbered side, from Prospect Street to end
Debbie Avenue, even-numbered side
Dupont, even-numbered side
Forest Street, odd-numbered side, from Ashland to West Streets
Free Street, even-numbered side
Gertrude Avenue, odd-numbered side, from West Street to Harding
Street
Greenfield Lane, even-numbered side
Harding Street, odd-numbered side, from Graham Street to Prospect
Street
Havey Avenue, even-numbered side
Herring Avenue, even-numbered side
Herring Extension, even-numbered side
(a)
Sec. 42-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-90.1
CHCT:521
Sec. 42-91. No-parking tow-zone area. [1975, § 14-81; Ord. of
11-21-1989(2); Ord. of 6-5-1990(1); Ord. of 6-5-1990(2); Ord. of
6-5-1990(3); Ord. of 6-13-1990; Ord. of 11-7-1990; Ord. of
3-16-1993; Ord. of 6-6-1995; Ord. No. 2003.53, 5-6-2003]
The following streets are hereby designated as no parking-tow zone areas:
Hill Street, even-numbered side from Clarendon Street to West Street
Hill Street Extension, both sides
Hillside Avenue, even-numbered side, from Prospect Street to Hill
Street
Hubert Street, even-numbered side
John Street, even-numbered side
Laurier Street, even-numbered side
Liberty Avenue, even-numbered side
Penney Avenue, even-numbered side
Prospect Street, even-numbered side from Clarendon to West Street
Ritz Avenue, even-numbered side
Sunrise, even-numbered side
Sunset, even-numbered side
Victory Avenue, even-numbered side
Wendell Avenue, even-numbered side
West Street, even-numbered side, from Five Points to Graham Street
Extension.
West Street, odd-numbered side, from Granite Street to Hill Street
Westfield, even-numbered side
Wilson Street, even-numbered side
For the purpose of this section, a special event includes an event which
is open to, or is intended to attract general public, whether or not an
admission fee is charged, and shall include, but is not limited to: La
Kermesse Festival; a football, soccer or baseball game; concert; any
public exhibition or entertainment.
(b)
Signs shall be erected that shall prominently read: "No Parking During
Events at Waterhouse or St. Louis Fields" The Police Department may
cause the removal of any vehicle found in violation of this section that
does not allow for a minimum of 10 feet of unobstructed passage.
Otherwise, a parking ticket may be issued.
(c)
Nothing in this section is intended to prevent the Police Department
from exercising its legal authority to meet special needs or
emergencies.
(d)
Sec. 42-90.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-91
CHCT:522
Biddeford Airport Industrial Park, all roads
Biddeford Industrial Park, all roads
Bridge Road, both sides, from Mile Stretch Road toward Route 9 for a
distance of 1/5 mile
Elizabeth Road, both sides, from Fortunes Rocks Road to Route 9
Foav Court, both sides, beginning at the intersection with Bacon Street,
thence southwesterly to the end [Added 5-21-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.36]
Gilbert Place, both sides, for its entire length and from Gilbert Place to
the gate of the Pool Beach Parking Lot.
Granite Street Extension, from the end of street at the existing
turnaround area for a distance of 50 feet on either side of center line of
roadway, from 6:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday between
September 1 and June 20
Hazel Street, both sides, from St. Mary's Street to Spruce Street [Added
11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.118]
Maddox Pond Road, both sides, from Fortunes Rocks Road to Pool Street
[Amended 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2014.129]
Main Street, from the corner of Main Street and Elm Street, 50 feet from
the corner heading a westerly direction to the sign, being the lefthand
side of Main Street from the traffic light, allowing for the flow of traffic on
a green arrow
Mile Stretch Road, from the entrance of Gilbert Place, also known as Pool
Beach Facility, for a distance of 1/2 mile total, using the center line of
Gilbert Place entrance, being a distance of 1/4 mile on either side of
Gilbert Place
Ocean Avenue, the entire one-way section of Ocean Avenue, including Bay
Street
Pierson's Lane, both sides, from Bacon Street to Water Street
Pierson's Lane [Repealed 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.36]
South Street, northerly side, from the intersection of Elm Street and
South Street, to the first driveway on South Street
Travers Street, southwesterly (left) side, from Elm Street to dead end
Wentworth Street, odd-numbered side, from the intersection with South
Street, thence southwesterly to Mason Street [Added 2-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.4]
Williams Court, both sides, from the intersection with South Street,
thence northeasterly to the dead end
Yates Street, odd-numbered side, beginning 132 feet northwest of the
southwest corner of the intersection with Mile Stretch Road, thence
northwesterly for a distance of 420 feet, between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. from June 15 to Labor Day [Added 4-21-2015 by Ord. No.
2015.19]
Sec. 42-91 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:523
Sec. 42-92. Limited parking. [Code 1975, § 14-82; Ord. of
7-17-1990(2); Ord. of 10-2-1990(2); Ord. of 10-1-1991(2); Ord. of
5-19-1992(2); Ord. of 5-19-1992(3); Ord. of 5-19-1992(4); Ord. of
11-4-1992; Ord. of 12-21-1993(2); Ord. of 12-21-1993(3); Ord. of
4-5-1994(2), § 14-82; Ord. of 8-15-1995; Ord. of 9-5-1995; Ord. of
9-20-1995; Ord. of 9-20-1995; Ord. of 6-4-1996(2); Ord. of
12-17-1996; Ord. of 1-21-1997(3); Ord. of 11-17-1997(2), (3); Ord.
of 4-21-1998(1); Ord. of 8-4-1998(4); Ord. of 12-15-1998(9); Ord. of
3-16-1999; Ord. of 6-15-1999(1); Ord. No. 2000.109, 10-26-2000;
Ord. No. 2000.127, 11-21-2000; Ord. No. 2001.30, 4-17-2001; Ord.
No. 2001.66, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 2002.26, 3-19-2002; Ord. No.
2002.36, 4-16-2002; Ord. No. 2002.53, 6-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002.64,
7-16-2002; Ord. No. 2002.97, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 2003.43,
4-15-2003; Ord. No. 2003.78, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 2004.32,
7-20-2004; Ord. No. 2007.31, 5-15-2007; Ord. No. 2007.45,
6-2-2007; Ord. No. 2007.121, 11-20-2007; Ord. No. 2008.62,
9-2-2008]
Parking will be limited at the following locations in the specified
manner.
Beginning at a point 50 feet westerly of the intersection of the
northeasterly side of Main Street with the northwesterly side of Elm
Street;
Thence, westerly along said Main Street a distance of 36 feet to the
first driveway apron;
Thence, beginning at a point 106 feet westerly of the intersection of
the northeasterly side of Main Street with the northwesterly side of
Elm Street;
Thence, westerly along said Main Street a distance of 54 feet to a point
Said herein described premises creates five parking spaces which will
be restricted to two-hour parking
Adams Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet from
the intersection of Main Street and Adams Street curblines, thence
southerly for two, one-hour parking spaces, between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturdays; exception: holidays
[Amended 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
Adams Street, odd-numbered side, from Main Street to Jefferson
Street, two hours, Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.; unless otherwise posted [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.106]
Adams Street, even-numbered side, from South Street to Jefferson
Street, two hours, Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.; unless otherwise posted [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.106]
(a)
Sec. 42-92 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:524
Alfred Street, southwesterly (even-numbered) side, from Main Street
from the second handicap parking space to Franklin Street, for all
available spaces to be two hours, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; exception:
Sundays and holidays
Alfred Street, southerly (odd-numbered) side, from Main Street to
Bacon Street, two hours, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; exception: Sundays
and holidays
Alfred Street, westerly side, between signs, at Lot 177, Map 34, for
118 feet (from lot line to lot line), also known as 200 Alfred Street, two
hours, from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Alfred Street, even-numbered side, from Birch Street towards W.
Myrtle for four spaces, 15 minutes
Alfred Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet from
the intersection of Birch Street and Alfred Street, thence easterly, for
one fifteen-minute parking space
Alfred Street, odd-numbered side, from Summer Street toward Pool
Street, three spaces for 15 minutes
Alfred Street, in front of the Farm Store located at 38 Alfred Street,
one space, 15 minutes
Alfred Street, odd-numbered side, at corner of Summer Street towards
Mt. Vernon Street, two spaces, two hours
Alfred Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
southwest from the intersection with Main Street, thence
southwesterly of a distance of 44 feet, 15 minutes
Alfred Street Parking Lot, commencing with Rows 2 and 3, being 44
spaces; Row 1 shall be reserved for police parking only, being 15
spaces, with the exception of two spaces in the first row to be marked
handicap parking only, two hours
Alfred Street Parking Lot, fourth row (closest to St. Andre's Credit
Union), four hours
Alfred Street Parking Lot, from the first snowfall or December 1,
from the hours of 12:00 a.m. (midnight) to 6:00 a.m. unit May 1,
except Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve, with the exception of police
vehicles
Bacon Street, both sides, Alfred Street to Foss Street, two hours,
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; exception: Sundays and holidays [Amended
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
Bacon Street [Repealed 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010.135]
Birch Street, odd-numbered side, from Alfred Street to Graham Street,
six spaces, ten-minute parking 7:00 a.m. through 4:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday
Birch Street, at the corner of Birch Street and Summer Street, being
two spaces in front of store on Birch Street, 15 minutes
Sec. 42-92 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:525
Center Street, both sides, from Jefferson Street to Kossuth Street, two
hours, Monday through Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.; unless
otherwise posted [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
City Hall Parking Lot, from the intersection of Adams Street and the
entrance to the City Hall parking lot, beside and easterly of City Hall,
six one-hour parking spaces
City Hall Parking Lot, northerly of the Civil War Memorial traffic
island, five one-hour parking spaces
Elm Street, easterly (odd-numbered) side, from the northerly side of
Thornton Street and running south 96 feet, two hours
Elm Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
southwesterly of the intersection with Cutts Street, thence
southwesterly for a distance of two parking spaces (44 feet ±), 15
minutes [Added 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.49]
Elm Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 180 feet south of
the intersection of St. Joseph Street, thence for a distance of 21 feet,
15 minutes. This area is more specifically located in front of 200 Elm
Street
Elm Street [Repealed 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.48]
Elm Street, westerly (even-numbered) side, from Thornton Street a
distance of 85 feet in a southwesterly direction, two hours
Fortunes Rocks Road, beach area, no parking 8:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
Foss Street Parking Lot, no parking from 12:00 a.m. (midnight) to 6:00
a.m. commencing with the first snowfall or December 1 until May 1,
except for Christmas Eve and New Year's Eve
Franklin Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 57 feet from
the intersection with Alfred Street, thence westerly for a distance of
66 feet, 15 minutes
Franklin Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 42 feet
southeast from the intersection with Main Street, thence
southwesterly to the intersection with the Downtown Parking Lot, two
hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except
holidays
Franklin Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet from
the intersection with Main Street, thence southwesterly for a distance
of one space, 15 minutes
Adjacent to the northwest side of the building located at 42 Franklin
Street, two parking spaces for 30 minutes [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018.106]
Southwest corner of the intersection of Franklin Street and Federal
Street, two spaces for 30 minutes [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.106]
Golden Avenue, no parking, 12:00 midnight to 4:00 a.m.
Sec. 42-92 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:526
Highland Street, both sides, from Main Street to South Street, no
parking, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday on school days [Amended 1-15-2013 by Ord. No. 2012.119]
Hill Street, beginning at a point on the northwesterly side of Hill
Street, said point being 228 feet northeasterly of the intersection of
Hill Street and West Street, thence, in a northeasterly direction for a
distance of 105 feet; parking is restricted for municipal vehicles only
from Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. All other vehicles may be towed at owner's
expense. [Added 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.15]
Hill Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet northeast
from the northeast corner of the intersection with Pool Street, thence
northeasterly for a distance of two parking spaces, 20 minutes,
Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. [Added
4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2014.130]
Jefferson Street, northeasterly (odd-numbered) side, from the Franklin
Street parking lot entrance to Washington Street, 15 minutes
Immediately adjacent to the southeast side of the building located
at 69 Jefferson Street, two parking spaces for 30 minutes [Added
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
Jefferson Street, odd-numbered side, from Main Street to South Street,
two hours, Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.;
unless otherwise posted [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
Jefferson Street, adjacent to the building at 265 Main Street, evennumbered
side, one space beginning at a point 20 feet from
intersection with Main Street, thence easterly for a distance of 24 feet
for 30 minutes [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard, both sides, from the intersection with
Yates Street thence southerly for a distance of 205 feet, three hours
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from June 15 through Labor Day of each
year
Lincoln Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet south
from the intersection with Stone Street, thence southerly for two twohour
parking spaces, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, except holidays
Lincoln Street, odd-numbered side, from Main Street to Pearl Street,
two hours, Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.;
unless otherwise posted [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
Lincoln Street [Repealed 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
Main Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet west
from the intersection with Elm Street, thence northwesterly for a
distance of two parking spaces, 15 minutes [Added 12-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014.115]
Sec. 42-92 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:527
Main Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point of the
perpendicular sight line with the northwest corner of the intersection
with Emery Street, thence westerly to Laconia Street, two hours,
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,
except on holidays, and excepting for those spaces that have been
designated elsewhere in this chapter for disability parking, loading
zone, or otherwise [Added 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.9]
Main Street, even-numbered side, from Laconia Street to Elm Street,
two hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday, except holidays, and excepting for those spaces that
have been designated elsewhere in this chapter for disability parking,
loading zone, or otherwise
Main Street [Added 8-2-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.50; repealed
1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2014.131]
Main Street, odd-numbered side, from Hill Street to Elm Street, two
hours, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday, except holidays, and excepting for those spaces that have been
designated elsewhere in this chapter for disability parking, loading
zone, or otherwise
Main Street, even-numbered side, two parking spaces in front of 144
Main Street, 15 minutes, 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
southeast from the intersection with Washington Street, thence
southerly for a distance of 21 feet, 15 minutes, between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 58± feet
southwest from the curblines with the intersection with Adams Street,
thence southwesterly for a distance of two parking spaces (44± feet)
30 minutes, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday, except holidays
Main Street [Amended 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.9; repealed
11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.94]
Main Street, southerly (odd-numbered) side, beginning 20 feet from
the corner of Washington Street, two 15-minute spaces
Maplewood Avenue, westerly side, from a point 150 feet southwesterly
from the intersection with Main Street, thence southwesterly to
entrance of Steven White Gymnasium during school hours, and on
school days, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. [Amended 3-16-2010 by Ord. No.
2010.20]
May Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 275 feet
southwest from the intersection with Colonial Drive, thence
southwesterly for a distance of 22 feet, five-minute parking for
passenger dropoff only [Added 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010.132]
Sec. 42-92 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:528
May Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 500 feet
southwest from the intersection with Colonial Drive, thence
southwesterly for a distance of 22 feet, five-minute parking for
passenger dropoff only [Added 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010.133]
Ocean Avenue [Repealed 9-15-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.58]
Pine Street [Repealed 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.16]
Pool Street, in front of Pool Street Market, store side, three spaces, 15
minutes
Prospect Street [Repealed 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.19]
St. Mary's Street [Repealed 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.85;
3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.17]
St. Mary's Street [Repealed 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.18]
St. Mary's Street, even-numbered side from the ninety-degree curve,
thence southwesterly for a distance of 60 feet [Added 11-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.88]
St. Mary's Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
west from the intersection with Hazel Street, thence northwesterly to
end of street, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
[Amended 11-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.119]
South Street, both sides, from Adams Street to Jefferson Street, two
hours, Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.; unless
otherwise posted [Added 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.106]
South Street, east side, behind Christ Episcopal Church/Headstart
Headquarters, for a distance of 30 feet, from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday
Spruce Street, northerly side beginning at a point 177 feet from the
intersection of Elm Street and Spruce Street for a distance of 66 feet,
two hours
Staples Street, Biddeford Pool, no parking, 12:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
Summer Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
northeast from the intersection with Birch Street, thence northeasterly
for a distance of 20 feet, 15 minutes
Summer Street, southerly side, corner of Alfred Street, three spaces,
two hours
Washington Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point of 20 feet
southwest from the intersection of Main Street, thence southeasterly
for a distance of 43 feet (two spaces) from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., 15
minutes [Added 11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.78]
Washington Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 63 feet
southwest from the intersection with Main Street, thence
southeasterly for a distance that is within 146 feet of the intersection
with Jefferson Street, two hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday, except holidays
Sec. 42-92 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:529
Washington Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point of 20 feet
southwest from the intersection of Main Street, thence southeasterly
for a distance of 43 feet (two spaces) from 12:00 noon to 5:00 p.m.,
two hours, Monday through Friday
Washington Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 63 feet
southeast from the intersection with Main Street, thence
southwesterly to the intersection with Jefferson Street, two hours,
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, except holidays
Water Street, even-numbered side, from Liberty Park to Sullivan
Street, two hours [Amended 10-26-2018]
Yates Street, easterly side, from the intersection with Lester B. Orcutt
Boulevard, thence southerly for a distance of 71 feet, three hours from
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. from June 15 through Labor Day of each year
Yates Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet from the
southwest corner of the intersection with Mile Stretch Road, thence
northwesterly for a distance of 112 feet, two hours between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. from June 15 through Labor Day of each
year [Added 4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.18]
Yates Street [Repealed 4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.19]
Yates Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 552 feet
northwest from the intersection with Mile Stretch Road, thence
northwesterly to CMP utility pole CMP 9 (entrance to Biddeford Pool
Yacht Club), three hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
from June 15 to Labor Day of each year [Added 6-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017.60]
Special note: [Added 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.89]
Building and facility improvements/renovations at Biddeford High
School are scheduled to be on-going through the school year
ending in year 2012. During these renovations, it is expected that
available parking at or near the high school for both students and
faculty will be severely limited. Although parking by permit only
zones have been created adjacent to the high school, and at the
Rochambeau Club, it is anticipated that students will park their
vehicles wherever they can on neighboring streets, streets that are
wholly inadequate to accommodate parking, and thereby create a
serious concern for the public's safety. For the foregoing reasons,
the following streets are designated as limited to parking during
school hours over the next two years. This ordinance change will
be in full force and effect until the end of the school year in
2012, or until renovations at the high school have been sufficiently
completed to no longer have a negative impact on parking within
the surrounding neighborhoods, at which time this order will be
vacated.
(1)
(b)
Sec. 42-92 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-92
CHCT:530
Sec. 42-92.1. (Reserved)41
The below listed changes are not intended to nullify existing
established no parking zones within these streets, but rather, are
intended to supplement and further define restricted parking.
(2)
A vehicle found in violation of these parking restrictions may, in
addition to being issued a notice of violation, be towed at the
owner's expense.
Brook Street, both sides, from South Street to dead end, no
parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday on school days
Cornish Avenue, both sides, from Mt. Pleasant Street to Dearborn
Avenue, no parking, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m., Monday through Friday on school days
Dearborn Avenue, both sides, from South Street to dead end, no
parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday on school days
East Brook Lane, both sides, from McKenney Drive to Shaw's Hill
Drive, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday on school days
Lunt Street, both sides, from Main Street to dead end, no parking
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday on school days
Main Street, odd-numbered side, from Thatcher Brook Bridge to
Lunt Street, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m., Monday through Friday on school days
McKenney Drive, odd-numbered side, from South Street to dead
end, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday on school days
Mt. Pleasant Street, both sides, from Main Street to South Street,
no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday on school days
Paquin Avenue, both sides, from South Street to dead end, no
parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday on school days
Shaw's Hill Drive, both sides, from South Street to dead end, no
parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday on school days
South Street, both sides, from Maplewood Avenue to Cathedral
Oaks Drive, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00
p.m., Monday through Friday on school days
Westmore Avenue, odd-numbered side, from South Street to dead
end, no parking between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday on school days
(3)
Sec. 42-92 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-93
CHCT:531
Sec. 42-93. Loading zones. [Code 1975, § 14-83; Ord. of
2-19-1991(1); Ord. of 6-18-1991; Ord. of 10-20-1992; Ord. of
8-3-1993(2); Ord. of 4-5-1994(1), § 14-83; Ord. of 9-20-1995; Ord. of
10-17-1995; Ord. of 12-17-1996; Ord. of 7-15-1997(2); Ord. of
8-4-1998(5); Ord. of 10-20-1998(2); Ord. of 10-20-1998(4); Ord. of
7-20-1999; Ord. No. 99.89, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 2001.28,
4-17-2001; Ord. No. 2002.37, 4-16-2002; Ord. No. 2002.53,
6-4-2002; Ord. No. 2002.97, 9-17-2002; Ord. No. 2003.42,
4-15-2003; Ord. No. 2003.78, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 2006.80,
10-3-2006]
The following areas are designated as loading zones and are subject to the
indicated restrictions:
Alfred Street, even-numbered side in front of 38 Alfred Street (Goodwill
Store), one space, from 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 a.m.
Center Street, northerly side, from the corner of Jefferson Street back to a
distance of 35 feet
City Hall Parking Lot, one space located adjacent to City Hall basement
door from 6:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
Cutts Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
northwesterly of the intersection with Elm Street, thence northwesterly
for a distance of 33 feet±, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday [Added 7-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.47]
Franklin Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet from
the intersection with Alfred Street, thence westerly for a distance of 37
feet, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday
Franklin Street Parking Lot, one space, located directly behind 62 Alfred
Street, and adjacent to the rear door, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m.
Franklin Street Parking Lot, two spaces located immediately in the rear of
the Super Sub Shop (69 Jefferson Street), for deliveries only, 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Hill Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 84 feet from the
southerly corner of the intersection with Pool Street, thence
southwesterly for a distance of 20 feet, 15 minutes from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet east from
the southeast corner of the intersection with Emery Street, thence
easterly for a distance of 44 feet, (two parking spaces) between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. [Added 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.93]
41.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 42-92.1, Waiver of parking fees under specific circumstances,
was repealed 6-6-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.51.
Sec. 42-93 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-93
CHCT:532
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
southeasterly from the intersection of Western Avenue, thence easterly for
a distance of 20 feet, one space, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday.
Pearl Street, even-numbered side, from Stone Street to Lincoln Street
Summer Street, even-numbered side, from the corner of Birch Street back
to a distance of 30 feet on Summer Street, two spaces.
Thornton Street, southerly side, beginning from the proposed handicap
parking space, 30 minutes, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
two spaces
Washington Street [Repealed 11-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.78]
Sec. 42-94. Taxi stands. [Code 1975, § 14-84; Ord. of 12-17-1996;
Ord. No. 2003.78, 7-15-2003; 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.107]
(Reserved)
Sec. 42-95. Four-way stop streets. [Code 1975, § 14-85; Ord. of
5-1-1990; Ord. of 9-4-1990(2); Ord. of 12-4-1990; Ord. of 5-7-1991;
Ord. of 7-2-1991; Ord. of 8-18-1992; Ord. of 7-6-1993(2); Ord. No.
99.90, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 2004.28, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 2007.10,
3-6-2007]
The following street intersections are hereby designated as four-way stop
intersections, and stop signs shall be erected on the four corners:
Bacon Street and Foss Street
Birch Street and Graham Street
Cathedral Oaks Drive, Alexander Drive, and Indian Ridge Drive
Fall Street and Summer Street
Foss Street and Summer Street
Green Street and Crescent Street
Green Street and Mason Street
Mason Street and Wentworth Street
Oak Street and Vine Street
South Street and Jefferson Street
Summer Street and Foss Street
Union Street and Graham Street
West Street and Guinea Road
Sec. 42-93 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-96
CHCT:533
Sec. 42-96. Three-way stop streets. [Ord. of 10-2-1990(3); Ord. No.
99.90, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 2006.80, 10-3-2006; Ord. No. 2007.4,
3-6-2007]
There shall be a three-way stop at the intersection of Forest Street and
Ridgeview Drive, signs to be placed as follows: one sign placed on
Ridgeview Drive at Forest Street and two signs to be placed on Forest Street
at the curve/intersection.
There shall be a three-way stop at the intersection of Mason Street,
Bradbury Street and Bradbury Street Extension, signs to be placed on each
of these streets.
Harold Avenue at Bernard Avenue
Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard at First Street
Sec. 42-97. Bus stops. [Code 1975, § 14-86; Ord. of 4-16-1991; Ord.
of 12-17-1996; Ord. No. 2006.104a, 11-21-2006]
The following locations shall be designated as bus stops.
Adams Street, odd-numbered side, in front of the Thacher Hotel
Washington Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at pole J-7 thence
northeasterly for a distance of ±79 feet
Sec. 42-98. Truck zone. [Code 1975, § 14-87]
The location designated as a truck zone is on Main Street, two spaces in
front of 143 Main Street, from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
Sec. 42-99. No through trucks. [Code 1975, § 14-88; Ord. of
10-17-1989; Ord. of 7-15-1997(3); Ord. No. 2000.42, 4-18-2000;
Ord. No. 2000.57, 6-20-2000; Ord. No. 2001.87, 10-16-2001; Ord.
No. 2002.110, 11-6-2002]
One-and-one-half-ton and over. There shall be no through trucks over 1
1/2 ton in size on the following streets: [Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017.61]
Diamond Street, no trucks greater than 1 1/2 ton; local deliveries only
Stone Street, no trucks greater than 1 1/2 ton; local deliveries only
Summer Street, signs to be placed at Summer Street and Harrison
Street and Summer Street and Birch Street
(a)
Five tons and over. There shall be no through trucks over five tons gross
vehicle weight on the following streets:
Edwards Avenue
Graham Street, any part between Crescent Street and Alfred Streets
(b)
Sec. 42-96 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-99
CHCT:534
Sec. 42-100. Disability parking. [Code 1975, § 14-89; Ord. of
6-5-1990(3); Ord. of 6-5-1990(4); Ord. of 2-19-1991(2); Ord. of
4-16-1991; Ord. of 5-21-1991(3); Ord. of 4-6-1993(1); Ord. of
4-6-1993(2); Ord. of 5-18-1993(1); Ord. of 12-17-1996; Ord. of
7-15-1997(4); Ord. of 12-22-1997; Ord. of 5-5-1998(3); Ord. of
12-15-1998(10); Ord. No. 99.80, 9-21-1999; Ord. No. 99.81,
9-21-1999; Ord. No. 99.88, 10-19-1999; Ord. No. 2000.23, 4-4-2000;
Ord. No. 2000.58, 7-5-2000; Ord. No. 2000.108, 10-26-2000; Ord.
No. 2000.126, 11-21-2000; Ord. No. 2001.11, 3-8-2001; Ord. No.
2001.28, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 2002.26, 3-19-2002; Ord. No. 2002.97,
9-17-2002; Ord. No. 2003.6, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 2003.41,
4-15-2003; Ord. No. 2003.78, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 2003.92,
9-30-2003; Ord. No. 2005.36, 5-3-2005; Ord. No. 2006.99,
11-21-2006; Ord. No. 2006.105, 12-5-2006]
Grayson Street, any part between Elm Street and Hill Street
[Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.61]
Janelle Street
Maple Avenue, any part
May Street, any part
(c) (Reserved)
In addition to those areas listed below, and designated as disability
parking, the Chief of Police is authorized to temporarily designate
an area as reserved for "disability parking" in order to meet special
needs and circumstances. The enforcement of these spaces would be
consistent and pursuant to the provisions under Section 42-51(a). All
such designated disability parking shall remain in effect for not longer
than 72 hours.
The following locations are designated for disability parking only:
Adams Street, odd-numbered side, in front of 25 Adams Street, three
spaces between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. only on those days that
District Court is open to conduct regular business. [Amended
6-17-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.44]
Alfred Street [Repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.96]
Alfred Street [Repealed 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.34]
Alfred Street [Repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.96]
Alfred Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
northeast of the intersection with Bacon Street, thence northeasterly
for a distance of 21 feet (one parking space) [Added 10-26-2018]
Bacon Street [Repealed 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010.136]
Birch Street [Repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.96]
(a)
Sec. 42-99 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-100
CHCT:535
Birch Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 30 feet east
from the northeast corner of Graham Street, thence southeasterly for
a distance of 44 feet, with a time limit of 20 minutes
Bradbury Street [Repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.96]
Community Center Parking Lot, back end corner of Clark Street and
Prospect Street, as posted
Foss Street, odd-numbered side, 26 feet from the intersection of Foss/
Pool Street, one space
Graham Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
northeasterly from the intersection with Harding Street, thence
northeasterly for a distance of two parking spaces. [Added
2-21-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.14]
Graham Street, two spaces, easterly side, in front of the United
Church of Christ, Congregational, transept (or annex) entrance
Hazel Street [Repealed 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.34]
Hill Street, even-numbered side, in front of the Park and Recreation
building, one space
Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard, even -numbered side, beginning at a point
20 feet east of the intersection with First Street thence easterly for a
distance of 50 feet, St. Brendan' s Chapel Mass times only: Saturday
and Sunday, from May 1 to October 31 [Added 11-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.96]
Lincoln Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 50 feet from
the intersection of Main Street and Lincoln Street curblines, thence
northerly, for one handicap parking space
Main Street, even-numbered side, beginning at a point 47 feet west
from the northwest corner of the intersection with Laconia Street,
thence northwesterly for a distance of one parking space
Main Street, even-numbered side, one space in front of the Biddeford
Savings Bank
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 61 feet west
from southwest corner of the intersection with Alfred Street, thence
westerly for a distance of one parking space
Main Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 62 feet
southwest from the intersection with Alfred Street, thence
northwesterly for a distance of 21 feet
Main Street, one parking space in front of 205 Main Street, beginning
at a point 36 feet from the intersection of Main and Adams Street
curblines, thence northwesterly for one handicap parking space
Main Street, one space in front of McArthur Library, located at 270
Main Street
St. Joseph Street [Repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.96]
St. Mary's Street [Repealed 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.34]
Sec. 42-100 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-100
CHCT:536
Sec. 42-101. (Reserved)42
Sec. 42-102. No left-hand turn streets. [Ord. No. 2000.39;
4-18-2000; Ord. No. 2000.130, 12-5-2000; Ord. No. 2004.102,
11-3-2004]
Lincoln Street [Repealed 2-2-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.13]
Pomerleau Street Extension [Repealed 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.5]
Precourt Street, no left-hand turn at the intersection of Precourt Street
and Booth Street
Sec. 42-103. Weight limits generally. [Ord. No. 2002.15, 2-19-2002]
Notwithstanding the weight limits established under the provisions of
Section 42-99(a), the Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to
designate a street or other public way, or any part thereof as "weight limit
zone," and may, as circumstances may require, set the maximum weight
limit of any vehicle that would travel through, or otherwise use any part of
Shevenell Court, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 50 feet
southeast of the intersection with Green Street, thence southeasterly
for a distance of 22 feet [Added 5-3-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.24]
Small's Court [Repealed 11-1-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.96]
Thornton Street [Repealed 5-21-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.34]
Vines Landing, one space reserved for disability parking [Added
6-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.39]
Washington Street, odd-numbered side, beginning at a point 20 feet
southeast from the intersection with Main Street, thence
southwesterly for a distance of 43 feet, two parking spaces
The Biddeford School Committee shall by resolve, designate parking
areas that are in or on the property owned by the City, and under
the jurisdiction and control of the Biddeford School Department, as
"disability parking." All areas so designated must be clearly marked
and posted as reserved for disability parking, and shall be enforced by
the Police Department pursuant to the provisions of Section 42-51. An
attested copy of the adopted resolution shall be forwarded to the Police
Department for enforcement.
(b)
Except as otherwise established elsewhere in this chapter, a vehicle
displaying a disability plate or placard issued in accordance with 29-A
M.R.S.A. § 521 shall be allowed to park for double the allotted time
limitations imposed under Section 42-92 or Section 42-58. All other
posted parking restrictions shall apply. [Added 1-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2018.146]
(c)
42.Editor's Note: Former Section 42-101, Farmer's Market, adopted as § 14-90 of the 1975
Code, as amended, was repealed by Ord. of 4-6-1999.
Sec. 42-100 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 42-103
CHCT:537
the street or other public way. For the purposes of this section, the vehicles
maximum gross vehicle rating is used to determine a violation of the weight
limits. The area so declared by the Director of Public Works will be posted
at each end of the street or other public way. In no event, however, shall
the limit so imposed exceed 90 consecutive days with any extensions to be
approved by the City Council.
Sec. 42-104. Streets closed to vehicular traffic. [Added 9-21-2010
by Ord. No. 2010.91]
Vehicles are prohibited from entering, remaining on or travelling upon a
way, or any part thereof, that has been designated by the City Council as
closed to vehicular traffic. Accordingly, the following street(s) has (have)
been designated as closed to vehicular traffic.
Bradbury Street Extension [Repealed 1-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2014.128]
Sec. 42-103 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 42-104
CHCT:538
Chapter 46
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 10.
Environment — See Ch. 34.
Miscellaneous provisions and offenses — See
Ch. 40.
Motor vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 42.
Streets, sidewalks and other public
places — See Ch. 62.
Waterways — See Ch. 74.
Sec. 46-1. Word usage and definitions.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural include the singular number,
and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(a)
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall have the meanings given herein:
CITY — The City of Biddeford.
DIRECTOR — The Parks and Recreation Director appointed pursuant to
§ 46-2 of the Code of the City of Biddeford.
DOG PARK — An area that has been fenced in and designated for
exclusive use by dogs. Dog parks shall have clearly established rules for
their use, which shall be posted at all entrances.
PARK — Shall be limited to the areas within the boundaries, as
described in the records of the City of Biddeford Assessor, of the
following City-owned recreational properties and facilities.43
TOBACCO — Includes but is not limited to cigarettes, cigars, snuff,
pipes, spit tobacco, and vaping.
TOBACCO-FREE ZONE — Includes City-owned playgrounds, sports
fields, parks and beaches.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn
or self-propelled. The term shall include but not be limited to
any trailer in tow, automobile, truck, wagon, snowmobile, motor bike,
skateboard, motorcycle or trail bike of any size, kind or description.
Exception is made for baby carriages, bicycles used at the Clifford Park
and Rotary Park, and vehicles used in the maintenance and operation
of City parks.
(b)
43.Editor's Note: See Section 46-5 for a list of City parks.
Sec. 42-104 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 46-2
CHCT:539
Sec. 46-2. Recreation Director appointment; hiring of personnel;
oversight.
Sec. 46-3. Powers and duties.
Sec. 46-4. Annual budget; reports; other duties.
The Recreation Director shall, with the consent and review of the
Recreation Commission, submit annually a budget for the ensuing year and
submit reports as requested by the Commission to the City Manager. The
Director shall also carry out such duties, provided that they fall within the
scope of the Recreation Department, as the Recreation Commission may
from time to time recommend.
Sec. 46-5. City parks, beaches and athletic fields.
Name Assessor's Map and Lot Numbers
Biddeford Pool Bath House/Gilbert
Boucher Park Gilbert Place
GIS
Biddeford Pool Mini-Park 0 Lest B.
Orcutt Blvd.
GIS 59-117
Cannon Plaza 59 South Street GIS 39-201
Canopy Park 65 Bacon Street GIS 39-129
City Square Park 58 Lincoln Street GIS 38-132
Clifford Park 130 Pool Street GIS 39-334, Parcels 8-1 and 8-3-1
Doran Field 314 South Street GIS 32-4
F.O.A.V. Court Park 2 FOAV Court GIS 39-137
Fortunes Rocks Beach
J. Richard Martin Community Center
Playground 189 Alfred Street
GIS 34-228
Liberty Park 2 Water Street GIS 41-129
The Recreation Director shall be appointed by the City Manager and
confirmed by the City Council.
(a)
All personnel hired by the Recreation Director shall be approved by the
City Manager.
(b)
The Recreation Director shall formulate and carry out recreation
programs, in consultation with the Recreation Commission, for the
benefit of the City's citizens and cooperate with other departments and/
or agencies.
(a)
The Recreation Director shall recommend the improvement of
recreational lands and facilities within the City and make periodic
reports, as requested by the Recreation Commission or by the City
Manager, on the operation of the Department.
(b)
Sec. 46-2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 46-5
CHCT:540
Name Assessor's Map and Lot Numbers
Pierson's Lane Community Park 40
Pierson's Lane
GIS 39-116
GIS 30-117
Mechanics Park 3 Main Street GIS 41-1
Memorial Park 130 May Street GIS 27-34
Middle Beach
Park in the Pines 194 Hills Beach
Road
GIS 55-51
River Walk Plaza/River Walk Phase 2
2 Main Street
GIS 71-11
Rotary Park 550 Main Street GIS 32-2
St. Louis Field GIS 28-270
Shevenell Park 149 Main Street GIS 38-372
Veteran's Memorial Park 2 Pool
Street
GIS 38-419
Vines Landing End of Lester B.
Orcutt Boulevard
GIS 59-117
Washington Street School Park 75
Washington Street
GIS 38-312-1
Williams Court Park South Street
and Green Street
GIS 183, 182
169-1
Sec. 46-6. Day-to-day operational rule making authority.
Under the direction and guidance of the Recreation Commission, the
Director shall have the authority to establish and promulgate rules and
regulations that are not otherwise in conflict with this chapter for the dayto-
day operation of the recreational facilities and Parks identified herein.
Sec. 46-7. Damage to park property.
Except as may be necessitated by reason of construction or maintenance
activities under the supervision and control of the Director, no person in a
park shall:
Buildings and other property.
Disfiguration and removal: willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables,
benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, waterlines
or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other structures or
a.
(1)
Sec. 46-5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 46-7
CHCT:541
Sec. 46-8. Sanitation.
No person in a park shall:
equipment, playground equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
Removal of natural resources: dig or remove any sand, soil, rock,
stones, trees, shrubs or plants, timber or other wood or materials
or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means
or agency.
b.
Erection of structures: construct or erect any building or structure
of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character,
or run or string any public service utility into, upon or across such
lands, except on special written permit issued by the Director.
c.
Trees, shrubbery and lawns.
Injury and removal: damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of
any tree or plant, nor shall any person attach a rope, wire or
other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
a.
Climbing trees: climb a tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments,
vases, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
b.
(2)
Pollution of waters: throw, discharge or otherwise place or caused to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pool, pond, stream or other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer
or drain flowing into such waters any substance, manner or thing, liquid
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(1)
Refuse and trash: have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or be left anywhere
on the grounds thereof, but it shall be placed in the proper receptacles
where these are provided. Where receptacles are not so provided,
all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by
the person responsible for such presence and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
(2)
Animal waste: fail to immediately remove and lawfully dispose of any
feces left in any park by a dog owned by such person or under his/
her control. This regulation shall not apply to a dog accompanying any
handicapped person who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically
unable to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
(3)
Sec. 46-7 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 46-9
CHCT:542
Sec. 46-9. Vehicles and traffic.
State motor vehicle laws apply. No person in a park shall fail to comply
with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle laws (NOTE:
See M.R.S.A. Title 29-A.) with regard to equipment and operations
of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this
chapter and other City of Biddeford ordinances. (NOTE: See Ch. 42,
Motor Vehicles and Traffic.)
(a)
Obey traffic signs. No person in a park shall fail to observe carefully
all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking
and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and the
property.
(b)
Speed of vehicles. No person in a park shall ride or drive a vehicle at a
rate of speed exceeding the posted speed for any park.
(c)
Operation of vehicles. No person in a park shall drive any vehicle,
excepting bicycles, on or in any area except public ways and paved
park roads or parking areas or such other areas as may, on occasion,
be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the Director.
Snowmobiles may be allowed on certain trails in City parks where such
trails serve to interconnect other snowmobile trails not in City parks
and where the Director of Parks and Recreation has designated such
trails for such purpose after finding that it is compatible with the use
of such park trails by the public for other purposes. Excepting bicycles,
only vehicles properly licensed and registered for operation on public
ways and operated by persons properly licensed under the laws of
the State of Maine shall be permitted in any parking area. Exception:
Snowmobiles are permitted to be operated on trails within Clifford
Park.
(d)
Parking.
No person in a park shall:
Designated areas: park a vehicle in other than an established
or designated parking area, and such use shall be in
accordance with the posted directions thereat and with the
instructions of any attendant who may be present.
a.
Overnight parking: leave a vehicle standing or parked at night
within any park after 10:00 p.m. Eastern time, except as
specifically authorized under Chapter 42, Section 42-59, Snow
emergency parking ban.
b.
Lifeguards: park a vehicle in an area that has been designated
by the Director as reserved for lifeguards.
c.
(1)
Exceptions. There shall be no parking between the hours of dusk
and dawn in Gilbert Boucher Park, including park easement areas.
Areas of the park affected by this prohibition shall be posted with
(2)
(e)
Sec. 46-9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 46-9
CHCT:543
Sec. 46-10. Recreational activities.
No person in a park listed in the chapter shall:
signs that read: "No parking dusk to dawn." The time of dawn and
dusk shall be as reported in the Maine Farmers Almanac.
Enforcement.
The laws of the State of Maine shall, where applicable in parks,
be enforced in the manner provided by law. City ordinances
and rules and regulations of the park shall be enforced in the
manner provided therein.
a.
b. Violations of this subsection shall be a parking infraction.
The Parks and Recreation Director or his or her authorized
representative, as specifically authorized by the Chief of Police,
and the Biddeford Police Department are authorized to issue
parking tickets for violations of this Subsection (e).
c.
Removal of unauthorized vehicles. Any vehicle found in
violation of this section may be removed in accordance with
the procedures established under Chapter 42, Motor Vehicles
and Traffic of this Code.
d.
(3)
Bicycles. No person in a park shall:
Confined to roads: ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicle road
or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted
to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded
trail or any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
(1)
Operation: ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the
road paving as close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be
kept in a single file when two or more are operating as a group.
Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable
regard as to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of
any vehicle they are overtaking and pass to the right of any vehicle
they may be meeting.
(2)
Designated racks: leave a bicycle at a place other than a bicycle
rack when such is provided and there is space available.
(3)
Immobile bicycles: leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or
set against trees or in a place or position where other persons may
trip over or be injured by it.
(4)
(f)
Bathing and swimming.
Designated areas: swim, bathe or wade in the waters of any
fountain, pond, pool, stream or other body of water in or adjacent
to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing
a.
(1)
Sec. 46-9 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 46-10
CHCT:544
Sec. 46-11. Alcoholic beverages; fires; use of closed areas.
into such waters, except in such waters and in such places as
are specifically provided for swimming or bathing purposes and in
compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may
hereafter be adopted by the Director, nor shall any person frequent
any waters or places customarily designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing or congregate thereat in such activities
prohibited by the Director upon finding such use of the water would
be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
Certain hours: frequent any waters or places designated for the
purposes of swimming or bathing or congregate thereat except
between such hours of the day and on such conditions as shall be
designated by the Director for such purposes for each individual
park area.
b.
Hunting and firearms: hunt, trap or pursue wildlife at any time. No
person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any description or air
rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or other forms of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire a blank cartridge or any
kind of trapping device. Shooting in park areas as defined herein is
strictly forbidden.
(2)
Camping: set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the
purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after
closing hours any movable structures or special vehicle that could be
used for such purposes as a house trailer, camp trailer, tent or the like.
(3)
Tobacco and smoking. All forms of tobacco use, including vaping are
prohibited.
(4)
Intoxicating beverages.
Liquor defined. For purposes of this subsection, "liquor" shall mean
and include any alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented or other
alcoholic beverage, or combination of liquors and mixed liquors,
intended for human consumption which contains more than 1/2 of
1% of alcohol by volume.
(1)
Prohibition. Except as specifically authorized, in writing, by the
City Council, no person within a City park, public beach, or athletic
field, identified under Section 46-5 of this chapter, or in any parking
area contiguous thereto, may possess or consume liquor at any
time. [Amended 5-16-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.35]
(2)
(a)
Fires. No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire, except
at such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by
the Director. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco or other inflammable
(b)
Sec. 46-10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 46-11
CHCT:545
Sec. 46-12. Merchandising, advertising and signs.
Except in conjunction with supervised activities under the general control
and supervision of the Director, no person in a park shall:
Sec. 46-13. Park operating policy.
material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting
or contiguous thereto.
Closed areas. No person in a park shall enter an area posted as "Closed
to the Public," nor shall any person use or let the use of any area in
violation of posted notices.
(c)
Vending and peddling: expose or offer for sale any article or thing,
nor shall he or she station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception
is here made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and
under the authority and regulation of the Director.
(1)
Advertising: pronounce, advertise or call to the public attention in any
way to any article or service for sale or hire.
(2)
Signs: paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatever on any City-owned lands or
highways or roads adjacent to a park. Exception from the prohibitions
of this subsection is made for the posting of such notices as may be
required by this chapter.
(3)
Sponsorship signs erected by the City of Biddeford in accordance with
guidelines established by the Recreation Commission shall not be
deemed a violation of this section.
(4)
Hours. All parks, as defined herein, shall be open to the public every
day of the year from dawn to dusk. In the event that activities are
conducted at either the St. Louis Field or Mechanics Park for which
there is an admission fee charged or access is otherwise controlled,
no member of the public shall have the right to enter said park areas
without authorization and/or payment of such admission fee. The
Director shall cause notices of the opening and closing hours to be
posted in each individual park for public information and enforcement
purposes.
(a)
Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed
to the public by the Director at any time for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular stated intervals (daily or otherwise).
(b)
Entry prohibited. Except with the written permission of the Director, no
person shall enter, pass through or remain in any park, or the closed
area of any park, except during the hours and times when such park, or
portion thereof, is open to the public as provided in this section.
(c)
Sec. 46-11 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 46-13
CHCT:546
Sec. 46-14. Safe zones.
Dogs, horses and horse-drawn vehicles. [Amended 5-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017.38]
Dogs, horses and horse-drawn vehicles are prohibited from
entering or remaining in any park or beach areas, except as
follows:
City beaches: No unleashed dog is allowed on any of the City's
public beaches from March 15 to September 15. Dogs are
completely prohibited from May 25 to September 15 between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Unleashed dogs under
voice command are allowed on the City's public beaches all
day from September 16 to March 14. This subsection does not
apply to the beach at Rotary Park.
a.
Rotary Park: Horses, horse-drawn vehicles, or dogs may not
use any part of the Rotary Park beach between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. from May 25 to September 15 of each
year.
b.
(1)
Nothing herein is intended to prohibit the Recreation Commission
from creating and maintaining a dog park, as defined herein under
Section 46-1(b), and for establishing rules and regulations
governing the operation thereof.
(2)
(d)
Pursuant to its authority under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3252, the City does
hereby designated the following athletic fields, parks, playgrounds or
recreational facilities as a "safe zone" under 17-A M.R.S.A. § 1101(23):
Rotary Park (includes entire parcel from Main Street to the Saco
River).
(1)
(2) Doran Field.
(3) St. Louis Field (entire fenced-in area).
(4) Waterhouse Field.
Mayfield (including all baseball and softball fields and tennis
courts).
(5)
Clifford Park (playground that abuts Pool Street, including tennis
and basketball courts).
(6)
(7) Biddeford Pool Bathhouse/Gilbert Boucher Park.
(8) J. Richard Martin Community Center Playground.
(9) The Arena (Biddeford Ice Arena).
(10)Williams Court Park.
(a)
Sec. 46-13 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 46-14
CHCT:547
Sec. 46-15. Enforcement.
The Director and his or her subordinate employees shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this
chapter. In addition, the Code Enforcement Officer and the members of the
Biddeford Police Department shall also have the authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 46-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter,
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100.
Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
Chapter 50
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 2.
(11)Mechanics Park.
(12)Shevenell Park.
(13)Liberty Park.
(14)Pierson's Lane Community Park.
The Commissioner of Public Safety has approved the following wording
to be used on a safe zone informational sign under the Maine Revised
Statutes, Title 30-A § 3253:
DRUG-FREE
SAFE ZONE
INCREASED PENALTIES FOR DRUG CRIMES
COMMITTED WITHIN THIS ZONE
(17-A, M.R.S.A. CHAPTER 45)
(b)
Sec. 46-14 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 46-16
CHCT:548
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 50-1. through Sec. 50-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 50-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 50-1
CHCT:549

ARTICLE II
TITLE, AUTHORITY, AND PURPOSE
Sec. 50-26. Purpose and applicability. [Ord. of 11-19-1996; Ord. No.
2007.12, 3-6-2007]
The purpose of this article is to establish a Human Resources Policy and
Procedure and Benefits Manual that is in compliance with all federal and
state laws and regulations. The City Manager is responsible for the
maintenance and preparation of a Human Resources Policy and Procedure
and Benefit Manual, which will govern the administration of the City's
human resources program. Amendments shall be presented to the Council
for approval as appropriate. This policy will guide the City Manager and
department heads in the administration of personnel activity except as it
conflicts with a collective bargaining agreement, or is otherwise stated in
the City Charter. All employees will be informed about their rights as well
as their responsibilities while in the employment of the City.
This article and subsequent modifications shall supersede any policy and
rule previously enacted by the City Council. This article applies to all fulltime,
part-time and temporary employees, as defined herein, except for
the City Manager, School Department employees, and those employees
whose employment relationship with the City is governed by a collective
bargaining agreement insofar as those provisions of the collective
bargaining agreement are in specific conflict with this article. Elected City
officials and appointed members of the City boards and commissions are
not considered as employees of the City and are not subject to the terms
and agreements of the Personnel Ordinance Human Resources Policy and
Procedure and Benefit Manual.
The City shall administer and implement the Human Resources Policy and
Procedure and Benefit Manual in a manner that shall not discriminate
unlawfully against any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin, age, or physical or mental disability. Furthermore, the City shall
take affirmative action to enhance the opportunities for minority group
members, where they may be underutilized.
Sec. 50-27. Authority. [Ord. of 11-19-1996; Ord. No. 2007.12,
3-6-2007]
The City Manager shall administer the personnel policy, and shall:
Appoint the Director of Human Resources to administer the policy on
his/her behalf.
(1)
Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of sound
personnel practices between and among the departments of the City.
(2)
Foster and develop programs for the improvement of employee
effectiveness and morale including but no limited to safety, health,
(3)
Sec. 50-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 50-27
CHCT:551
Sec. 50-28. through Sec. 50-68. (Reserved)
counseling, proper courtesy when dealing with the public, and respect
for municipal property.
Establish and maintain records of all employees in the public service,
setting forth as to each employee the class, title, pay or status, sick
leave, vacation time and other relevant data in accordance with
applicable federal and state law.
(4)
Apply and enforce the provisions of this policy and perform any act,
which may be necessary or desirable to carry out the purposes and
provisions of this policy.
(5)
The City Manager has the authority to establish, amend, alter or revoke
the work rules, operational policies, regulations and standards as
circumstances for the good of the City and its employees covered by
this policy may require.44
(6)
Copies of the Human Resources Policy and Procedure Manual and
Benefit Manual are made available to the public in the City Clerk's
office or Human Resources Department.
(7)
44.Editor's Note: This subsection was altered to remove references to the policies of the
Police and Fire Departments as governed by commissions pursuant to the 11-8-2016
amendment to the City Charter that eliminated the Fire Commission and the Police
Commission.
Sec. 50-27 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 50-28
CHCT:552
Chapter 51
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and building regulations — See Ch.
18.
Sec. 50-28 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 50-28
CHCT:553

ARTICLE I
PURPOSE; ENABLING LEGISLATION
Sec. 51-1. Purpose.
By and through this chapter, the City of Biddeford declares as its public
purpose the establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens
to participate in a property assessed clean energy (PACE) program so
that owners of qualifying property can access financing for energy-saving
improvements to their properties located in the City of Biddeford. The City
of Biddeford declares its purpose and the provisions of this chapter to be in
conformity with federal and state laws.
Sec. 51-2. Enabling legislation.
The City of Biddeford enacts this chapter pursuant to Public Law 2009,
Chapter 591 of the 124th Maine State Legislature, "An Act To Increase the
Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses," also known
as the "Property Assessed Clean Energy Act" or the "PACE Act" (codified at
35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151 et seq.).
Sec. 51-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 51-2
CHCT:555

ARTICLE II
TITLE; DEFINITIONS
Sec. 51-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Biddeford
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance" (the "chapter").
Sec. 51-4. Definitions.
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall have their customary meanings; as used in this chapter, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
ENERGY-SAVING IMPROVEMENT — An improvement to qualifying
property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and
that:
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Biddeford.
PACE AGREEMENT — An agreement between the owner of qualifying
property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage
on qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of
the qualifying property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage
holders.
PACE ASSESSMENT — An assessment made against qualifying property to
repay a PACE loan.
PACE DISTRICT — The area within which the municipality establishes a
PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the municipality's
boundaries.
PACE LOAN — A loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s)
of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy-saving
improvements.
PACE MORTGAGE — A mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a PACE
program to fund energy-saving improvements on qualifying property.
Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced
energy use and:
Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental
Protection Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy
Star program or similar energy efficiency standards established or
approved by the Trust; or
a.
Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency
improvements of residential, commercial or industrial property in a
manner approved by the Trust; or
b.
(1)
Involves a renewable energy installation, a system capable of utilizing
off-peak power for thermal storage, or systems that otherwise meet or
exceed standards established or approved by the Trust.
(2)
Sec. 51-3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 51-4
CHCT:557
PACE PROGRAM — A program established under state statute by the Trust
or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy-saving
improvements on qualifying property.
QUALIFYING PROPERTY — Real property located in the PACE district of
the municipality.
RENEWABLE ENERGY INSTALLATION — A fixture, product, system, device
or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying
property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited
to, photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill
gas to energy systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet
systems and any other systems eligible for funding under federal qualified
energy conservation bonds or federal clean renewable energy bonds.
TRUST — The Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10103
and/or its agent(s), if any.
Sec. 51-4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 51-4
CHCT:558
ARTICLE III
PACE PROGRAM
DIVISION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 51-5. Establishment of PACE District.
Pursuant to Article I, Section 51-1, the City of Biddeford establishes a PACE
District to encompass all area within the municipal boundary. Any qualifying
property within the PACE District may access the PACE Program.
Sec. 51-6. through Sec. 51-50. (Reserved)
Sec. 51-5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 51-6
CHCT:559

DIVISION 2
FUNDING
Sec. 51-51. Establishment of program.
The municipality hereby establishes a PACE Program allowing owners of
qualifying property located in the PACE District who so choose to access
financing for energy-saving improvements to their property through PACE
loans administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds are available
from the Trust in municipalities that:
Sec. 51-52. Amendments; additional funding.
The municipality may from time to time amend this article to use any other
funding sources made available to it or appropriated by it for the express
purpose of its PACE Program, and the municipality shall be responsible for
administration of loans made from those other funding sources.
Sec. 51-53. through Sec. 51-100. (Reserved)
(1) Adopt a PACE ordinance;
(2) Adopt and implement a local public outreach and education plan;
Enter into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to establish
the terms and conditions of the Trust's administration of the
municipality's PACE Program; and
(3)
Agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its administration of the
municipality's PACE Program.
(4)
Sec. 51-51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 51-53
CHCT:561

ARTICLE IV
CONFORMITY WITH REQUIREMENTS OF TRUST
Sec. 51-101. Conflicting standards.
If the Trust adopts standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model
documents subsequent to the municipality's adoption of this chapter and
those standards, rules or model documents substantially conflict with this
chapter, the municipality shall take necessary steps to:
Sec. 51-102. through Sec. 51-150. (Reserved)
Conform this Chapter and its PACE program to those standards, rules,
or model documents, or
(1)
Continue to support the existing PACE program but prohibit future
PACE participation if such changes constitute an unacceptable burden
as determined by the municipality.
(2)
Sec. 51-101 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 51-102
CHCT:563

ARTICLE V
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
Sec. 51-151. Program administration.
Sec. 51-152. Liability of municipal officials; liability of municipality.
PACE administration contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the municipality will enter into a PACE
administration contract with the Trust to administer the functions of
the PACE program for the municipality. The PACE administration
contract with the Trust will establish the administration of the PACE
Program, including, without limitation, that:
The Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the municipality's PACE District.
(1)
The Trust, or its agent, will create and record a notice of the PACE
agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a
PACE mortgage.
(2)
The Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner.
(3)
The Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner.
(4)
The Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments.
(5)
The Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment.
(6)
The Trust or its agent on behalf of the municipality promptly shall
record the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the
PACE loan.
(7)
(a)
Adoption of education and outreach program. In conjunction with
adopting this chapter, the municipality shall adopt and implement an
education and outreach program so that citizens of the municipality
are made aware of home energy-saving opportunities, including the
opportunity to finance energy-saving improvements with a PACE loan.
(b)
Assistance and cooperation. The municipality will assist and cooperate
with the Trust in its administration of the municipality's PACE Program.
(c)
Assessments not a tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but
may be assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined
by the Trust and consistent with applicable law.
(d)
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal
officers and municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax
assessors and tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust or
(a)
Sec. 51-151 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 51-152
CHCT:565
Sec. 51-153. through Sec. 51-999. (Reserved)
to any other person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or
related to a PACE Program, including, without limitation, claims for or
related to uncollected PACE assessments.
Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under Article V,
Section 51-151(a)(1) above, a municipality has no liability to a property
owner for or related to energy-savings improvements financed under a
PACE program.
(b)
Sec. 51-152 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 51-153
CHCT:566
Chapter 54
SOCIAL SERVICES
Sec. 51-153 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 51-153
CHCT:567

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 54-1. through Sec. 54-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 54-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-1
CHCT:569

ARTICLE II
REHABILITATION LOAN-GRANT PROGRAM
Sec. 54-26. Administration. [Code 1975, § 18.5-1]
The administration of the City's housing rehabilitation loan-grant program
will be carried out by the Community Development Commission and its
Director and subordinate staff within the framework approved by the Mayor
and City Council and in conformance with the guidelines established in this
article. The administration and operation of the program shall conform to
all local codes and ordinances as well as all requirements established by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the state
pertaining to the community development block grant program.
Sec. 54-27. Objectives. [Code 1975, § 18.5-2]
The objectives of the City's rehabilitation loan-grant program are as follows:
Sec. 54-28. Funding and financing. [Code 1975, § 18.5-3; Ord. of
10-3-1989]
Financial assistance in a combination of grants and loans may be made
available in accordance with the provisions for each category as prescribed
below:
To prevent blighting influences and deterioration of property and
neighborhoods.
(1)
To improve the quality of the City's housing stock for low-moderate
income persons.
(2)
To provide financial assistance to low-moderate income property
owners for purposes of housing rehabilitation.
(3)
(4) To eliminate code violations and deficiencies.
(5) To stimulate private investment in the project area.
Owner-occupant (Section 8 VLI), 100% CD financing. Applicant income
must not exceed HUD Section 8 income limits for housing assistance
to very-low-income households as established for the county or other
income limits as may be established by the state relative to this
program.
Applicants meeting such income limits may qualify for a deferred
payment loan (DPL) for 100% of project costs up to a maximum of
$15,000.
(1)
Owner-occupant (Section 8LI), 50% CD financing. Applicant income
must not exceed HUD Section 8 income limits for housing assistance to
lower-income households as established for the county or other income
limits as may be established by the state relative to this program.
(2)
Sec. 54-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-28
CHCT:571
Applicants meeting such income limits may qualify for a deferred
payment loan (DPL) for 50% of project costs up to a maximum of
$10,000.
Owner-occupant (Section 8 median), 20% CD financing. Applicant
income must not exceed Section 8 median income level as established
for the county or other income limits as may be prescribed by the state
relative to this program.
Applicants meeting such income limits may qualify for a deferred
payment loan (DPL) for 20% of project costs up to a maximum of
$4,000. Assistance to owners under this category is subject to
eligibility standards established by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development and the state planning office.
(3)
Investor-owners (landlords), 30% CD financing. Applicant may qualify
for a deferred payment loan (DPL) for 30% of project costs up to
a maximum of $10,000 with the percentage level of such assistance
correspondent to the extent to which rental units are (or will be, in the
case of vacant units) occupied by income-eligible tenants.
(4)
Slums and blighted areas and structures, 25% DPL financing.
Consistent with federal and state regulations, applicants who do not
meet the eligibility requirements previously cited in this section may
be determined eligible provided that rehabilitation is necessary for
the elimination of slums and blight and the prevention of blighting
influences and the deterioration of property and neighborhoods.
Applicants meeting the eligibility provisions under this subsection may
qualify for a deferred payment loan for 25% of total project costs, up
to a maximum of $3,000.
(5)
Loan assistance. Loan assistance shall be provided in the form of a
deferred payment loan (DPL) at the levels prescribed for each owner
category in the preceding subsections under this section. Such DPL
shall be interest-free for a term of 20 years and shall contain a provision
for repayment upon conveyance of the property within the twenty-year
term. Specific standards governing such provision shall be established
by the City's Community Development Commission.
(6)
Definition of income, total housing income. For the purpose of this
program, total household income shall include the combined gross
incomes of all household members, excluding dependents under age 18
or dependents attending school on a full-time basis. In cases involving
household members who are earning an income but are not owners of
the property, only that income which they contribute to the household
shall be considered in determining the gross income of the household.
Such contribution is not to be less than 20% of the household member's
gross income.
(7)
Sec. 54-28 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 54-28
CHCT:572
Sec. 54-29. Applicant's eligibility. [Code 1975, § 18.5-4]
The eligibility of the applicant for a loan-grant under this article shall be
determined by the community development committee as follows:
Sec. 54-30. Property eligibility. [Code 1975, § 18.5-5]
Examples of sources of income to be included are: Wages, salaries,
Commissions, pensions, annuities, social security, AFDC, general
assistance payments, aid to the disabled, VA benefits, unemployment
benefits, support/alimony, and other income such as interest, dividends
and rental income. In determining the amount of rental income,
adjustment may be made for expenses incurred in generating this
rental income by deducting, on a pro rata basis, such items as
mortgage interest payments, taxes and insurance. Depreciation shall
not be considered to be a deductible expense.
An applicant who is unemployed and wishing to qualify for assistance
as an owner-occupant must have been unemployed for a period of 180
continuous days in order for income to be calculated on the basis of
unemployment status at the time of application.
The applicant must be the owner of the property proposed for
rehabilitation.
(1)
Applicant and/or tenant(s) must meet income limits for the appropriate
grant category as prescribed under Section 54-28.
(2)
Owner-occupant applicants wishing to qualify for either a 50% or 100%
grant may not have liquid assets in excess of $5,000. Applicants 60
years or older, however, may have liquid assets up to a maximum of
$10,000.
(3)
The applicant must:
Complete the grant application and furnish all documents required
by the City to verify eligibility.
a.
b. Comply with program procurement standards and procedures.
c. Certify to all program terms and conditions.
(4)
The area to be served by the City's housing rehabilitation program shall
be the same geographic area as identified and delineated in the City's
approved community development block grant application.
(a)
Proposed improvements to the property must fall within the scope of
the following general category: water, heating, electrical, plumbing
and sewer, insect and rodent extermination, repairs to deteriorated
steps, walls, ceilings, floors, porches, roofs, downspouts, chimneys and
foundations; work on exterior walls including painting, siding, windows
and insulation; demolition of deteriorated structures for the purpose
of removing hazards and threats to health and safety. Grant funds
(b)
Sec. 54-28 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-30
CHCT:573
Sec. 54-31. Determining work to be done. [Code 1975, § 18.5-6]
In order to determine the rehabilitation work necessary to bring a property
into conformance with local and state codes and to provide assistance
through this program, Community Development Department staff shall:
may also be used for the construction of housing-related improvements
to meet the special needs of handicapped persons. Rehabilitation
assistance funded through this program must provide for the purchase
and/or installation of smoke detectors in all dwellings proposed for
rehabilitation which do not contain such devices; location and
installation shall comply with guidelines provided by the City's Fire
Prevention Officer.
Ineligible items. Rehabilitation grant funds may not be used for the
purchase, installation, or repair of furnishings and appliances. Unless
necessary to alleviate overcrowding, new construction or expansion of
the size of the structure is not eligible. Nonessential improvements
such as purely decorative work are not eligible. The rehabilitation of
appurtenant structures is generally ineligible unless deemed necessary
under the standards of Subsection (f) of this section.
(c)
Proposed improvements must be in compliance with all pertinent local
ordinances, codes and regulations, including the elimination of leadbased
paint conditions. Unless necessary to alleviate overcrowding and/
or eliminate existing code deficiencies, new construction or expansion
of the size of the structure is not eligible.
(d)
Structures to which improvements are being proposed must be
economically repairable, as determined through inspection of the
premises.
(e)
The property must require improvements in one of the following
categories:
The property presently does not conform to local codes and
regulations, i.e., building, housing, fire, electrical, and plumbing
codes.
(1)
The condition and appearance of the property is detrimental to the
neighborhood environment.
(2)
The proposed improvement will result in the conservation of
energy or more efficient use of fuel.
(3)
(f)
The property must be a residential structure, although a minor mixed
use shall not render it ineligible.
(g)
Inspect the property and prepare an inspection report which identifies
each deficiency that may be corrected with rehabilitation grant funds.
(1)
(2) Prepare a work writeup and cost estimate of the rehabilitation work.
Sec. 54-30 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 54-31
CHCT:574
Sec. 54-32. Procurement of bids and contract for rehabilitation
work. [Code 1975, § 18.5-7]
Sec. 54-33. Terms and conditions. [Code 1975, § 18.5-8; Ord. of
10-3-1989]
Consult with the applicant to finalize proposed work to be done,
estimated costs to be incurred, and the amount of rehabilitation grant
assistance which may be available.
(3)
Solicitation of bids. The applicant is responsible for selecting three
contractors in each major craft for which rehabilitation work is
proposed. The Community Development Department shall establish and
maintain a current listing of qualified contractors who are interested
in participating in the City's housing rehabilitation program. The
applicant may solicit bids from contractors who are not on this listing
provided that such contractors meet the program's insurance
requirements for contractors.
(a)
Selection of successful bidder. The applicant shall be responsible for
selecting the contractor(s) to perform the work authorized and such
contractor must be approved by the Community Development
Department along with his bid. While the applicant may select a bid
other than the lowest bid, the level of grant assistance will be
calculated on the basis of the amount of the lowest bid with the cost
differential to be borne by the applicant.
(b)
Execution of contract. The applicant and the approved contractor(s)
shall be required to execute a written construction contract using the
form prescribed by the City for this program.
(c)
Participating contractors. All contractors wishing to participate in the
City's housing rehabilitation program must furnish written proof of
insurance coverage at the level established by the Community
Development Department. Upon a recommendation of its Director, the
Community Development Commission reserves the right to debar any
contractor from participating in this program on the basis of
unsatisfactory performance or for any impropriety associated with the
contractor's participation in the program.
(d)
Civil rights. The applicant will be required to comply with Title VI of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 1968, to not discriminate upon the basis
of race, color, creed or national origin in the sale, lease, rental, use or
occupancy of the subject property.
(a)
Use of funds. All funds made available by the loan/grant program shall
be used only for work approved and identified in the application.
(b)
Work to be performed by applicant. An applicant wishing to perform
the project work may do so, provided that he has the necessary skill,
equipment and ability to satisfactorily perform the work. In such a case
(c)
Sec. 54-31 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-33
CHCT:575
labor costs expended by the applicant or any other person not deemed
to be a bona fide contractor shall not be an eligible expense. Assistance,
however, for the purchase of supplies and materials related to the
project work is authorized. When deemed appropriate, an applicant's
labor may be accepted in lieu of cash for the applicant's share of the
cost of the rehabilitation work authorized.
Inspections. Inspection by authorized City officials of the property, the
rehabilitation work, materials and equipment shall be a condition of the
agreement.
(d)
Supplementary funds. In instances where the rehabilitation project
costs exceed the amount of financial assistance provided, the applicant
shall be responsible for providing whatever additional amount is
needed to assure completion of the work.
(e)
Conflict of interest. The operation and administration of this program
shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements
respecting conflict of interest.
(f)
Tenant displacement. The applicant must assure that the rehabilitation
work being proposed will not result in the involuntary displacement or
relocation of tenants or persons presently residing on the premises.
(g)
Applicant-contractor conference. Upon approval of the application and
the selection of a contractor, the financial analyst shall meet with the
applicant and the contractor to review the proposed work, project
costs, completion time, warranties and efficient completion of the
project work.
(h)
Flood insurance. All structures within the City's flood-prone areas, as
identified on the official floodplain map of the City, shall be required to
be covered by flood insurance prior to any assistance being given by
the City under this program.
(i)
Bonus, Commissions, fees, kickbacks. It shall be strictly prohibited that
any bonus, Commissions, fees or kickbacks be made to any person
having any connection with this program and the subject project.
(j)
Conveyance of property. Any owner applying for rehabilitation
financing under this program shall agree to the following terms and
provisions as a condition of such assistance:
The owner shall agree to repay 100% of the deferred payment loan
(DPL) received if the assisted property is sold, disposed of or title
conveyed, excluding disposition by will or inheritance, within 10
years from the date of final inspection by the City.
(1)
The owner shall agree to repay 50% of the deferred payment loan
(DPL) received if the assisted property is sold, disposed of or title
conveyed, excluding disposition by will or inheritance, during the
(2)
(k)
Sec. 54-33 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 54-33
CHCT:576
period subsequent to the 10th year but prior to the end of the 20th
year from the date of final inspection by the City.
Subsequent to the end of the 20th year from the date of final
inspection by the City, the deferred payment loan (DPL) shall be
considered forgiven and the owner shall thereafter bear no further
obligation to repay such DPL.
(3)
If the assisted property is conveyed by will or inheritance, then
the heirs shall be bound by the sale provisions and time period(s)
prescribed in this article.
(4)
The owner may repay the deferred payment loan at any time prior
to the expiration of the time period(s) prescribed pursuant to this
subsection.
(5)
Program grant limits. Program grant limits will be reviewed on an
annual basis and will be amended to reflect the annual increase or
decrease in the cost of living index. This review will be conducted at
the beginning of each community development program year and will
reflect the change in the cost of living over the previous 12 months.
A list of revised grant limits will be maintained by the Community
Development Department.
(l)
Grant assistance in excess of established program grant limits. In cases
of severe need for the City's lowest income residents the program grant
limits for an individual property may be exceeded. If the community
development rehabilitation specialist believes such action to be
necessary he shall request the grant review subcommittee to
accompany him on an inspection of the property. The specialist will
review with the subcommittee the health, safety and energy related
deficiencies of the property. The subcommittee will then render a
decision as to whether or not the deficiencies warrant the expenditure
of grant assistance funds in excess of the established program grant
limits.
(m)
Emergency grants. Rehabilitation grant assistance may be made to
owner-occupants residing outside of the project area on an emergency
basis in order to correct conditions which pose an imminent threat to
the health and safety of the occupants. Such assistance may be granted
provided that:
The owner meets all other program requirements identified in this
article;
(1)
No other source of assistance is available to correct the problem;
and
(2)
The nature and severity of the conditions is documented by
appropriate City inspectors.
(3)
(n)
Sec. 54-33 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-33
CHCT:577
Sec. 54-34. Community Development Commission functions. [Code
1975, § 18.5-9]
All requests for emergency grant assistance must be reviewed and
approved by the grant review subcommittee.
Loan repayment income.
Any community development housing rehabilitation loan
repayments received by the City prior to the closeout of the
community development block grant (CDBG) from which the
certain loan was made are subject to the reuse and expenditure
regulations governing "program income" as prescribed by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development and the state
planning office.
(1)
Any community development housing rehabilitation loan
repayments received subsequent to the closeout of the CDBG from
which the certain loan was made may be used by the City for any
eligible activity pursuant to the Federal Housing and Community
Development Act of 1974, as amended.
(2)
The reuse of the aforementioned repayments shall be determined
by the City's Community Development Commission subject to
review and approval by the City Council.
(3)
(o)
The Community Development Commission shall:
(1) Recommend amendments and revisions to the program ordinance.
(2) Review program progress and operation.
Review and act upon staff recommendations to debar contractor
participation.
(3)
(a)
The Chairman of the Community Development Commission shall
appoint two members of the Commission to serve on a grant review
subcommittee with each member serving a term of one year. The
Community Development Director shall serve as a permanent member
of the subcommittee. The functions of the subcommittee shall be as
follows:
Review applications and determine eligibility for emergency grant
assistance.
(1)
Review and determine eligibility for applicants requesting grant
assistance in excess of established program limits.
(2)
Serve to arbitrate disputes between the property owner and
contractor resulting from work performed in connection with the
program.
(3)
(b)
Sec. 54-33 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 54-35
CHCT:578
Sec. 54-35. Procedure for funds disbursement. [Code 1975,
§ 18.5-10]
Sec. 54-36. Program amendments. [Code 1975, § 18.5-11]
Any amendments to the City's rehabilitation loan-grant program which
are recommended by the Community Development Commission must be
approved by the City Council.
Sec. 54-37. through Sec. 54-60. (Reserved)
Payment in the grant amount authorized shall be made in accordance
with the terms of the construction contract(s).
(a)
In any project wherein the applicant is required to contribute funding
toward the cost of rehabilitation, the applicant's funds must first be
fully disbursed prior to the disbursement of any City rehabilitation
grant funds approved for the project.
(b)
Prior to any disbursement of grant funds, appropriate purchase orders
must first be submitted to the City's Finance Committee for final
authorization.
(c)
Payment to contractor(s) shall be made upon satisfactory completion of
the project work as determined through a closeout inspection made by
authorized City officials. If progress payments are required, the timing
and amount of such payments shall be determined in advance by the
City, the lending institution and the contractor, and specified in the
construction contract(s). All such payments shall be contingent upon
satisfactory completion of each stage of the project work as determined
through inspections by authorized City officials.
(d)
Sec. 54-35 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-37
CHCT:579

ARTICLE III
[Ord. Of 5-3-19G9E4;N AEmRAenLd AeSdS IInS TItAsN ECnEti rPeRtOy G5-R3A-2M016 By Ord. No.
2016.29]
Sec. 54-61. Statement of policy.
The Municipality of Biddeford administers a program of general
assistance (GA) available to all persons who are eligible to receive
assistance in accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided
within this article, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)
GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
(a)
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant
while encouraging self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible
persons achieve self-maintenance by promoting the work incentive.
When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial
through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the
personal rights of the applicant or recipient, nor will there be any
unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, nationality, religion,
sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed to
including qualified individuals with disabilities in municipal services,
programs, and activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA
program that, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and
usable by individuals with disabilities. GA applicants with physical or
mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation in order
to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged
to provide the municipality with advance notice regarding the
accommodation request.
(b)
The General Assistance Administrator will act promptly on all
applications for assistance and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants
will be provided information regarding their rights and responsibilities
under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an application,
the Administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether
or not assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for
the decision. The Administrator will also provide the applicant written
notice that the applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing
authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an applicant is
determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted
except when the Administrator issues nonemergency assistance
conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment.
(c)
The Administrator will maintain complete and accurate records
pertaining to each applicant and recipient. These records are
confidential as a matter of law (see 22 MRSA §4306).
(d)
The Administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the
Administrator will be available. The Administrator, or other designated
person/entity, will be available to take applications in the event of an
(e)
Sec. 54-61 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-61
CHCT:581
emergency at all other times. A copy of this article and Maine General
Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public
upon request.45 Notice to this effect will be posted.
45.Editor’s Note: A complete copy of this ordinance is available in the City Clerk’s office and
on the City of Biddeford website.
Sec. 54-61 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 54-61
CHCT:582
Chapter 58
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 34, Art. II. Streets, sidewalks and other public
places — See Ch. 62.
Sec. 54-61 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 54-61
CHCT:583

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 58-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCEPTABLE MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — All waste as identified by
the Public Works Director annually in accordance with existing disposal
agreements, disposal facility acceptance requirements, and permit
authorizations.
ACCEPTABLE RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — All acceptable recyclables as
identified by the Public Works Director annually in accordance with existing
recycling agreements, recycling facility acceptance requirements, and
permit authorizations.
ASHES — That residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
CITY — The City of Biddeford, Maine.
CITY TRANSFER STATION — A City-owned building or container or
designated area in which acceptable waste is disposed of for transshipment
to another facility for disposal or material recovery.
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE, RUBBISH, OR WASTE — Any solid waste
originating and/or generated within the boundaries of the City by any
business, firm or person identified as paying personal property taxes
through the City Assessor's records or required to obtain a business license
under the City's definitions of licensed activities, excepting licenses for
waste hauling only. For the purpose of this chapter, this includes public
organizations and facilities except for parish houses, parsonages and
churches; parish halls; mobile home parks; and condominiums and
multifamily dwellings of six units or more. This definition excludes
"grandfathered facilities.” This definition excludes home occupations as
defined and described in Article VI, Section 38, of the Biddeford Zoning
Ordinance, being clearly secondary and incidental to the primary residential
use.[Amended 3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.10]
DESIGNATED MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — A portable
container provided by the City for the sole purpose of storing acceptable
municipal waste prior to curbside collection. Bags designated for overflow
are also considered designated municipal solid waste containers.
DESIGNATED RECYCLING CONTAINER — A portable container provided
by the City for the sole purpose of storage of acceptable recyclables prior to
curbside collection.
DISPOSAL — The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, leaking, spilling
or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water.
Sec. 58-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-1
CHCT:585
DISPOSAL FACILITY — The facility or facilities controlled or designated by
the City for the storage and/or disposal of wastes.
ENERGY RECOVERY FACILITY — A facility which processes and recovers
energy from acceptable waste generated within the City.
GRANDFATHERED FACILITY — Any property that would otherwise
generate commercial garbage, rubbish, or waste and both 1) currently
receives curbside trash collection services from the City and 2) the owner
of the property has not changed, as of July 1, 2002. The following
condominium locations also shall be grandfathered facilities: 1) 318 Alfred
Street; 2) 100 Hills Beach Road; 3) 9 Lester B. Orcutt Boulevard; 4) 55 West
Street; and 5) 91-93 Western Avenue. [Amended 3-3-2015 by Ord. No.
2015.10]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — The waste substance or material, in any physical
state, designated as hazardous by federal, state or local laws; waste
material that exhibits characteristics of hazardous waste, as defined in
RCRA (ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity), is listed specifically in
RCRA 261.3 Subpart D, is a mixture of either, or is designated locally or by
the state as hazardous or undesirable for handling as part of the municipal
solid waste and would have to be treated as regulated hazardous waste if
not from a household.
HOUSEHOLD — Each residential unit regardless of whether the residential
unit is owned by an individual or business entity.
HOUSEHOLD GARBAGE AND RUBBISH — Any acceptable waste
originating and/or generated within the boundaries of the City, at the site
of generation by a homeowner or occupant. For the purpose of this chapter,
this does not include commercial garbage, rubbish, or waste except that
waste generated from a grandfathered facility.
OVERFLOW — That volume of acceptable municipal solid waste in excess of
the volume of the designated municipal solid waste container.
PRIVATE TRANSFER STATION — A privately owned building or container
or designated area in which waste is temporarily deposited and stored for
transshipment to a disposal facility.
PRIVATE WAY — Any street, lane, road or other roadway not considered a
public way.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, lane, road, or other roadway accepted by the
City Council as a public way.
RESOURCE RECOVERY — The recovery of materials or substances that still
have useful physical or chemical properties after serving a specific purpose
and can be reused or recycled for the same or other purposes.
SELF-HAULER — Any person involved in the collection and transportation
of self-generated recyclable material or solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with
insufficient liquid content to be free-flowing, including, by way of example
and not by limitation, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert
Sec. 58-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-1
CHCT:586
fill material and landscape refuse, but shall not include septic tank sludge
or agricultural or hazardous wastes.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — All solid waste of the type municipalities are
required to regulate by 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305, as amended, which specifically
excludes industrial and sewage treatment plant sludge, and not included in
the definition of "acceptable waste."
WASTE HAULER — Any person, firm or corporation which collects
residential, institutional, commercial and/or industrial waste for a fee and
transports it to a central collection or disposal facility and any person,
business or institution which transports its own waste to the designated
disposal facility.
WHITE GOODS — Major appliances, such as refrigerators, stoves, freezers,
washing machines and dryers, generally having a bulk in excess of 10 cubic
feet or a single dimension exceeding five feet.
Sec. 58-2. Legislative authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted in 30-A M.R.S.A.
§§ 2001, 2002 and 3001 and 38 M.R.S.A. § 1304-B.
Sec. 58-3. Purpose.
The City has a statutory obligation to provide solid waste disposal
services for domestic and commercial waste generated within the City
and is authorized to provide such a facility for industrial waste and
sewage treatment plant sludge, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 1305(1).
Municipal solid waste contains valuable recoverable resources,
including energy, which if recovered reduce the cost of solid waste
disposal.
(a)
The City must exercise its legal authority to control the collection,
transportation and disposal of solid waste generated within its borders.
(b)
The City shall establish a system of regular collection, subject to the
requirements of this chapter, for all household garbage and rubbish and
recyclables, all as defined herein. The City will not collect commercial
garbage and rubbish, and such commercial garbage and rubbish shall
be removed from the premises and disposed of at the expense of
the owner or occupant of such premises. The City shall not collect
otherwise eligible waste from residences located on private ways unless
it is brought to the intersection of the private way and a public way
and otherwise complies with all other requirements of this article. The
Director of Public Works is expressly granted the authority to issue
rules or regulations governing the collection of containers on private
ways, streets that are too narrow to allow for routine collection, and
for dead-end streets where it is impractical for the collection trucks to
service the containers.
(c)
Sec. 58-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-4
CHCT:587
Sec. 58-4. Regulated activity.
The accumulation, collection, transportation and disposal of the following
materials generated within the City shall be regulated in the following
manner:
Sec. 58-5. Property rights.
Sec. 58-6. Administration.
This chapter shall be administered as described below:
All acceptable municipal solid waste generated within the City from
eligible residential customers and grandfathered condominium
facilities shall be placed in a designated solid waste container and
collected by the City at curbside on a weekly basis. [Amended
3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.10]
(1)
All acceptable recyclable materials from eligible residential customers,
and grandfathered facilities if applicable, shall be placed in a
designated recycling container and collected by a City authorized
commercial hauler at curbside on a weekly basis. [Amended 3-3-2015
by Ord. No. 2015.10]
(2)
All recyclable materials designated as acceptable for delivery to the
Biddeford Recycling Center may be delivered to the facility by any
entity.
(3)
All unacceptable waste generated within the City shall be deposited in
a manner prescribed elsewhere in this chapter and or as specified by
the Director of Public Works.
(4)
All commercial waste shall be regulated in accordance with the most
recent version of the International Property Management Code adopted
by the City of Biddeford.
(5)
All solid waste collected by City vehicles or deposited at the City
transfer station or other designated area shall become the property of
the City or its assignee. No one may salvage, remove or carry off any
such waste without prior approval of the Director of Public Works in
accordance with a policy approved by the Biddeford City Council.
(a)
All recyclable materials collected by a City-authorized commercial
hauler shall become the property of the City-authorized commercial
hauler unless otherwise specified in a written contract.
(b)
City Council: Adopt reasonable rules and regulations as needed to
enforce this chapter and institute any necessary proceedings, either
legal or equitable, to enforce this article.
(1)
City Clerk: To consider all license applications and to grant or deny
each application within 10 days after receipt of a completed application
(2)
Sec. 58-4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-6
CHCT:588
Sec. 58-7. Regulated activities and administration.
The accumulation, collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste,
both acceptable and unacceptable, generated within the City of Biddeford
shall be regulated in the following manner:
at the City offices or a later time as deemed reasonable by the City
Clerk and the applicant.
Codes Office:
To review any alleged violation of this chapter, and to impose
appropriate penalties.
a.
To institute necessary proceedings, either legal or equitable, to
enforce this chapter.
b.
c. To review all applications in consultation with the City Clerk.
(3)
Director of Public Works:
The collection, transportation and disposal of all waste generated
within the municipality shall be under the supervision and direction
of the Director of Public Works.
a.
The Director of Public Works shall establish a collection schedule
that will allow for the collection of acceptable municipal solid
waste and acceptable recyclable materials on a regular basis and
may make periodic changes to the schedule as may be needed to
facilitate the program in an efficient and effective manner.
b.
The Director of Public Works shall determine the manner in which
unacceptable waste shall be managed and deposited.
c.
(4)
Solid Waste Management Commission.
To review the City's waste collection and management policies
and propose revisions as may be needed to facilitate the City's
comprehensive solid waste management plan, and reduce costs to
the taxpayers of the City.
a.
Evaluate, propose, and conduct education and outreach to facilitate
the program in an efficient and effective manner.
b.
(5)
Such City collection will be limited to properties whose primary use is
residential in nature.
(1)
The operating hours and general administration of the City transfer
station shall be set by the City Council, except for holidays or
emergencies where the Director of Public Works would have the
authority to set emergency hours.
(2)
When a holiday falls upon the day of collection, or severe weather
necessitates cancellation of collection services, recycling services for
(3)
Sec. 58-6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-7
CHCT:589
Sec. 58-8. Variances.
Sec. 58-9. Penalties.
Penalties associated with enforcement shall be waived for a period of three
months following the effective date of this chapter to allow for education
and awareness.
Sec. 58-10. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Public Works Department, authorized
commercial hauler, and Code Enforcement Office as further described
below.
the residents on that day's route will be collected on the following
Saturday. Collection of waste shall be on the next day following the
cancellation.
In the event of two or more collection service cancellations in one
week, the Public Works Director shall publish an emergency collection
schedule, which may include, but may not be limited to, no collection
for one or more routes with collection occurring on the next week's
regular schedule. The requirement that all acceptable municipal solid
waste fit in the designated municipal solid waste container shall be
waived during emergency collection events.
(4)
Evaluation of private ways for municipal waste collection and curbside
collection of acceptable recyclables shall be reviewed through the
variance process. The Director of Public Works may, on written
application, grant a variance from a specific provision of this chapter in
specific cases, subject to appropriate conditions, where such variance
is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
Such variance, if granted, shall remain valid until such time as the
condition or conditions warranting the variance are no longer valid. As
an example and for the avoidance of doubt, the sale of property or the
assignment of a new tenant shall terminate the variance, at which time
the new property owner or tenant may apply for a variance.
(a)
A grandfathered facility, excluding grandfathered condominium
facilities, shall no longer be eligible to receive municipal curbside
collection services following the date upon which ownership of the
property changes or the property becomes otherwise ineligible for
services. [Amended 3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.10]
(b)
Criminal penalties. Any person who violates any portion of this chapter
shall be subject to penalties and enforcement as authorized under the
provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
(1)
In no event does this section limit the City's ability to address a
nuisance or take other action for equitable relief.
(2)
Sec. 58-7 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-10
CHCT:590
Sec. 58-11. Effect on other laws; severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall supersede all other local laws,
ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations contrary thereto or in conflict
therewith. If provisions of this chapter, or the applicability thereof to any
person or circumstance, shall be held invalid, the remainder of this chapter
and the application thereof shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 58-12. through Sec. 58-30. (Reserved)
Sunset provision. Penalties associated with enforcement shall be
waived for a period of three months following the effective date of this
chapter to allow for education and awareness.
(1)
Upon observation of failure to place only acceptable municipal solid
waste in the designated solid waste container or to place only
acceptable recyclable materials in the designated recycling container,
the receptacle will not be collected and a warning notice shall be
placed on the appropriate designated container by the Public Works
Department or City-authorized commercial hauler.
The address, date, and nature of the nonconformance shall be
forwarded to the Director of Public Works and the Code
Enforcement Officer.
a.
The Director of Public Works and Code Enforcement Officer shall
document and review each nonconformance and determine the
appropriate enforcement action.
Nonconformance notices corrected prior to the next scheduled
collection date shall be closed with no further action.
1.
Failure to correct a nonconformance notice prior to the next
scheduled collection date or two or more consecutive
nonconformance events shall warrant direct contact with the
property owner and responsible party to document education
and outreach.
2.
Nonconformance notices issued after contact and education
shall be subject to penalties as per Section 58-9.
3.
b.
(2)
Upon determination by the Code Enforcement Officer that a violation
of this chapter exists or has occurred, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall give written notice of the violation to the violator, which notice
shall specify the section violated, the nature of the violation, and a
reasonable time period to cure the violation.
(3)
If a waste hauler is found to be unlicensed, penalties and enforcement
shall be in accordance with Section 58-9.
(4)
Sec. 58-10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-12
CHCT:591

ARTICLE II
COLLECTION
Sec. 58-31. Effective date.
This chapter shall become effective July 1, 2013, provided the City provides
notice of commencement in the manner required for publication of
ordinances.
Sec. 58-32. Mandatory separation.
Sec. 58-33. (Reserved)
Sec. 58-34. Exempted activities.
Sec. 58-35. Portable receptacles.
Each household eligible for and receiving City curbside collection
services for acceptable municipal solid waste or acceptable recyclable
materials shall separate acceptable recyclable materials, acceptable
municipal solid waste, and unacceptable waste.
(a)
(b) Separated materials shall be managed as identified in this chapter.
Residents shall be exempt from the separation requirements identified
in Section 58-32 and the overflow requirements identified in Section
58-35(a)(1) for the collection period coinciding with Thanksgiving and
Christmas as specifically designated by the Director of Public Works.
(a)
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a residential user from retaining
materials from his or her acceptable municipal solid waste or
acceptable recyclable materials for the purpose of sale or profit.
(b)
Nothing in the chapter shall prohibit a residential user from hiring
a fee-for-service provider for the collection of acceptable municipal
solid waste or acceptable recyclable materials. In the event of such
an arrangement, the residential user shall not be eligible to receive a
designated municipal solid waste container or a designated recycling
container. Such containers shall be returned to the Public Works
Department if previously issued.
(c)
The Public Works Department shall issue two designated collection
containers, color-coded, to each residential dwelling unit receiving
municipal waste collection and curbside recycling collection: one
container, approximately 35 gallons, shall be for acceptable municipal
solid waste, and one container, approximately 65 gallons, shall be for
acceptable recyclable materials; except that grandfathered facilities,
except grandfathered condominium facilities, shall not receive
designated municipal solid waste containers and shall place acceptable
municipal solid waste in designated bags for curbside collection.
Designated recycling containers shall be assigned to grandfathered
(a)
Sec. 58-31 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-35
CHCT:593
Sec. 58-36. through Sec. 58-39. (Reserved)
Sec. 58-40. Container repair and replacement; stolen containers.
facilities, subject to space limitations, as determined by the Director of
Public Works. [Amended 3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.10]
Weekly collection of acceptable municipal solid waste shall be
limited to the volume of the designated municipal solid waste
container such that the waste shall not spill out of the container or
prevent the cover from closing.
Overflow shall not be collected unless contained within a
designated bag made available to residents on a fee-per-bag
basis. The overflow bag may be placed on or adjacent to the
designated municipal waste container or in a container
separate from the designated municipal solid waste container.
If overflow is placed in a separate container, the container shall
not be larger than 45 gallons or weigh in excess of 35 pounds.
a.
The City Council shall establish the overflow bag price, which
may be adjusted.
b.
The Director of Public Works shall maintain and make available
a list of the locations at which residents may purchase overflow
bags and the price of each bag as established by the City
Council. The list and pricing shall be made available upon
request, shall be posted to the City website, and shall be
otherwise available as may be directed by the City Council.
c.
Overflow restrictions may be waived during designated
emergency collection schedules as defined in Section 58-7(4).
d.
(1)
Weekly collection of acceptable recyclable materials placed in the
designated recycling container shall not spill out of the container
or prevent the cover from closing.
(2)
Each designated container shall remain the sole property of the City of
Biddeford and may not be moved to any other location.
(b)
Residents may request larger or additional designated recycling
containers from the Director of Public Works for good cause as
determined by the Director of Public Works. Requests of any other
nature shall be evaluated through the variance process.
(c)
Property owners shall be responsible for the proper use and security
of their assigned containers. Each container is fitted with a radio
frequency identification (RFID) tag to assist with assignment and
identification.
(a)
If a designated container is damaged as a result of the City's collection
service or authorized commercial hauler actions, normal wear and tear,
(b)
Sec. 58-35 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-40
CHCT:594
Sec. 58-41. Container placement and removal. [Amended 6-3-2014
by Ord. No. 2014.41]
Sec. 58-42. through Sec. 58-60. (Reserved)
or due to a manufacturer's defect, the City shall repair or replace the
container; otherwise, the resident must pay for the cost of necessary
repairs or replacement.
The Director of Public Works shall post the replacement cost of each
type of container on the City's website and update the posting annually.
(c)
If a container is stolen, the responsible party must report the theft to
the Biddeford Police Department and the Public Works Department and
fill out any required reports. Any person who removes a designated
container from a residence may be prosecuted for theft of City property
and may have his or her collection privileges suspended.
(d)
All designated municipal solid waste containers and designated
recycling containers must be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk or
the edge of the roadway shoulder for removal on the day of collection,
providing a minimum of one foot of spacing between containers. Under
no conditions shall the containers be placed at the outer edge of the
sidewalk or edge of the roadway for removal prior to 4:00 p.m. on the
day before the day of collection.
(a)
All containers must be removed from the outer edge of the sidewalk or
edge of the roadway shoulder by 8:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
(b)
Sec. 58-40 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-42
CHCT:595

ARTICLE III
WASTE FLOW CONTROL AND TRANSFER STATION
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 58-61. Purpose.
The City shall provide a disposal facility (also referred to in this article
as "transfer station") for the receipt of unacceptable waste other than
hazardous waste. This article sets out the procedure for the operation of
the transfer station, to be operated by the City of Biddeford Public Works
Department.
Sec. 58-62. Use of transfer station. [Amended 7-18-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017.73]
Any resident, taxpayer, commercial entity, or property owner of the City
of Biddeford may dispose of any material as listed in Section 58-64 by
disposing of it at the transfer station. Materials identified in Section
58-64(a)(1) and (11) and (b) shall only be acceptable if the materials have
come from a property located within the limits of the City of Biddeford.
Sec. 58-63. Operating hours. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
The transfer station shall be open Tuesday through Saturday and closed on
Sundays and Mondays. The hours of operations shall be set by the Public
Works Director but shall not exceed 40 hours per week. The Director may
modify this schedule to accommodate special circumstances.
Sec. 58-64. Large item and recycling programs.
Free disposal:
Residents may dispose of up to one yard of household items in
any one day for free (furniture, stereos, lamps, fixtures, etc.). Any
additional loads of household items may be disposed of for a fee of
$20 per yard. [Amended 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019.12]
(1)
(2) Up to four tires per year from Biddeford residents.
Twice a year, for two-week intervals, residents will be allowed to
deliver up to one cubic yard per delivery of construction materials
and/or wood debris.
(3)
Wet cell and dry cell batteries. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No.
2014.25]
(4)
Metals (items that have had the Freon removed by licensed vendors
must show a certificate of proper removal for free disposal of the
item at this facility). [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
(5)
(a)
Sec. 58-61 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-64
CHCT:597
Sec. 58-65. through Sec. 58-75. (Reserved)
(6) Cardboard. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
(7) Plastic Nos. 1 and 2. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
(8) Paper/magazines. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
(9) Glass (jars and bottles). [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
(10)Tin cans. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
Grass clippings, leaves, brush and branches. [Added 4-1-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014.25]
(11)
(12)Waste motor oil. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
(13)Telephone books. [Added 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]
Fees. [Amended 4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.25]46
Fees for the disposal of the following acceptable items will be
charged at cost. Note: "At cost" means that the charges for the
disposal of the following items will be based upon the previous
quarter's actual disposal costs incurred by the City for the
particular item.
a. Freon containing items.
Tires (car and pickup truck only, greater than four tires per
year).
b.
c. CRTs (televisions, computer monitors, laptops).
d. Computer CPU, keyboard, mouse and printers.
(1)
Fees for the disposal of the following acceptable items will be
established by the Public Works Director:
a. Construction materials/wood debris.
Grass clippings. [Added 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2019.12]
1. Commercial: $10 per cubic yard.
b.
Brush and branches. [Added 3-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019.12]
1. Commercial: $10 per cubic yard.
c.
Demolition debris: $20 per cubic yard. [Added 3-19-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019.12]
d.
(2)
(b)
46.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsections (c), At cost disposal, and
(d), Nonpermit fee disposal. For current provisions on at cost disposal, see Subsection (b).
Sec. 58-64 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-65
CHCT:598
DIVISION 2
LICENSING
Sec. 58-76. License required; application and registration.
Any person required to obtain a license under this chapter and not in
possession of such a license as of the effective date of this chapter shall
have 60 days from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this
chapter derives to secure such license, which shall become effective on the
date specified therein.
No person, business, firm, corporation, institution or industry shall
transport solid waste, swill, offal, garbage or other like waste
substances over public ways within the City except in completely
enclosed containers or vehicles. Such containers or vehicles shall be
kept tightly covered and secured to prevent any spillage on the public
ways. No such container or vehicle shall be permitted to become foul or
offensive.
(1)
Any person, firm, corporation, institution, industry or business that
collects, transports or disposes of acceptable waste or unacceptable
waste (i.e., solid waste, garbage, swill, offal, rubbish, scrap metals,
junk, refuse, inert fill material, landscape refuse or other like waste
substances) generated within City limits, other than a self-hauler
handling only materials generated by the hauler, must first obtain a
waste hauler license on an annual calendar-year basis being in effect
from January 1 through December 31, from the City Clerk, in
accordance with this section.
(2)
Any person or other entity required by this chapter to obtain a waste
hauler license shall make application to the City Clerk on an annual
basis, providing the information required on the proper form approved
by the City Clerk. Each application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application and vehicle fee as listed in Chapter 22,
Section 22-11.
(3)
The application for a waste hauler license under this section shall
contain all information required by the City Clerk, including, but not
limited to:
A description of the activity, e.g., collection, transport or disposal
of acceptable and/or unacceptable waste,
a.
b. The type and amount of waste handled in each service area,
A description of the facility operated and used, and an equipment
inventory, including, for vehicles, a description of the make, model
and year of each vehicle used for the collection or transportation of
solid waste,
c.
d. Proof of insurance for each vehicle,
(4)
Sec. 58-76 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-76
CHCT:599
Sec. 58-77. Nontransferability; term; expiration.
Sec. 58-78. Grounds for denial.
The City Clerk may deny a license application under this article, in
consultation with the Code Enforcement Office, upon a finding that the
applicant:
e. A list of customer names and addresses,
A signature by the applicant as verification that he/she has read,
understands and will abide by all provisions of this chapter.
f.
If the City Clerk, in consultation with the Code Enforcement Office,
determines the application to be incomplete, the Code Enforcement
Office shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the specific information
necessary to complete the application.
(5)
Each waste hauler license shall obtain a permit for each vehicle used to
haul such trash or waste covered by this chapter by affixing a stamp or
decal to each vehicle licensed, such stamp or decal to be obtained from
the City and affixed as instructed.
(6)
The Code Enforcement Office and the Department of Public Works shall
be informed immediately of any changes in, or additions to, equipment,
including vehicles.
(7)
If a new customer is acquired or an existing customer is lost during
the course of the year, the licensee will notify the Code Enforcement
Office and the Department of Public Works of such customer's name
and address. The notices required by this section shall be submitted
within 30 days of such change in customer accounts of the licensee.
(8)
Regular employees of the Public Works Department and authorized
commercial hauler vehicles performing municipal collection duties are
exempt from the requirements of this section.
(9)
(a) Licenses issued under this article are not transferable.
All licenses issued under this article shall expire each December 31,
unless otherwise stated on the license or revoked or suspended sooner
in accordance with the provisions of this article. Licenses granted after
July 1, 2013, and prior to December 31, 2013 shall expire December 31,
2014.
(b)
Has not made adequate provision for the control of offensive odors or
has not made adequate provision to prevent air and water pollution.
(1)
(2) Has not previously secured any necessary state or federal permits.
Has failed to respond to inquiries relative to the source of waste or the
location of waste generators during periods of time when the Director
of Public Works or his designee is monitoring or verifying eligible
(3)
Sec. 58-76 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-78
CHCT:600
Sec. 58-79. Fee; hearing following denial of license.
Sec. 58-80. Suspension or revocation.
Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked by
order of the City Council after benefit of a hearing in accordance with the
procedures in Section 58-81, for the following causes:
Sec. 58-81. Hearings.
curbside collection locations for residential collection. Failure to
respond within 14 days of an inquiry shall be reason for denial.
Has failed to transport waste loads in completely enclosed containers
or vehicles; such containers or vehicles shall be kept tightly covered
and secured to prevent any spillage on public ways.
(4)
(5) Has failed to comply with any other provisions of this article.
The City Clerk may not refund any portion of the fee if the license is
suspended or revoked.
(a)
If a license application is denied under this article, the Code
Enforcement Office shall notify the applicant in writing and shall state
the reasons for the denial. The applicant may request a public hearing
in accordance with the procedures in Section 58-81.
(b)
(1) Violation of this article.
Violation of any provision of any state or local law, ordinance, code or
regulation which relates directly to the provisions of this article.
(2)
(3) Violation of any license condition.
(4) Falsehoods, misrepresentations or omissions in the license application.
Anyone denied a license or whose license is suspended or revoked
pursuant to Section 58-78 or 58-80 is entitled to a hearing before the
City Council if such request is made in writing within 10 days of the
denial, suspension or revocation.
(a)
Such hearings shall be held within 30 days after receipt of the written
request for a hearing.
(b)
The licensee or applicant shall be notified, in writing, as to the time
and place of the hearing at least 10 days prior to the hearing date. The
applicant or licensee has the right to be represented by counsel, to offer
evidence and to cross-examine witnesses, but the hearing is not subject
to rules of evidence or formal rules for adjudicatory proceedings.
(c)
A determination shall be made by the City Council within 10 days
after the conclusion of the hearing, and notice of the decision shall be
(d)
Sec. 58-78 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-81
CHCT:601
Sec. 58-82. Special license for replacement vehicle.
Sec. 58-83. through Sec. 58-105. (Reserved)
served upon the applicant or licensee by registered mail, return receipt
requested.
The City Council's final determination relative to the denial, suspension
or revocation of a license and the period of suspension or revocation
shall take effect as provided in the notice unless, at the time of final
determination, the City Council made it effective immediately. The City
Council's determination is conclusive. Notice of the final determination
shall set forth the reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation and
the effective dates thereof together with a statement that such decision
may be appealed as provided in this article.
(e)
Any controversy or claim arising out of or relating to the City Council's
determination may be appealed to the superior court pursuant to Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B, within 30 days after the City
Council's final determination.
(f)
The City Clerk may grant a special license to a licensee for a limited
period and upon such terms and conditions as deemed appropriate,
using procedures deemed appropriate by the City Clerk.
(a)
In the event of a vehicle breakdown or emergency, upon furnishing the
same information required for a licensed vehicle, the licensee may be
issued a special temporary license for the replacement vehicle at no
charge.
(b)
The City Clerk shall be notified immediately, by the licensee, of any
changes in or additions to equipment, including vehicles.
(c)
Sec. 58-81 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-83
CHCT:602
ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)
Sec. 58-106. through Sec. 58-130. (Reserved)
Sec. 58-106 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-106
CHCT:603

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)
Sec. 58-131. through Sec. 58-160. (Reserved)
Sec. 58-131 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-131
CHCT:605

ARTICLE VI
SOLID WASTE ADMINISTRATION
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 58-161. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Biddeford, Maine, Solid Waste
Administration Ordinance."
Sec. 58-162. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted in 30-A M.R.S.A.
§§ 2101, 3001 and 3002 and 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 1304-B and 1305.
Sec. 58-163. (Reserved)
Sec. 58-163.1. Solid Waste Management Commission.
Mission.
The Solid Waste Management Commission is created by the
Council of the City of Biddeford to facilitate the development and
implementation of the City's comprehensive waste management
program and coordinate the efforts of the several departments in
the City that address the municipal waste issues.
(1)
The Commission is further charged with the operation and
maintenance of the provisions of this article.
(2)
The Commission shall report to the Mayor and Council upon a
periodic basis.
(3)
(a)
Membership.
The Solid Waste Management Commission shall be composed of
nine members. Of the nine voting members, two shall be
Councilors. A 10th and nonvoting member shall be a School
Department representative who shall be nominated by the
Superintendent and confirmed by the School Committee. All other
members are to be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed by
the City Council. [Amended 9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.73;
4-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.27]
(1)
The voting members shall be registered voters and residents of the
City of Biddeford.
(2)
(3) The Commission Chairman shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(b)
(c) Terms.
Sec. 58-161 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-163.1
CHCT:607
The members of the Solid Waste Management Commission shall
serve three-year terms and may serve additional terms upon
nomination and reappointment.
(1)
The initial membership shall be appointed for staggered terms in
order that a stabilized organization remain in place as much as
possible. Initial terms will be:
a. Councilors serve two years;
b. Two members initially appointed for one year;
c. Two members initially appointed for two years;
d. Two members initially appointed for three years.
(2)
Whenever a vacancy occurs in the membership, a replacement
member shall be appointed to fill the unexpired term of the
vacancy.
(3)
Members may be removed from the Commission by the Council,
upon recommendation by the Commission Chairman to the Council,
for reasons to include:
a. Inability to attend scheduled meetings;
b. Continual conflicts of interest;
c. Inability to function with the group process.
(4)
Organization.
The Solid Waste Management Commission shall be composed of
the following standing subcommittees, membership and Chair to be
appointed by the Chairman of the Commission:
Municipal solid waste: addressing issues of transportation and
handling of municipal solid waste.
a.
b. Recycling: addressing issues of recycling.
c. Transfer station: addressing transfer station issues.
Wastewater Commission relations: to coordinate Wastewater
Commission issues as relating to waste management.
d.
(1)
These subcommittees shall research issues and provide reports
as needed by the Chairman of the Commission to fulfill the
Commission's mission and long-term goals.
(2)
The Chairman may appoint additional committees as necessary to
fulfill the mission and long-term goals of the Commission.
(3)
(d)
(e) Relation with other commissions, committees, etc.
Sec. 58-163.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-163.1
CHCT:608
Sec. 58-164. through Sec. 58-185. (Reserved)
With the establishment of this Commission, all other waste
management committees are abolished and their functions
incorporated in this Commission.
(1)
This Commission may interact with other commissions, boards,
committees and City departments as needed to fulfill its mission
and long-term goals.
(2)
Sec. 58-163.1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 58-164
CHCT:609
Chapter 62
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Miscellaneous provisions and offenses — See
Ch. 40.
Motor vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 42.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 46.
Subdivisions — See Ch. 66.
Utilities — See Ch. 70.
Land development regulations — See Part III.
Sec. 58-164 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 58-164
CHCT:610
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 62-1. Removal of ice and snow; responsibility. [Ord. of
12-4-1991, § 20-8]
The owner of any building or parcel of land abutting any public
sidewalk in the downtown business area shall be responsible for the
removal of any snow and/or ice which may accumulate upon such public
sidewalk. The downtown business area shall include only the following
streets or portions thereof:
Adams Street, both sides, between Main Street and Jefferson Street
Alfred Street, both sides, between Main Street and Mt. Vernon Street
Elm Street, both sides, between the Saco River and Centre Street
Federal Street, both sides, for the entire length of the street
Franklin Street, both sides, for the entire length of the street
Jefferson Street, both sides, for the entire length of the street
Lincoln Street, easterly side, for the entire length of the street
Main Street, both sides, between the Saco River and Elm Street
Pool Street, both sides, between Alfred Street and Foss Street
South Street, both sides, between Jefferson Street and Adams Street
Washington Street, both sides, between Main Street and Jefferson
Street
Washington Street, easterly side, between Jefferson Street and Alfred
Street
Water Street, both sides, between Hill Street and Sullivan Street
Such removal of snow and/or ice shall be accomplished within six
hours after the cessation of precipitation, unless such cessation of
precipitation occurs during the nighttime. If so, the removal of the
snow and/or ice shall be completed by 12:00 noon of the following day,
unless the following day is a Sunday. If such precipitation should occur
on a Sunday, the snow and/or ice shall be removed before noon on
Monday. Any extra-wide sidewalk need be cleared only to a width of
five feet to meet the requirements of this section.
(a)
This section shall be construed to extend to the removing of snow or
ice falling from any roof upon any of the public sidewalks downtown as
listed in Subsection (a) of this section. The time constraints stated in
Subsection (a) shall apply to this condition also.
(b)
No person shall cause to be placed upon any public street or sidewalk
or public parking lot any snow which did not fall thereupon in a natural
manner. No person shall, after any public street, sidewalk or public
parking lot shall have been cleared of snow, cause or allow any snow
(c)
Sec. 62-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-1
CHCT:611
Sec. 62-2. Roof railings, guards, other protective devices. [Ord. of
12-4-1991, § 20-9]
to be purposely and willfully removed from any building, sign, vehicle,
steps, walks, or any location which is not a part of such public street,
sidewalk or public parking lot, and be deposited upon such public
street, sidewalk or public parking lot, unless such snow shall be
promptly removed from the previously cleared portion of the public
street, sidewalk or public parking lot and relocated in such a manner so
as not to impede the normal traffic thereupon.
If the owner cannot remove snow and/or ice from a public street,
sidewalk or public parking lot by normal procedures as required in this
section, he shall cover or treat the snow and/or ice with any granular
substance to provide a nonslippery surface for the pedestrian traffic, or
he shall treat it with a chemical substance which will cause the snow
and/or ice to melt and thus provide a safe surface for pedestrian traffic;
provided, that such chemical or granular substance does not damage
any paved surface.
(d)
Upon failure by any property owner to comply with the requirements
of this section, and upon notification by the Codes Enforcement Officer
of such failure by the owner, the Director of Public Works shall cause
the snow and/or ice to be removed from the public street, sidewalk or
public parking lot, or shall cause such snow and/or ice to be covered
with granular material, or treated by chemical substances so as to
provide safe surfaces for the passage of pedestrians and other traffic.
The cost of accomplishing such work shall be assessed to the owner of
the property concerned. [Amended 3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.9]
(e)
If a building is located in close proximity to any public street, sidewalk
or public parking lot, and is so shaped, or is constructed of such
material, as to allow snow and/or ice to fall or slide therefrom onto the
public street, sidewalk or public parking lot, the owner thereof shall
install guards or railings upon such building, or any other device or
structure which shall be effective in preventing the shedding of snow
and/or ice onto the public street, sidewalk or public parking lot.
(a)
When directed by the Mayor and/or Council, the Codes Enforcement
Officer shall cause notice to be given to the owner of any building
covered by this section, directing such owner to install guards, railings
or other devices as required in this section, and allowing such owner
a period of 30 days to comply with this section. Such notice shall be
delivered personally to the owner of the building, or shall be mailed
to the owner by registered or certified mail, with a return receipt
requested of the post office. In such a case, the date of receipt by
the owner shall be the first day of the thirty-day period. [Amended
3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.10]
(b)
If any owner notified in the manner prescribed in this section shall
refuse or fail to place the required guards, railings or other protective
(c)
Sec. 62-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-2
CHCT:612
Sec. 62-3. Depositing snow on streets, public squares. [Code 1975,
§ 15-6]
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any large body of ice or
amount of snow in any street or public square of the City.
Sec. 62-4. Responsibility for care, custody of City buildings. [Code
1975, § 7-28; Ord. of 4-18-1995]
The Committee on Capital Projects shall make all recommendations
regarding the care and custody of all buildings and appurtenances thereof
owned by the City and of all alterations and repairs thereof.
Sec. 62-5. Authority to lease City buildings; terms and conditions of
lease. [Code 1975, § 7-29; Ord. of 4-18-1995]
The Committee on Capital Projects shall, subject to the approval of the
Mayor and Council, have the authority to negotiate a lease of any part of the
buildings and appurtenances thereof owned by the City not already under
lease or appropriated to the use of any of the various branches of the City
government. Such lease shall be recommended to the full Council upon such
terms and conditions as the Committee deems expedient and shall be for a
period not to exceed five years, with one option to renew for a like period.
Sec. 62-6. Authorization to lease City land; terms and conditions of
lease. [Code 1975, § 7-29.1; Ord. of 4-18-1995]
The Committee on Capital Projects shall, subject to the approval of the
Mayor and Council, have the authority to recommend the leasing of any lot
or part thereof owned by the City not already under lease or appropriated
to the use of any of the various branches of the City government. Such lease
shall be recommended to the full Council upon such terms and conditions
as the committee deems expedient and shall be for a period not to exceed
15 years, with one option to renew for a ten-year period.
Sec. 62-7. through Sec. 62-30. (Reserved)
device required by this section, and by a duly delivered notice from the
Codes Enforcement Officer, within the period of 30 days specified in
such notice, the Mayor shall direct that such devices be installed upon
the subject building, and the costs of so doing shall be assessed upon
the owner of the building. [Amended 3-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.10]
Sec. 62-2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-7
CHCT:613

ARTICLE II
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 62-31. Nomination and appointment. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-21; Ord. No. 99.69, 8-17-1999]
Sec. 62-32. Compensation. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-22]
The Director of Public Works shall receive such compensation as the Mayor
and Council shall establish, in accordance with Chapter 50.
Sec. 62-33. Responsibilities. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-23; Ord. of
4-18-1995; Ord. No. 99.69, 8-17-1999]
The Director of Public Works shall report to the City Manager, who shall
provide supervision for the instructions to the Director.
Sec. 62-34. Powers. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-24]
All of the powers vested in and required of road commissioners by the laws
of the state (23 M.R.S.A. § 2701 et seq.) are hereby vested in and required
of the Director of Public Works.
Sec. 62-35. Duties. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-25; Ord. of 4-18-1995]
As required by the Charter, the City Manager shall appoint a Director
of the Department of Public Works of the City. Upon confirmation by the
City Council, the nominee shall be sworn to the faithful performance of
his duties as enumerated in this article, and in other ordinances.
(a)
Should the office of Director of Public Works be vacated during the term
thereof, the City Manager shall forthwith appoint another qualified
person to be acting Director. Such appointment shall be submitted
to the City Council for confirmation, and upon such confirmation, the
person so named will become the Director.
(b)
The Director of Public Works shall perform such duties as prescribed
by the City Manager. The Director may perform such duties upon
the recommendation of the Capital Projects Committee, Operations
Committee and/or the Mayor and Council. The Director shall administer
and enforce the provisions of Chapters 26 and 58 and this chapter.
(a)
The Director of Public Works shall:
Administer the overall operation and functions of the department
of public works, which shall encompass the following divisions:
a. Streets and sidewalks.
b. Cemeteries.
c. Waste collection and recycling or disposal.
(1)
(b)
Sec. 62-31 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-35
CHCT:615
Sec. 62-36. Encroachment on public ways. [Ord. No. 99.67,
8-17-1999]
d. Motor vehicles and equipment.
Engineering Division. [Added 6-7-2016 by Ord. No.
2016.41]
e.
Prepare and provide all budget requests and reports required for
his department, and supervise the expenditure of funds allocated
for public works operations. He shall file all requests for purchases
with the finance committee.
(2)
Oversee the general condition of all public works facilities of the
City, and direct the maintenance of these in a manner which will
provide the public with safe, convenient and efficient
infrastructure.
(3)
Temporarily close to public travel during times of construction
or maintenance activities any public way which he deems to be
inadequate or unsafe for travel during such construction or
maintenance. In so doing, the Director shall see that suitable and
legal warning lights and/or barricades are erected to advise the
public of the hazard.
(4)
Be responsible for all buildings, equipment, vehicles, tools,
materials and supplies belonging to the City which are for the use
of his department.
(5)
Issue all permits required by this chapter for excavations or
construction within any public way of the City; and supervise and
inspect the performance thus permitted, to assure proper
execution by the permittee.
(6)
Collect such fees for permits as determined by the City Council,
and forward such monies to the City Treasurer on a regular basis.
(7)
Together with the City Engineer:
Conduct inspections of completed subdivisions in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 66.
a.
Conduct inspections of private ways prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the Building Inspector, as required
by Section 18-61.
b.
(8)
See that no encroachments are made upon the streets or public
grounds of the City by fences, buildings or otherwise.
(a)
Whenever any encroachments are made upon any streets and public
grounds of the City and the party making the same neglects or refuses
to remove the same, it shall be the duty of the Director to cause the
person so offending to be prosecuted and the encroachment abated.
(b)
Sec. 62-35 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-36
CHCT:616
Sec. 62-37. through Sec. 62-55. (Reserved)
Any violation of this section shall be subject to a penalty per Section
1-12 for violations of Code, continuing violations.
(c)
Sec. 62-36 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-37
CHCT:617

ARTICLE III
SIDEWALKS
Sec. 62-56. Injuring, defacing, altering restricted. [Ord. of
12-4-1991, § 20-6]
No person shall injure, deface or make any alteration in any sidewalk
without the written consent of the Council or the Director of Public Works.
Sec. 62-57. Displaying merchandise, goods, wares; standards for
tables and chairs, and the service and consumption of alcoholic
beverages. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-7; Ord. of 3-7-1995; Ord. No.
2005.68, 8-2-2005; Ord. No. 2007.89, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 2018.35,
5-1-2018]
No person engaged in the sale of goods, wares or merchandise shall
deposit, pile, place or display for purposes of sale any such goods,
wares or merchandise upon or above any public sidewalk, public space,
or public way without first receiving a permit from the City Clerk's
office. Permits shall be free of charge for use of space that is contiguous
to a licensed establishment; and $1,000 for use of space that is
noncontiguous to a licensed establishment; and shall only be valid from
May 1 to October 31 within any calendar year; and shall only be issued
by the City Clerk's office for such displays within the MSRD-1 Zone,
as depicted on the official Zoning Map of the City, once the Code
Enforcement Office has determined that the performance standards in
Subsection (c) are met.
(a)
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, in order to sponsor a
more leisurely and pleasant commercial atmosphere in the downtown
area, the City Clerk's office may issue permits for the setting of tables
and chairs associated with established restaurants or other holders
of valid City Council issued victualer licenses in the MSRD-1 Zone,
as depicted on the official Zoning Map of the City, upon or above
any public sidewalk, public space, or public way. Such permits shall
be free of charge for use of space that is contiguous to a licensed
establishment; and $1,000 for use of space that is noncontiguous to a
licensed establishment; and shall only be valid from May 1 to October
31 within any calendar year, and shall only be issued once the Code
Enforcement Office has determined that the performance standards in
Subsection (c) are met.
(b)
Performance standards:
Except where Subsection (c)(4) below applies, the following
standards must be maintained:
The goods, wares, other merchandise, tables, and chairs are
located in front of the specific establishment;
a.
b. Are portable;
(1)
(c)
Sec. 62-56 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-57
CHCT:619
Are removed from the sidewalk at the end of the specific
operating hours of the establishment;
c.
That an adequate pedestrian travelway, such travelway being
at least 48 inches between the outside edge of the goods,
wares, other merchandise, tables and chairs, any required
barriers, and the outer edge of the curb, is maintained; and
d.
That there is no hindrance or hazard to pedestrian safety or
movement, or the opening of vehicle doors.
e.
There are adequate provisions to collect and remove any and all
waste or litter associated with or resulting from the use or display
of said goods, wares, other merchandise, tables and chairs so that
there is no accumulation of wastes and litter on said sidewalk.
(2)
The City Council may permit the service to, and the consumption
of alcoholic beverages by, a patron of a restaurant that has been
licensed by the state for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, and that the licensed area has been extended to include
part of the sidewalk or other public way. When a license has been
so approved and issued, all of the conditions under Subsections
(1) and (2) above shall be adhered to. Additionally, the licensee
shall comply with the provisions under 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1051(3),
which limits the service and consumption of liquor to areas that
are clearly defined and approved in the application process by the
bureau of alcoholic beverages as appropriate for the consumption
of liquor. Outside areas must be controlled by barriers and by signs
prohibiting consumption beyond the barriers.
(3)
The City Council may permit the service to, and the consumption
of, alcoholic beverages by a patron of a restaurant that has been
licensed by the state for the sale and consumption of alcoholic
beverages, and that the licensed area has been extended to include
part of the sidewalk or other public way that is noncontiguous to
the premises so licensed. When a license has been so approved
and issued, all of the conditions under Subsection (c)(2) above
shall be adhered to. Additionally, the licensee shall comply with
the provisions under 28-A M.R.S.A. §§ 1051(3) and 1051(8), which
limits the service and consumption of liquor to areas that are
clearly defined and approved in the application process by the
Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages as appropriate for the consumption
of liquor. Outside areas must be controlled by barriers and by
signs prohibiting consumption beyond the barriers. Further, the
following performance standards must be maintained:
That an adequate pedestrian travelway, such travelway being
at least 60 inches wide, be maintained for pedestrian access
between the outside edge of tables and chairs and any required
barriers and that such a travel way complies with the
Americans with Disabilities Act;
a.
(4)
Sec. 62-57 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-57
CHCT:620
That there is no hindrance or hazard to pedestrian safety or
movement, or the opening of vehicle doors;
b.
The building in which the permitted restaurant operates
shares a common boundary line with a public sidewalk;
c.
The outdoor seating area is located within 20 feet of the
entrance fronting the permitted restaurant;
d.
An outdoor seating area that directly abuts a street travelway,
such as when located in a parking space, must have a physical
barrier along the street side of the area;
e.
An outdoor seating area located within a street adjacent to a
curb shall be elevated on a platform so that it is flush with the
top of the curb;
f.
No outside seating area located on a sidewalk may be located
so it is any closer than two feet from the face of the curb;
g.
The outdoor seating area is not located closer than 20 feet to
any crosswalk or street intersection and no closer than five feet
to any driveway;
h.
The operation of the outdoor seating area for the restaurant
shall be related to the sale of food or drink from the permitted
restaurant;
i.
Access to the outdoor seating area by patrons and staff shall
be maintained such that is complies with the Americans with
Disabilities Act;
j.
An outdoor seating area must not block a fire hydrant or
impede drainage to stormwater facilities;
k.
Outdoor seating furniture may remain in the outdoor seating
area when the restaurant is closed so long as it is adequately
locked down and secured;
l.
A continuous barrier of not less than three feet in height shall
be installed and must start from the ground, and shall be
in compliance with standards and rules set forth by Maine
Bureau of Alcoholic Beverages;
m.
Tabletop signage is limited to menus and must not exceed four
square feet in area;
n.
Signage must be posted in the outside seating area that states,
"No Alcohol Beyond This Point"; and
o.
Lighting may not be affixed to any City infrastructure,
including, but not limited to, streetlights, trees, and signs,
without the express permission of the City of Biddeford Public
Works Department.
p.
Sec. 62-57 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-57
CHCT:621
Sec. 62-58. Riding bicycles, skating on sidewalks prohibited;
penalty. [Code 1975, §§ 6-1, 6-14, 15-12]
Sec. 62-59. through Sec. 62-80. (Reserved)
The Code Enforcement Office shall enforce these provisions and
shall take actions to correct any problems that result from the
issuance of permits under this section. Such action shall include
revocation of any permit issued under these provisions.
For the purposes of this section, "restaurant" shall have the
following definition: Any public place kept, used maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals
are served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity and having employed therein a sufficient
number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve
suitable food for its guests. Provided further that no restaurant
licensed as such shall sell alcoholic beverages later than one hour
after the time food service has ended or 11:00 p.m., whichever is
earlier.
Unless further action is taken by the City Council, the provisions
pertaining to noncontiguous outside seating areas contained in
Section 62-57 of this chapter shall expire on November 1, 2018.
(5)
No person shall ride a bicycle upon any public sidewalk in the City. No
person shall skate on any sidewalk in the City.
(a)
Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section may be punished by a fine of not more than $10.
(b)
Sec. 62-57 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-59
CHCT:622
ARTICLE IV
STREETS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 62-81. Definitions. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-1; Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY ROADS — All City roads shall be classified according to the following
criteria by the Director:
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the City.
ENGINEER — The City Engineer as defined in Chapter 2, Division 4, of
the Code of Ordinances, or his/her designee, provided they are a licensed
professional engineer.
MEDIAN STRIP — A paved or planted area of public right-of-way, dividing
a street or highway into lands according to the direction of travel.[Added
10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.81]
CLASS 1—LOCAL ARTERIALS — A major roadway serving long
distance traffic through and between municipalities and carrying traffic
to major centers of activity, or critical locations within the City. (Roads
having an annual average daily traffic in excess of 2,000 vehicles per
day, or critical facilities reside on this road as defined by the Director.)
(1)
CLASS 2—LOCAL COLLECTORS — A principal roadway which conveys
traffic between arterial streets. (Roads having an annual average daily
traffic between 250 and 2,000 vehicles per day.)
INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL — Roads providing access to
abutting commercial or industrial properties, the primary function
of which is to serve those properties.
a.
b. (Reserved)
(2)
CLASS 3—MAJOR RESIDENTIAL — A street which is designed to carry
traffic between local collectors and minor residential streets. Roads
having an annual average daily traffic between 250 and 1,000 vehicles
per day.
(3)
CLASS 4—MINOR RESIDENTIAL — A street designed to provide access
to abutting property and to carry no more traffic than that generated by
the uses along the street. Roads having an annual average daily traffic
less than 250 vehicles per day and/or serving less than 26 dwelling
units.
(4)
Sec. 62-81 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-82
CHCT:623
Sec. 62-82. Procedure for establishment of City park or
establishing or altering public ways. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-2; Ord.
of 4-18-1995; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Whenever written application is made to the City Council to lay out,
widen or alter any street, lane, walk, square or highway, or portion
thereof, to accept as a City park, or to accept as a public way any
street constructed according to this article, the Council shall refer
such applications to the committee responsible for capital projects.
Upon receipt of such application, and after giving notice as required
by law (23 M.R.S.A. § 3001 et seq.), the committee shall proceed to
investigate the premises as necessary. [Amended 5-7-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013.27]
(a)
The committee responsible for capital projects on streets shall make a
written report of its proceedings relative to the application described
in Subsection (a) of this section at the meeting of the City Council
next following the completion of the proceedings of the committee. The
report shall be accompanied by an accurate survey and plan giving
the boundaries and measurements of such laying out, widening and/or
altering. The plan shall indicate, as accurately as possible, all physical
features of the subject way, both above grade and below grade. All such
features shall be a part of the acceptance of the way [see Subsection (e)
of this section] unless specifically excluded from such acceptance.
(b)
The committee responsible for capital projects shall utilize the services
of the engineer to aid it in any work required in performing its duties
under this section. If there is no engineer, the committee may request
that the City Manager employ any professional civil engineer or land
surveyor to so assist. In such an event, the engineer or surveyor so
employed shall be allowed reasonable compensation for his services.
(c)
The owner(s) shall present to the City a deed for the property within
the boundaries of the right-of-way, and other areas as required, at the
time of the street's acceptance by the City Council.
(d)
After the report of the committee responsible for capital projects on
streets is accepted by the Council, and adopted by order of the Council,
the way so laid out and reported on shall be established and known
as a public way; and the Council order and the survey and plan
accompanying the report of the committee shall be duly recorded by
the City Clerk both in the files of their office.
(e)
The acceptance of the street shall be contingent upon the recordation
of the final plan and the deed at the York County Registry of Deeds
within 30 days, and the subsequent presentation to the City Clerk of
copies thereof, bearing the imprimatur of the registry of deeds, and
Y.C.R.D. file index numbers, and the date of recording.
(f)
The owner shall warranty all public improvements for a period of at
least one year, or such a period of time as determined by Council,
(g)
Sec. 62-82 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-82
CHCT:624
Sec. 62-83. Naming of streets, parks and public buildings. [Ord. of
12-4-1991, § 20-3; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003; amended 4-2-2013
by Ord. No. 2013.17]
Sec. 62-83.1. Procedure for adopting new names or changing
existing names. [Added 4-2-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.17]
from the date of acceptance and post a maintenance guarantee. The
bond shall cover 100% of all expenses to reconstruct the roadway, and
that amount must be approved by the engineering department prior
to acceptance. At the conclusion of the one-year warranty period, the
City Council shall release the maintenance guarantee provided the
engineer agrees the road and all associated structures show no sign of
deterioration or poor construction.
Prior to Planning Board review, the owner shall consult with the 911
Coordinator to determine if the street name is acceptable for the City’s
911 system. Once approved by the Planning Board and recorded on
development plans, said name of street will be forwarded to the City
Council with the application for street acceptance.
(a)
All streets heretofore laid out and dedicated, all parks and all public
buildings shall be known by the names now recorded, and there shall
not be a change in the name of any street, park or public building or
the naming of a new or unnamed street, park or public building, except
under the procedures outlined in this chapter.
(b)
The City Council shall not approve and the City Engineer shall not
record any street, park or public building name when any other street,
park or public building shall have been recorded with the same name,
unless a new street, park or public building is a continuation of or in
alignment with or an addition to existing recorded streets, parks or
public buildings, in which event they shall bear the same name of said
existing streets, parks or public buildings.
(c)
Request for consideration to adopt a new name or change of name. Any
number of City residents by petition to the City Council or the Mayor
by written communication to the City Council or any City Councilor, or
by resolution duly filed may request the City Council to consider the
naming or change of name of a public street, park or public building.
(a)
Any request submitted pursuant to Subsection (a) must contain the
proposed name change or name, the existing name, if any, and a brief
statement in justification for such name change or name.
(b)
Notice of intention. The City Council may approve or deny any such
request. If the City Council approves such request, a public hearing
shall be held thereon. The City Council shall direct the City Clerk to
prepare and submit to the City Council for its consideration a notice
of intention to name or change the name of the public street, park
or public building designated in the aforesaid request. Said notice of
(c)
Sec. 62-82 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-83.1
CHCT:625
Sec. 62-84. Street signs. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-4; Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sec. 62-85. Setting posts, signs, other structures in right-of-way.
[Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-5; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
No person shall set or plant any post, tree, shrub, bush, sign, fence, stone,
monument, statue, or any other such structure, or plant within the limits of
any right-of-way, without the written consent of the Council or the Director.
Neither shall anyone allow any such plant on his property to grow so as to
encroach upon a right-of-way in such a manner as to be detrimental to the
normal and full use of that right-of-way. This section shall not exclude the
placing of rural mailboxes within the right-of-way, nor shall it apply to trees
or other features approved by the Planning Board and the Director for a
street in a new subdivision.
Sec. 62-85.1. Political signs. [Ord. of 10-4-1994, § 14-6; Ord. of
8-20-1996; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003; amended 4-3-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012.28; 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.26]
See Part III (Land Use Regulations), Article VI (Performance Standards),
Section 59B14k, for regulations on political signs.
intention shall contain the proposed name or change of name, the
existing name, if any, and the time and place for the public hearing. The
hearing shall be held before the City Council in its Council chambers.
Notice of public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by
publication of the aforesaid notice of intention pursuant to the manner
set forth by the City of Biddeford's Code of Ordinances.
(d)
Within 30 days following the public hearing described in Subsections
(b) and (c), the City Council must act on the proposed name or change
of name.
(e)
The Director shall have authority and power to erect, put up, attach
or cause to be erected, put up or attached on or to any building or
part thereof, tree, post, wall, fence, or other proper object within the
City such signboards as may be necessary to indicate the name of the
highway, street, lane, alley, wharf, square or court, or any distance
thereon or thereover.
(a)
Any signboards placed in accordance with this section shall be of
uniform size, color, and lettering as determined by the Director to be in
compliance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices of the
U.S. Department of Transportation.
(b)
A person commits a violation of this chapter if that person removes,
defaces, or tampers with a sign that has been placed or erected in
accordance with this section. A person found to have committed a
violation of this section is subject to a civil penalty of $250.
(c)
Sec. 62-83.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-86
CHCT:626
Sec. 62-86. Boundary survey of proposed right-of-way required.
[Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-51; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Each street proposed for acceptance by the City Council shall be shown
on a survey plan signed and sealed by a state professional land surveyor.
The field survey shall be conducted under the United States Standard of
Measurement. Prior to acceptance by the City Council, each street proposed
for acceptance shall be inspected by the engineer for conformity of the
physical layout to the plan submitted, and for completeness of
monumentation, etc. The City Council may order a retracement survey
based on the report of the engineer.
Sec. 62-87. Monumentation required. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-52;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sec. 62-88. Plan and profile required. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-53;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Each street proposed for acceptance by the City Council shall be
physically marked on the ground by a state registered land surveyor.
Granite monuments not less than 36 inches in length and having an
exposed end-face measuring four inches by four inches shall be placed
on all points of intersection with other rights-of-way, ways or railroads,
points of curvature, reverse curvature, compound curvature or
tangency, and angle points formed by changes in direction. Monuments
shall be set flush in paved areas, or when they are located within two
feet of a pedestrian way. In no instance shall any monument protrude
more than four inches above the ground. Alternate materials for
monuments will be allowed at specific locations if circumstances do
not permit installation of granite monuments, and if approved by the
engineer in writing. All monuments, of whatever type, shall meet the
requirements of current rules and regulations for the State Board of
Registration for Land Surveyors Standards of Practice, Rule 12.8.
(a)
Whenever possible, monuments shall have at least three reference ties
to relatively permanent, intervisible points at the time of installation.
The ties shall be nearly equal in length, and less than 100 feet in length,
or at other points as required by the engineer at sufficient locations to
reproduce the street line, and at least 90° apart.
(b)
The survey plan required in Section 62-86 shall be drawn in indelible
ink on standard D size (twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch) sheets of
translucent drafting material (Mylar) at a suitable scale no smaller than
one to 600 (one inch equals 50 feet). The plan view shall be shown
on the upper half of the sheet, and the profile directly below on the
lower half, and shall be aligned vertically with the plan view insofar as
is possible. If more than one sheet is required, appropriate matchlines
shall be used to show the continuity.
(a)
The survey plan required in Section 62-86 shall show the following
information:
(b)
Sec. 62-86 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-88
CHCT:627
The magnetic meridian shall be shown, and the year and month of
the observation noted.
(1)
All distances shown shall be stated to the nearest 1/100 of one foot
(three mm).
(2)
All bearings and angles, necessary for plotting said street and lots,
shall be displayed to the nearest five seconds of arc.
(3)
All horizontal curves shall be identified by radius, arc length,
tangent length and central angle.
(4)
All vertical curves shall be identified by curve length, initial and
final slope, station, and elevation of the point of vertical
intersection (PVI).
(5)
The profile of the center line shall have horizontal scale the same as
the plan view, and the vertical scale shall be 10 times the horizontal
scale.
(6)
The horizontal scale shall be indicated both graphically and as a
numerical ratio.
(7)
A cross section of said street or way drawn to a horizontal scale no
larger than five foot to one inch and a vertical scale of one foot to
one inch.
(8)
Topography and natural drainagecourses with contours at intervals
of five feet or less.
(9)
All existing structures and portions of structures, water pipes,
storm drains, sanitary sewers, gas mains, culverts, underdrains,
and underground utilities within the proposed right-of-way shall
be shown, with ties or offsets to indicate actual location. These
ties or offsets may be tabulated or illustrated, at the option of the
surveyor/drafter.
(10)
All properties or right-of-way monuments found or set at the time
of survey.
(11)
(12)The names and deed references of all abutters to the right-of-way.
The name of persons proposing the acceptance of the street, and
the deed references indicating title. A copy of such deed may be
required in some cases.
(13)
The surveyor's stamp and signature must appear legibly on the
plan, and his certification must be prominently displayed on the
plan as provided in Section 62-89.
(14)
Sec. 62-88 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-89
CHCT:628
Sec. 62-89. Surveyor's certificate. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-54; Ord.
No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
The survey plan required by this article must bear a certification by the
surveyor making the survey, to the effect that all data shown is correct and
properly indicated on the drawing. The certificate shall read as follows:
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
Date: _______________
I certify to the City of Biddeford, Maine, its agents and assigns, that I have
surveyed the street as shown on this plan; that the monuments as shown
on this plan are in place and correct to the best of my ability; and that
there are no encroachments across lines except as shown on this plan. I
further certify that I have taken tie-distances as required, and they are
accurately represented hereon. I further certify that this survey conforms
to the M.B.P.L.S. Standards.
Name of Surveyor
Maine Registration Number (SEAL)
Firm Name (if any)
Sec. 62-89.1. Professional engineer's certification. [Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
It is required that all drawings, which contain designed construction details,
have the stamp and signature of a professional engineer licensed in the
State of Maine.
Sec. 62-90. through Sec. 62-100. (Reserved)47
47.Editor's Note: Former Section 62-90, adopted by § 20-55 of Ord. No. 12-4-1991, which
contained provisions on application and recording, was repealed 2-4-2003 by Ord. No.
2003.16.
Sec. 62-89 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-90
CHCT:629

DIVISION 2
DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 62-101. General requirements. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-71;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
All new streets shall be designed consistent with requirements herein;
and any reconstruction or relocation of existing streets shall reflect the
minimum requirements as far as may be practical. The City Council, after
review and recommendation of the committee responsible for capital
projects, may accept a street to be a public way which does not meet the
requirements of this article. The Council may waive specific requirements of
this article if it is in the best interest of the public to do so, based upon the
recommendations of the engineer. Developers are cautioned to obtain such
waivers in advance of Council acceptance. In the case of a subdivision, the
Council waiver must be obtained prior to approval by the Planning Board.
For roads and driveways within Shoreland and Resource Protection Areas,
additional design standards apply to these projects. See Article XIV,
Shoreland Zoning, Section 15-H, for requirements.
In cases where a roadway is to be constructed that will be offered to the
City for acceptance as a public way and where such roadway will be used
to provide access to successive phases of development, the developer, upon
request for acceptance of the roadway as a public way, shall provide a
performance guarantee (letter of credit, insurance policy or cash account),
as surety for repair of damage to final paving and curbing, in an amount
equaling the cost of final paving and curbing times 150% times 5% per year
inflation factor.
Sec. 62-102. Minimum width of right-of-way. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-72; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
No street shall be designed with a right-of-way less than 50 feet in width.
Greater width shall be provided to accommodate such features as on-street
parking or surface drainage facilities. The land within the right-of-way of an
approved public road shall not be used to meet the area requirements of
any lot obtaining its frontage from the public road.
Sec. 62-103. Arrangement of features within right-of-way. [Ord. of
12-4-1991, § 20-73; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
The performance guarantee shall be for an initial term of five years and
shall be renewed as required. The performance guarantee shall remain
in effect until 75% of the lots in the successive phases served by such a
road receive occupancy permits. The Director of Public Works with the
assistance of the Engineering Department shall review the condition
of the roadway prior to the release of the performance guarantee and
will make the determination of the cost to repair any deficiencies. The
repair shall be done by the developer to the satisfaction of the City prior
to any release of the performance guarantee.
(1)
Sec. 62-101 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-103
CHCT:631
Sec. 62-104. Intersections. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-74; Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sec. 62-105. Curves and deflections. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-75;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Subsurface utility conduits shall be located so as to minimize conflicts
and interference with one another, both in the original construction and
in future maintenance. The standards of the department of engineering
shall be adhered to in design, and the Director shall condition all street
opening permits to promote those standards.
(a)
Aboveground features shall be located as delineated herein, to provide
for a minimum of mutual interference. In general, traffic control devices
shall be located behind the curb within the esplanade; utility poles,
trees and other plantings may be within the esplanade or at the rear of
the sidewalk, provided they are not underneath any overhead wires or
over any subsurface conduits and do not block any line-of-sight required
elsewhere in this chapter. Hydrants shall be located to the rear of
the sidewalk unless circumstances demand an alternate location, as
determined by the Chief of the Fire Department, or his/her designee.
(b)
Minimum angle. In general, right angle (ninety-degree) intersections
are preferred, but a variation of up to 15° either way may be permitted.
(a)
Curb radius. Intersecting curblines (or edge of pavement, if there are
no curbs) shall be cut back to a radius of not less than 25 feet (9.0 m).
The right-of-way line shall also be a radius of sufficient length to assure
no narrowing of the sidewalk and/or esplanade of the narrower street.
(b)
Separation of adjacent intersections. The intersection of a minor street
with any major street shall be separated from all other such
intersections by at least 200 feet (61 m) as measured along the center
line of the major street. This condition shall apply if the two successive
intersections are on the same side of the major road. For intersecting
streets on opposite sides of the major street, the intersections shall be
horizontally spaced either less than 25 feet apart or more than 200 feet
apart. Horizontal projection shall be based on the distance between the
center lines of the intersecting roads with the major road, starting from
a point 100 feet back from the intersection with the major road and
drawing a line along the center line of the road that intersects with the
major roads center line. In all cases, it is encouraged that the travel
lane portion of the minor road entering on to the major street should be
at a 90° for a minimum of one car length, or 20 feet.
(c)
Block length. In subdivisions and other planned developments, the
street pattern shall be such that blocks shall be at least 600 feet (180
m) long, but no more than 1,200 feet (360 m).
(d)
All changes in direction of streets shall be accomplished by the use of
appropriate curves, rather than by abrupt deflections. The degree of
(a)
Sec. 62-103 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-105
CHCT:632
Sec. 62-106. Dead-end streets. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-76; Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
The design of streets shall provide for future continuation of existing
streets, and proper projection onto adjacent lands, so as to provide for
continuous, through streets upon ultimate development. Every effort shall
be made in the design stage to avoid alignments which cannot be extended
in the future.
curvature shall be sufficient to ensure adequate sight distance for the
design speed of the street, but in no case shall the road's center-line
radius be less than those shown in Table A, Section 62-126, except for
corner radii at intersections and at culs-de-sac or other turnarounds.
No two curves of reverse alignment shall be contiguous, but shall have
a straight portion (i.e., tangent) of street interposed. The length of such
tangents shall not be less than those values shown in Table A, Section
62-126.
(b)
If a dead-end street is necessary, either permanently or temporarily,
a suitable turnaround shall be provided at the closed end. A turning
circle shall have an island in the center that is sized to allow two full
traffic lanes to encircle it. The minimum radius of such an island shall
be 65 feet, the outer pavement edge shall have a minimum radius of 91
feet, and the right-of-way shall have a minimum radius of 105 feet. Any
plantings or other objects within an island shall not restrict visibility
across the entire island.
(1)
Turnaround: A hammerhead or "T" turnaround shall be constructed
to comply with the applicable standards of this section, and the
perpendicular cross piece of the "T" shall have the same width as its
associated road, and shall extend a minimum of 40 feet to either side of
the center line of the dead-end street. The cross piece of the "T" shall
be located within a fifty-foot wide right-of-way that shall extend at least
20 feet beyond the ends of the pavement. No lot may be accessed from
either ends of a hammerhead or a "T" turnaround.
(2)
Dead-end streets in the RF Zone only: A dead-end street shall not
exceed in length a distance of 1,500 feet, as measured along the
proposed street center line, from the end of the dead end road to the
outside edge of the traveled way of the nearest intersecting through
road. Exceptions to the maximum dead-end lengths:
If an applicant can demonstrate (through a master plan) that the
street will be connected to create a through street in future
development, the Planning Board may allow dead-end lengths to
temporarily exceed 1,500 feet.
a.
If a road loops back on to itself (i.e. lollipop or p-shaped), it may
exceed the standards above, provided that the point at which the
b.
(3)
Sec. 62-105 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-106
CHCT:633
Sec. 62-107. Grades, minimum and maximum. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-77; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Grades of all streets shall be held to a reasonable minimum, but in no
case less than 1% or greater than 8%. Additionally, within 75 feet of an
intersection, the road grade shall be no greater than 3%.
Exception to the maximum road grade — For minor residential roads only:
Sec. 62-108. Drainage. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-78; Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
The proper drainage of stormwater within the right-of-way of any street
is influenced by the following features: roadway crown, gutters and curbs,
culverts and ditches, catch basins and subsurface storm drains; and all
such features shall be designed to function together to effect a smooth
and efficient removal of stormwater from the travel lanes of the street.
In general, urban areas will be drained by subsurface facilities, whereas
surface drainage facilities usually will be satisfactory in non-urban areas.
road loops back onto itself as measured from the beginning of the
dead-end road is not more than 1,500 feet.
When a temporary turnaround of whatever design is provided, the
plans shall clearly indicate the limits of the easements for roadway
purposes, and the dimensions of those easements, so as to eliminate
any uncertainties at such time as the street shall be continued, as to
which portion of the easements, if any, are to revert to specific abutting
properties.
(4)
Roads with slopes greater than 8% (up to a maximum of 14%) have
to increase the level off distance by 25 feet for each percent over 8%
coming into intersections.
(1)
Open drainage, where used, will be by trapezoidal ditches running
approximately parallel to the roadway, together with culverts under the
road at appropriate locations, and culverts under all driveways and side
streets. Both culverts and ditches shall be designed to accommodate a
twenty-five-year storm, using the Manning formula. Culvert ends shall
be protected by masonry headwalls or other suitable method, and shall
discharge into a riprap protected area with a plunge pool, or other
approved method. Maximum culvert side slopes shall be 33% (1:3), and
shall be stabilized with grass or any other method allowed in Section
62-132. Ultimate discharge shall be into a receiving body having ample
capacity to accommodate the added volume of water.
(1)
Subsurface drainage will be used on all streets having curbed gutters.
Catch basins or curb-inlets will be located at the uphill side of any
intersecting streets or as directed by the engineer; otherwise, basins
shall be placed at intervals so that a twenty-five-year storm will not
cause ponding greater than 50% of the total crown of the roadway, nor
(2)
Sec. 62-106 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-108
CHCT:634
Sec. 62-109. Roadway features. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-79; Ord.
No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
The roadway portion of a street layout shall consist of those features which
serve to support, channel or restrict the vehicles using the street. It includes
the pavement and its base material, curbs, guardrails, medians, shoulders,
access ramps and driveway aprons. (Note: See Section 62-126, Table A, for
minimum roadway construction standards.)
velocities greater than 500 feet per minute in the gutters. Pipes shall
be no smaller than 12 inches in diameter, and shall have a minimum of
four feet (1.2 m) of cover over the crown of the pipe. If conditions do
not allow for the required four feet of earth cover, a blanket of approved
insulation material may be placed over the pipe to compensate; the
width of such insulation shall be equal to three times the nominal pipe
diameter. In no case shall the earth cover be less than two feet.
If the maximum water table is within 18 inches of the ground and if
ditches can not be used, an underdrain system shall be installed and
discharged in a positive manner to appropriate open or closed system.
A note shall be placed on the plan that if evidence of the water table
is discovered during the inspection process the engineer may require
underdrain to be installed. Follow underdrain specifications in MDOT
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, most recent edition.
(3)
Stormwater management. In order to preserve nonurban natural
resources and keep construction costs down, the City of Biddeford will
require the developer to implement a stormwater management plan
utilizing low-impact water collection structures.
For roads servicing five or less lots or roads located within a
cluster subdivision, vegetative buffers and swales shall be utilized.
However, if there are extenuating circumstances that do not afford
the use of vegetative structures (land slope, wetland protection,
neighboring properties, etc.), and the applicant's engineer has
proven that there are no other reasonable alternatives, the
engineer will work with the applicant to determine the best means
of stormwater management.
a.
For roads serving greater than five lots, subsurface stormwater
drainage may be used, although if feasible, vegetative (surface)
structures should be incorporated.
Refer to "Private Ways and Roads Standards (Section 51) in the
Performance Standards (Article VI) for details on vegetative
drainage systems under Stormwater Management for
Subdivisions.
b.
(4)
Travel lanes: Lane width for City streets shall not be less than those
values shown in Section 62-126, Table A. The shoulders must be a
(1)
Sec. 62-108 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-109
CHCT:635
Sec. 62-110. Sidewalks. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-80; Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
minimum of two feet on each side. If a curb or berm is installed, the
travel lane shall be a minimum of 13 feet in width.
For minor residential streets in the RF Zone, the travel lane width shall
be a minimum of 10 feet with two-foot gravel shoulders at each side
and no curbing. If curbing is technically necessary, as determined by
the engineer, for a RF Zone minor residential street, then the street
must comply with the City street standards previously stated.
Parking lanes: When provision is made for parallel parking along the
side of any street, the parking lane shall be at least 7 1/2 feet (2.3 m)
in width. An eight-foot paved shoulder may be designated and used for
parking, consistent with other ordinances.
(2)
Medians: If a median is desired to separate traffic lanes, it shall be
no less than four feet (1.22 m) in width (except for temporary traffic
dividers used during construction operations). If a median is used to
channelize traffic at intersections, it shall be no less than one-foot
wide. Medians may be raised above the travel surface, in which case
mountable edgings set no more than 45° from horizontal shall be used,
and the material behind the edging shall also be graded to a slope
no greater than 10% Depressed medians shall have paved shoulders
next to the travel lanes, paved and graded no steeper than 2% for
at least four feet (1.22 m), and material within the median to be
graded no steeper than 10%. Medians may accommodate plantings,
drainage features, informational or directional signs, or other traffic
control devices provided they conform to the standards of the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices of the U.S. Department of
Transportation. These standards shall apply to islands at culs-de-sac.
(3)
Curbs, berms and edgings. Provision of curbs, berms and pavement
edgings will depend in large measure upon the drainage chosen (i.e.,
open or subsurface), Materials normally used will be granite, cement
concrete or bituminous concrete, although other materials will be
considered. Curbs will be vertical, or within 10° of vertical, when
placed between traffic lanes and pedestrian sidewalks, unless there
are alternate provisions for pedestrian safety. Mountable edging may
be used elsewhere. When sidewalk is rebuilt, the existing granite or
bituminous curbing shall be replaced with like material or better.
(4)
Future extension/expansion. Any road that is extended as results in
further development thereby increasing traffic may have its
classification changed by the Director. This would require the road to be
upgraded to the road design criteria stated in Section 62-126. Neither
building permits nor road acceptance may be granted before the road
upgrade is complete, unless a performance bond for 150% of the entire
road build out is posted, or the Planning Board selects as optional these
roadway upgrade requirements.
(5)
Sec. 62-109 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-110
CHCT:636
Sec. 62-111. Driveway aprons and curb cuts. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-81; Ord. of 8-4-1998(7); Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003; Ord. No.
2005.95, 10-4-2005]
Construction and maintenance of curb cuts and driveway aprons are
normally the responsibility of the owner of the property served, although
legally a part of the public way. All such features shall be constructed only
with a valid permit from the Director as provided in Section 62-171.
Required. Adequate allowance shall be made for safe and convenient
pedestrian traffic, either actual or anticipated. Minimum provision for
pedestrians shall be an all-weather sidewalk on one side of a street, at
least five feet (1.5 m) wide. See Section 62-134, constructing sidewalks,
for construction details.
(a)
Curb ramps. Appropriate ramps sloped no greater than one inch of
height per foot of horizontal distance (8.33%) shall be used at all
locations where a pedestrian sidewalk must cross a curbline to meet a
crosswalk, whether at a street intersection or at a midblock location.
Ramps shall not feather in to the roadway surface, but shall have
a vertical termination approximately 1/4 inch to 3/8 inch in height,
aligned with the normal curbline. Ramped surface shall be broomed or
scored to provide a reasonably nonskid surface, and shall contrast in
texture with the normal surface of the sidewalk and roadway.
(b)
Curb cuts will be equal to the allowable width of the driveway apron
plus a radius on each side: a driveway radius shall be at least two feet
but no more than 12 feet, and in no case shall the radius exceed the
width of the esplanade.
(1)
The width of the driveway apron between the curbline and the property
line will be limited according to the type of use intended, and in
conformance with the following schedule:
Type I-A: Residential use; a single-family residence or a duplex
structure. Driveways up to 24 feet may be allowed by the Director
for public safety reason, provided a written request is submitted
to the Director for approval. Note: Duplex dwellings may have
separate twelve-foot driveways for each unit provided that they are
on opposite sides of the structure and are not interconnected.
a.
Type I-B: Residential use; multifamily building with off-street
parking facility and driveway for two-way travel (16 feet), unless
otherwise approved by the Director for a width not to exceed 24
feet. Applicant must submit request in writing to the Director.
b.
Type II-A: Business use; non-highway related uses with a single
drive (20 feet) for both entrance and exit to/from off-street parking
areas for use by customers and employees and light delivery
vehicles, unless otherwise approved by the Director for a width not
c.
(2)
Sec. 62-110 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-111
CHCT:637
to exceed 24 feet. Applicant must submit request in writing to the
Director.
Type II-B: Alternate to Type II-A for separate entrance and exit
drives to parking area. Width, 16 feet; minimum separation, 32
feet.
d.
Type II-C: (Note: "Highway related use" shall mean businesses
engaged in selling, leasing or servicing motor vehicles, or parts or
accessories thereof, which normally requires that the motor vehicle
be located at the business site.) Business use; highway related
uses having a single drive for both entrance and exit to off-street
parking, for use by both customers and employees and by delivery
vehicles (24 feet).
e.
Type II-D: Alternate to Type II-C for parking areas having separate
entrance and exit driveways. Width, 16 feet; minimum separation,
32 feet.
f.
Type III-A: (Note: Industrial sites may have automobile parking for
employees and visitors separated from the truck parking or loading
areas, in which case, the Type I-B or II-A provisions shall apply
to the autos.) Industrial driveways for large trucks, buses or other
motorized equipment, having a single driveway, 40 feet wide, for
both entrance and exit to off-street parking and/or loading areas,
or similar.
g.
Type III-B: Alternate to Type III-A for separate entrance and exit
driveways to/from off-street parking/loading areas. Width of drives,
24 feet; minimum separation, 48 feet.
h.
Driveway aprons shall be located no closer to the side line of the lot
served (or extension thereof at right angles to the front property line)
than the allowable width of the driveway given in Subsection (2) of
this section. Spacing between adjacent driveways will be equal to the
combined width of the driveways, as given above.
(3)
Driveway aprons shall be located no closer to an intersection than 25
feet. No driveways may be located within any intersection.
(4)
Driveways to corner lots, or through lots shall gain access from the
street of lower classification when a lot is bounded by streets of two
different classifications. The restriction shall appear as a note on the
plan and as a deed restriction. Also, the lots legal frontage shall be
determined by this requirement. In extenuation circumstances where
this requirement creates a hardship for the landowner, the Planning
Board can work with a landowner to determine the best location for the
structure.
(5)
The driveway ramp shall lie completely between the gutter line and the
inner edge of the sidewalk (the edge nearest the center of the street)
where a sidewalk exists. In the case of an esplanade too narrow to
(6)
Sec. 62-111 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-111
CHCT:638
Sec. 62-112. Esplanades and plantings. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-82;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Normally, the portion of the street right-of-way lying between the curb and
the sidewalk (or the curb and the limit of the right-of-way in the case of
no sidewalk) is designated the esplanade, and is devoted principally to
grass or other ground cover. This area is also used to locate utility poles,
fire hydrants, traffic signs, and sometimes trees. However, anything, either
natural or artificial, which would significantly reduce the visibility of drivers
and pedestrians should be removed or relocated. Shrubs, advertising signs
(especially temporary, moveable signs) and the like are not permissible
except to the rear of the sidewalk. Likewise, trees which have branches
overhanging the sidewalk or esplanade must be trimmed to a height of eight
feet above the sidewalk or esplanade. Esplanades are normally graded to a
1% or 2% pitch toward the street, but in exceptional cases, may be steeper
if allowed by the Director.
Sec. 62-113. Street signs and lighting. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-83;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
accommodate a ramp of reasonable flatness, the sidewalk grade may
have to be lowered in order to meet the above condition. In all cases,
alterations must be by permit from the Director.
In the event of a change in the use of a driveway, a permit must be
obtained to enlarge a drive; and if the new use requires a narrower
drive, the Director may order the alteration at the expense of the
property owner.
(7)
In the event of any construction by the City disturbing or destroying
an existing driveway apron, the City will construct a new, conforming
apron at no cost to the property owner, but the responsibility for
maintaining it will remain with the owner.
(8)
If a driveway is discontinued, it shall be the responsibility of the
property owner to remove the driveway apron, and to replace the curb
in a manner satisfactory to the Director. If the property owner fails to
accomplish this removal, the City may elect to do the work, and charge
the cost to the property owner.
(9)
The Public Works Director, City Engineer and City Planner may waive
any of the above criteria providing they agree to such a waiver
unanimously, granting the waiver would serve a useful purpose, and
it does not adversely impact traffic flow and safety or create undue
adverse impacts on abutting properties. Appeals of the decision to
grant, grant with conditions, or deny the waiver shall be taken directly
to the City Council.
(10)
Signs shall be placed at the beginning and ending of every street, and at
such intermediate points as shall be required by the Director, indicating
(a)
Sec. 62-111 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-113
CHCT:639
Sec. 62-114. Sight distance. [Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sight distance is the length of approaching roadway, which is visible to the
driver.
Stopping sight distance in the sum of the distance traveled during driver
perception/reaction time (2 1/2 seconds) and the distance traveled while
braking to a stop. The measurement is from the driver's eye 3 1/2 feet above
the pavement to a six-inch height of object. Table 62-114-1 lists the design
guidelines for stopping sight distances at various speeds. Table is based
on 10 feet of sight distance for every mile per hour. In no case shall the
minimum sight distances be less than the MDOT Highway Design Guide
requirements.
Table 62-114-1
Stopping Sight Distance
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Sight Distance
(feet)
15 150
25 250
30 300
35 350
40 400
45 450
50 500
the name of the street. Such signs shall conform to the requirements of
Section 62-84.
Adequate lighting shall be provided on all streets. The number and
location of all streetlights shall be installed according to the following
guidelines: in urban areas, the lights shall be located at all intersections
and on every other telephone pole, in non-urban areas light shall be
located at all intersections and to service three homes. For overhead
power, type and size of streetlights to be determined by public works. If
underground power is used, the applicant needs to coordinate with the
engineering department for City standard light fixtures and poles.
These current guidelines may be reviewed on a case-by-case basis
by the committee responsible for capital projects if extenuating
circumstances exist. A plan showing all of the above details shall be
furnished for the committee responsible for capital projects approval
prior to installation.
(b)
The Planning Board shall review project from a planning point of view,
while the committee responsible for capital projects shall review
projects from an operations point of view.
(c)
Sec. 62-113 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-114
CHCT:640
Table 62-114-1
Stopping Sight Distance
Design Speed
(miles per hour)
Sight Distance
(feet)
55 550
Intersections at grade sight distance: Any intersection street or road shall
be so designed in profile and grading to provide minimum sight distances
measured in each direction. The height of eye of the driver is 3 1/2 feet and
the height of object (an approaching car) is 4 1/4 feet. This section is based
on Chapter 8 of the Maine DOT Highway Design Guide. Refer to the most
recent version of this manual for sight distance requirements for various
intersections.
Sec. 62-115. Soil conditions. [Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
The owner may be required to investigate and determine the types and
classifications of the subsurface soils, which shall be considered in the
design of the proposed street(s). If in the opinion of the engineer, unsuitable
subsurface soils are encountered during construction, the owner shall be
required to excavate and remove the unsuitable material and replace it
with suitable granular material at the expense of the owner, or the owner's
engineer may provide an alternative means to deal with the poor soils. (See
Section 62-129)
Sec. 62-116. through Sec. 62-125. (Reserved)
Sec. 62-114 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-116
CHCT:641

DIVISION 3
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
Sec. 62-126. Purpose; state specifications; design requirements
generally. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-91; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sec. 62-127. Clearing and grubbing. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-92;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Clearing and grubbing is a necessary first step in the construction of
a street, and must be accomplished thoroughly, whether the location is
across undeveloped terrain or across areas previously paved or built upon,
demolished and leveled. It is most important to remove all material which
The standards set out in this division for the construction of streets in
the City are promulgated to ensure that the streets will provide the
traveling public with safe and convenient passage, both pedestrian and
vehicular; and concurrently, to provide the City with facilities which will
be a long-lasting asset, requiring only nominal maintenance.
(a)
Generally, the provisions of Division 200, Earthwork, of the latest
edition of the State of Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges shall be followed in the
construction of new streets in the City, whether in subdivisions in
accordance with plans approved by the Planning Board or other streets
which are to be traversed by the public. All subsequent references to
the above mentioned state specifications shall be to the most recent
edition of that publication. All streets to be built or rebuilt shall be
designed by a registered professional engineer, and the design is to be
approved by the engineer prior to the commencement of construction.
(b)
Definitions for urban and nonurban areas within the City of Biddeford.
Urban area: Generally, the area bounded by the following landmarks
will be considered the urban area for City of Biddeford Public Roadway
Requirements. To the West: The Maine Turnpike to its intersection
with Alfred Road and then Alfred Road to the Arundel Border, to the
South: The Arundel Border, to the East: A northeasterly line from the
Arundel Border to the West Brook branch nearest to Granite Street
Extension and then following West Brook to the Saco River, to the
North: The Saco River,
Non-urban area: Generally, all areas outside the border of the urban
area.
The Director may change a streets urban/non-urban classification if it
is in the best interest of the City to do so.
The Director shall determine road classification of any street category
not listed in Table A.48
(c)
48.Editor's Note: Table A is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 62-126 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-127
CHCT:643
could be detrimental to the structural integrity of the roadway, and its
consequent long life. In general, the provisions of Section 201 of the State
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Highways and
Bridges will be followed for all right-of-way clearing.
Sec. 62-128. Subsurface utilities. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-93; Ord.
No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Width, depth and contour. The entire area within the roadway lines
shall be cleared of all vegetation and other material unsuitable for a
base, unless specifically excepted [see Subsection (2) of this section]
All stumps and roots shall be grubbed out completely, and all topsoil,
peat and muck shall be excavated to whatever depth is required to
produce a firm and solid base for the roadway structure, and rock shall
be removed to the depth indicated on the approved plan, or as specified
in Table A, Section 62-126, whichever is greater.
(1)
Exceptions for certain trees, etc. If clearly shown on the approved plan,
or if agreed to in advance by the engineer and marked appropriately,
certain trees which are good, healthy plants of pleasing shape may
be exempt from the clearing provision of the previous subsection.
In allowing such exceptions, the engineer will consider all possible
interference by such trees, their root systems, branches and shed
leaves with the full use of the traveled portion of the street, the
sidewalks, sewers and drainage systems thereof, both present and
future, to the fullest extent possible.
(2)
Generally. All subsurface utility conduits shall be installed at the
location and depth shown on the approved plan, or as specified in
writing by the engineer. Any deviations from planned locations made
necessary by unforeseen subsurface conditions must be approved by
the engineer.
(a)
Excavation and backfilling. No excavations may be made in any rightof-
way without proper permits from the Director as provided in Section
62-171 et seq. Excavations in a paved portion of any street, sidewalk
or public parking lot shall not commence until the paved surface has
been cut with an approved type of pavement cutter completely around
the area to be excavated; or in the case of a trench for a pipeline, both
sides of the proposed trench shall be cut on parallel lines. Excavated
material shall be loaded onto trucks and hauled away to an approved
dump site, unless specific written permission has been granted by the
Director to use the material for backfill. Such permission, if granted,
shall be granted on the condition that an inspector from the City be at
the site during all backfilling operations; the contractor to pay the sum
of $50 for each hour or part thereof that the inspector is at the site.
Excavated material may not be stockpiled on the paved portion of the
street overnight, and may be so stockpiled on the unpaved portion of
the street only by specific, written permission of the Director and for
less than 14 days without using temporary erosion control measures.
All excavation and backfilling shall be generally in accordance with
(b)
Sec. 62-127 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-128
CHCT:644
the provisions of Section 206 of the state's Standard Specifications for
Highways and Bridges, latest edition.
Backfilling shall be accomplished using clean, reasonably dry bankrun
gravel, having no stones larger than four inches maximum dimension.
Material shall be placed in the excavation in lifts not exceeding six
inches uncompacted depth, and shall be well compacted using
appropriate vibratory compactors before placing the next lift. When
placing the first few lifts of backfill material around a pipeline or other
cylindrical conduit, extreme care shall be taken to assure that the
gravel surrounds the pipe completely, and that no voids are allowed to
remain under the pipe barrel.
Backfilling shall continue in six-inch lifts all the way up to final grade,
except that in areas which are not paved, and upon which no vehicular
travel is normally expected, the engineer may allow deeper lifts to be
used, but in no case shall the lifts exceed 12 inches in depth.
Sewers and drains. (Refer to Chapter 70, Utilities, of this Code for
additional requirements for sewer and drains.)
When laying sewer or drainage pipelines, proper attention shall be
given to the design grade and alignment of the pipeline. The use
of a laser alignment device is strongly recommended, and shall be
used in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. If a
builder's level is utilized for individual sections of pipe, the grade
shall be checked with a surveyor's level every five sections of pipe,
or every 50 feet, whichever is the lesser distance. Once in proper
position, each section of pipe shall have approved backfill material
placed under its entire length, and the grade checked again, before
proceeding to place the next section.
(1)
Sewer and drainage structures (i.e., manholes) shall be of precast
concrete material for all new construction. The base sections shall
have openings located at the proper elevation and with proper
orientation as indicated by the approved plans; and the openings
shall provide for rubber-ring gaskets to provide the seal between
the pipe and the structure.
All storm drain manholes must have sumps, and all sewer
manholes to have smooth inverts.
If openings in the wall of the structure must be created on-site, the
openings shall be cut using a masonry saw guided by a pilot-hole
(cored) or other approved positioning device. In no case shall the
opening be created by a hammer or chisel, or other nonprecision
instrument. In any case of doubt, the engineer shall determine the
acceptable method to be used. In addition, rubber boots shall be
installed in all openings.
(2)
(c)
Sec. 62-128 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-128
CHCT:645
Sec. 62-129. Excavation and embankment. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-94; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Testing—All sanitary sewers shall be tested using air pressure
tests and must pass the standards given by the City engineering
office. Sewer manholes shall be vacuum tested and must pass City
standards, unless otherwise approved by the engineer. Applicant
shall provide evidence that all boots are securely fastened to the
pipe. All testing results must be submitted to the City engineering
office for approval.
Water and gas lines. Alignment of these subsurface conduits shall be
as indicated on the approved plan, or as agreed to by the engineer.
If these utilities are located within the traveled portion of the street,
the excavation and backfilling requirements specified in this section for
sewers and drains shall be adhered to. If, however, these are located
off of the traveled way, then the engineer may allow less strict
requirements for backfilling and compaction. Such variance shall be
obtained beforehand, in writing.
If nonferrous material is used for water or gas pipes, the contractor
shall place a conductive material in the trench between the pipe
and the surface, to allow detection of the buried pipe with magnetic
locators. In addition, the pipe shall be identified by a brightly colored
flagging laid in the trench above the pipe. This may be combined with
the conductive material required above, if desired.
(d)
Electric, telephone or TV cable conduits. When these utility lines are
installed underground, they shall be located as shown on the approved
plans, or as directed or allowed by the engineer. These utilities shall not
be located beneath the traveled portion of the street except for lateral
connections crossing at approximately right angles to the center line
of the street. As required in this section for water and gas lines, these
conduits shall be identified both visually and magnetically for ready
identification by the City or contractors working in the area.
(e)
Generally. The provisions of Section 203 of the state's Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges shall be followed for roadway
excavation and the placement of fill material where necessary to meet
the requirement of the subgrade elevation shown on the plans (i.e., the
design grade of the finished road, less the total depth shown in Table A,
Section 62-126).
(a)
Quality of material. All unsuitable subgrade material shall be removed
and shall be replaced by clean, bankrun gravel approved for use by
the engineer, or material meeting the requirements of Sections 703.19
or 703.20 of the State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Highways and Bridges. Material shall be compacted
to 95% of maximum density as specified by Section 304.04 of such
specifications. Before the base material is spread, the subgrade shall
(b)
Sec. 62-128 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-129
CHCT:646
Sec. 62-130. Roadway gravel specifications. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-95; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sec. 62-131. Paving. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-96; Ord. No. 2003.16,
2-4-2003]
be shaped to a true surface conforming to the proposed cross-section of
the road, and shall be compacted as required in this section.
Placement and compaction. All approved fill material used for road
base gravel, shoulders or side slopes shall be placed in layers without
segregation of particle size, to such loose depth that when compacted
the layer will have a maximum thickness of six inches. Each layer of
aggregate shall be placed over the full width of the section of roadway.
Each layer shall be compacted separately until a uniform surface is
obtained, conforming to the lines and grades of the plan, or as directed
by the engineer. Each layer shall be maintained during subsequent
compaction in such a manner as to produce a uniform texture, and such
that the aggregate is firmly keyed. Extra care shall be taken on slopes,
that the layer of fill is reasonably consistent in depth and conforms
to the required slope before compaction. Compaction shall begin at
the toe of the slope and shall proceed parallel to the slope, gradually
working upward to the top of the slope, to preserve the uniformity
of the layers as much as possible. Compaction shall be achieved by
mechanical means except on very small areas where hand-tamping may
be approved. Equipment used shall be suitable for the type of soil being
compacted (see Section 203.11 of the Maine DOT specifications). Rock
embankments (Section 203.15 of the state specifications) shall not be
used except as specifically permitted, and no frozen material shall be
used for fill purposes (Section 203.16 of the state specifications). Soil
shall be tested according to Section 62-137 or other suitable method.
Crushed material shall be spread as indicated above, except for
thickness of the layer. No materials shall be added to the crushed
gravel in order to obtain compaction, unless specifically allowed by the
engineer. No water shall be added unless approved.
(c)
Material for roadway base shall consist of a mixture of sand and gravel
consisting of clean, hard, durable particles which are free from organic
matter, lumps, balls of clay, and other deleterious material. The
graduation shall conform to the following: 100% to pass three inch
sieve; 70% to pass one-fourth-inch sieve; 30% to pass No. 40 sieve; 5%
or less to pass No. 200 sieve (equivalent to MDOT Type D).
(a)
Crushed gravel shall be placed as the topmost layer of the roadway
gravel. The gradation of the crushed material shall be: 100% shall pass
a three-fourths-inch sieve; 45% to 70% shall pass a one-half-inch sieve;
30% to 55% shall pass a one-fourth-inch sieve; 0% to 20% shall pass a
No. 40 sieve; 5% or less shall pass a No. 200 sieve (equivalent to MDOT
Type A).
(b)
Sec. 62-129 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-131
CHCT:647
Sec. 62-132. Grading, drainage and side slopes. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-97; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Materials. All roadway pavements will be plant-mix bituminousconcrete,
in general conformity with Division 400 of the state
specifications for highways and bridges. Specifically, the provisions of
Sections 401.02 through 401.06, inclusive, of such specifications shall
be followed in selecting the components of the mix. See Table A in
Section 62-126 for pavement requirements.
(a)
Methods. The provisions of the state specifications for highways and
bridges shall be observed closely, and the methods therein specified
(Division 400) shall be followed.
(b)
Existing pavement. Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the
existing pavement shall be saw cut along a straight line to form a neat,
even, vertical joint. A tack coat shall be applied to all joints prior to
placement of new pavement.
(c)
Surface coat. The surface coat shall not be placed sooner than one
year after the base coat has been placed unless the engineering office
considers this acceptable or a maintenance guarantee for 150% of the
roadway construction costs is posted for a period of at least one year
after the surface coat is placed.
(d)
Culverts and headwalls.
Culverts generally shall be installed consistent with the provisions
of Section 62-128. All culverts shall be laid to the line and grade
as indicated on the approved plans, and any deviation therefrom
required by unforeseen subsurface conditions must be approved
in advance by the engineer. Culvert pipes shall be installed as
recommended by the manufacturer, consistent with the type of
material being used. Bedding for culverts, especially those of
flexible materials, shall be carefully prepared, graded and
compacted; and special care shall be taken during backfilling to
assure proper support under the lower half of the pipe.
(1)
Headwalls, including wingwalls if required, shall be constructed
at both ends of culverts under all streets and roadways, for the
purpose of support and containment of embankments above and
around the culverts. Materials for headwalls may be varied
depending upon conditions: cement concrete, bituminous concrete,
steel sheets or plate, riprap of stone, wood, cement, or other
material may be used if approved. Aprons shall be used at the
outfall of most culverts, unless natural conditions will provide
similar protection from scouring of the streambed. Material of
aprons will normally be the same as the headwall.
(2)
(a)
Sec. 62-131 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-132
CHCT:648
Sec. 62-133. Setting curbs, berms and edgings. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-98; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sec. 62-134. Constructing sidewalks. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-99;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Paved swales. Swales or ditches for conveying stormwater, whether
parallel to a roadway or perpendicular thereto, shall be protected from
scouring if anticipated velocities exceed the following:
Two feet per second in uncompacted sand, silt, fine gravel or soft
clay.
(1)
Four feet per second in undisturbed or well-compacted medium or
coarse gravel.
(2)
Five feet per second in stiff clay, shales or hardpan, cobbles or
shingles.
Swales may be paved with bituminous concrete, cement concrete,
bricks, natural stone or other approved material, so long as the
material serves to protect both the bottom and the sides of the
swale from scouring and erosion, to the depth anticipated from a
ten-year storm.
(3)
(b)
Easements. Wherever roadway drainage is to be located within an
easement across private property (see Section 62-108), care shall be
taken to construct the drainage swale between the limits of such
easement, to avoid future problems of encroachment.
(c)
Preformed curbs or edgings of granite or concrete shall be placed to
true line and grade [see Section 62-109(4)], supported by a base of
properly compacted crushed gravel, as specified on the plans. Care
shall be taken to align abutting ends to minimize the width of the
joint. Joints shall be finished using a mortar of comparable color to the
stones. Bedding, both behind the stones as well as on the street side,
shall be of crushed gravel, well compacted up to the subgrade indicated
on the plans, leaving sufficient depth to place loam to the rear of the
stones and pavement to the fore.
(a)
Cast-in-place edgings shall be of two types: cement concrete poured
into prefabricated forms, or cement concrete or bituminous concrete
extruded through a slip-form device. In either case, care shall be taken
to assure proper line and grade of the completed edging. Extruded
edging shall be placed on a prepared base, usually the base course
of the roadway pavement, which shall have been laid extra width to
accommodate the proposed edging. Placement of extruded edging upon
the finish course of the roadway pavement shall be avoided, unless a
key or other device has been placed which will inhibit slipping of the
completed edging.
(b)
(a) Bituminous sidewalks:
Sec. 62-132 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-134
CHCT:649
Excavation shall be made for the full width of the designed
sidewalk, and to a depth below the design grade equal to the
combined thickness of the bituminous paving and the specified
gravel base. Any soft or yielding material lying below this grade
shall be removed and replaced with common borrow and
compacted.
(1)
Gravel base shall be placed in lifts not exceeding six inches, and
compacted thoroughly before placing the subsequent lift. Final lift
shall be graded to the design grade, less the thickness of pavement
to be laid.
(2)
Bituminous material shall meet the requirements of Section 403
of the Department of Transportation specifications, and shall be
machine-laid on the compacted base course in two courses to
provide the required depth when rolled. Compaction shall be by a
power roller having a minimum total weight of 2,000 pounds and
a maximum width of 30 inches. A vibratory compaction device may
be used if approved in advance by the City engineer. Hand tamping
is permitted for areas inaccessible to the power compactors.
(3)
Cement concrete sidewalks:
Excavation for cement concrete sidewalks shall be made as
indicated in Subsection (a)(1) of this section for bituminous
sidewalks, and shall be to the depth and width that will permit the
installation and bracing of the forms.
(1)
Forms shall be of wood, metal or other approved material, and shall
extend for the full depth of the concrete. All forms shall be true,
free from warp and of sufficient strength to resist the pressure
of the concrete without springing. Bracing and staking of forms
shall be such that the forms remain in both horizontal and vertical
alignment until their removal. Forms shall not be removed until
slabs have cured for at least 24 hours.
(2)
Immediately before placing concrete, the foundation shall be
thoroughly moistened. The proportioning, mixing and placing of
the concrete shall be in accordance with the requirements of
Section 502 of the Maine DOT Standard Specifications for
Highways and Bridges.
(3)
After placing, the surface shall be finished with a wood float which
shall be moved in a circular motion to produce a shell-like pattern.
No plastering of the surface with mortar will be permitted. All
outside edges of the slab and all joints shall be rounded with a onefourth-
inch radius edging tool.
(4)
Joints shall be located as shown on the plans. Slabs shall be placed
alternately and the joints coated with an approved bituminous
material before placing the adjacent slab. When a concrete
sidewalk is constructed adjacent to a curb, building, retaining wall
(5)
(b)
Sec. 62-134 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-134
CHCT:650
Sec. 62-135. Monuments. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-100; Ord. No.
2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Sec. 62-136. Landscaping and planting. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-101; Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
All portions of a street which are not paved shall be landscaped in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 615 through 622, inclusive, of
the Maine DOT Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges.
or other fixed structure, a one-fourth-inch-thick preformed joint
filler shall be used between the slab and the structure.
The concrete shall be cured for at least 72 hours. Curing shall be
by moist burlap or mats, white pigmented curing compound, or by
other approved methods. During the curing period, all traffic, both
pedestrian and vehicular, shall be excluded. Vehicular traffic shall
be excluded for such additional time as may be directed.
(6)
In general, monuments are to be located and set as indicated in Section
62-87. They shall be placed in a vertical position in excavated holes,
and at depths appropriate to the surroundings. Roadway bounds shall
be placed with two edges parallel to the tangent at PC's and PT's; and
at points of deflection they shall be set skewed equally from the two
lines. Backfill material shall be of sand or fine gravel, and placed in lifts
of six inches, and well compacted.
(a)
When underlying bedrock prevents setting the full length of a
monument, the monument may be cut to an appropriate length to allow
setting it onto the rock, using concrete at the base to secure it to
the rock. The remaining portion shall be backfilled as specified in this
section. When bedrock is exposed at the surface at a location to be
monumented, alternate materials and procedures will be permitted (see
Section 62-87).
(b)
Soils and soil enrichment. Loam, meeting the requirements of Section
615 of the Maine DOT specifications, will be spread on all areas to be
seeded for grass. Minimum depth of loam will be four inches (10 cm).
All loam material must be approved by the engineer as to its source;
whether from off-site, or from stockpiled material from the original
clearing of the site.
Sod may be used if it meets the requirements of Section 616 of the
Maine DOT specifications. If available loam is of poor quality, it may be
enriched by the addition of lime, peat, fertilizer, or other material to
produce the necessary characteristics for good growth.
(1)
Grass and/or ground cover. Seeding shall meet the requirements of
Section 618 of the Maine DOT specifications, and the specifications, if
any, of the provider of the seed.
(2)
Sec. 62-134 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-136
CHCT:651
Sec. 62-137. Inspection and tests. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-102;
Ord. No. 2003.16, 2-4-2003]
Mulching. Material for mulch and the procedures for application shall
conform to Section 619 of the Maine DOT specifications. Variations
from this specification may be approved in advance by the engineer.
(3)
Maintenance. Following the seeding and mulching operations, the
developer or contractor shall be responsible for maintaining the seeded
areas until an acceptable stand of reasonably thick and uniform grass
or other ground cover is achieved (90% ground cover and no gaps
larger than five square inches).
(4)
Inspection is required for all new streets and sidewalks during
construction, and for any other work conducted on any public street
or sidewalk for which a permit is required. The inspection will be
conducted by the engineer, or by his/her designee from the department.
Inspections must be requested in writing at least 48 hours in advance,
and sent to the engineer. Requests must be dated and signed by a
responsible developer, contractor or foreman, and must indicate clearly
the location and portion of work to be inspected.
Sewer testing criteria shall be found in Chapter 70 of the Biddeford
Code of Ordinances.
Inspectors shall, upon completion of every such inspection, make a
written report stating the results of the inspection and any
recommendations for changes or remedial action which may be
required; and he shall give one copy of such report to the developer,
contractor or foreman at the job site, and also to the Planning Board
if the inspection was made on a current subdivision on behalf of the
board.
Inspections shall be requested upon completion of the following
phases of the development (if applicable):
First inspection: Upon completion of all preliminary rough grading
of all roadways.
(1)
Second inspection: Following installation of underground service
pipes, but prior to backfilling. Inspectors will witness backfilling
operations and make it part of the report.
(2)
Third inspection: Upon completion of all grading of the roadway
subgrade, and the subgrade of any sidewalk.
(3)
Fourth inspection: Upon placement, grading and compaction of the
roadway gravel but prior to placing any of the crushed gravel.
(4)
Fifth inspection: Upon completion of all paving, landscaping and
cleanup of all work required.
(5)
(a)
Sec. 62-136 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-137
CHCT:652
Sec. 62-138. through Sec. 62-160. (Reserved)
Final inspection: On subdivisions which have been approved by the
Planning Board, a review and approval of plans showing as-built
conditions.
In addition to the above-scheduled inspections, the inspectors may
conduct additional inspections at any time, or during any phase of
the work, if such additional inspection is deemed beneficial. The
engineer or his/her designee may issue directives to a developer
or to a contractor working for the City. Appeals to such directives
may be made to the City Manager by developers, or to the City
Council by a contractor working for the City. Road or sidewalk
builders who are neither subdividers or contractors to the City
should consider the provisions of Sections 62-35, 62-56 or 62-82
of this chapter.
(6)
Tests may be made by the engineer of any material, tool, implement
or device being used, or proposed for use, in or on any project for
which inspection is required by Subsection (a) of this section. Testing
shall be for the purpose of determining if materials are of satisfactory
quality for the use for which they are intended, and to determine if
tools, etc., are adequate for the task for which they are intended. Tests
may be conducted on-site if appropriate, or material may be sent to an
appropriate testing laboratory for analysis or testing. Material testing
will follow generally the requirements of Section 106 of the Maine
DOT Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges. Results of any
testing shall be furnished to the developer, or contractor, together with
a statement by the inspector as to the results being satisfactory or not
so. All costs associated with the tests shall be the responsibility of the
contractor/developer.
The engineer also has the option of requiring the contractor/developer
perform the testing and forwarding the results on to the City
engineer's office. All costs associated with the tests shall be the
responsibility of the contractor/developer.
The engineer may request that the contractor/developer provide
submittals from manufacturers on items furnished to the City.
(b)
Sec. 62-137 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-138
CHCT:653

ARTICLE V
EXCAVATIONS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 62-161. through Sec. 62-170. (Reserved)
Sec. 62-161 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-161
CHCT:655

DIVISION 2
PERMIT
Sec. 62-171. Required. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-41; Ord. No. 99.67,
8-17-1999]
Unless first obtaining a written permit therefor from the Director of Public
Works, no person shall make or cause to be made any opening in any street
or sidewalk in the City; dig up or assist in the breaking or digging up of
any part of a street or sidewalk; or remove any gravel or other material
therefrom. Any violation of this article shall be subject to the penalties
described in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Section 1-12, General penalty,
for violations of code, continuing violations.
Sec. 62-172. Bond required. [Ord. of 12-4-1991, § 20-42]
Sec. 62-173. Supervision of work; costs. [Ord. of 12-4-1991,
§ 20-43]
No permit required by this division shall be granted unless the
applicant for such permit shall first execute and file with the City
treasurer a good and sufficient bond, or other surety, to be approved
by the treasurer and conditioned upon the performance of all of the
requirements of the permit. The bond or surety shall be at least $4,000,
or a greater amount to be determined by the Director of Public Works,
depending upon the extent of work which requires such surety. The
bond or surety shall remain in force for a period of two years from
the date of the most recent permit. This bonding or surety shall be in
addition to any surety required by other ordinances.
(a)
The provisions of this section shall be held to apply to the building,
alteration or repair of any public sewer, by any person under contract
with the City.
(b)
In issuing any permit for excavation in any public street or sidewalk, the
Director of Public Works shall include such conditions as he shall deem
proper for the proposed work, and such fees as have been established
by the street committee. He shall inspect the progress and quality of
work during the construction, and shall require the permittee to make
any changes or alterations to the plans which may be necessary to
protect the safety and well-being of the general public.
(a)
The Director of Public Works shall have complete discretion in
determining whether openings in streets and sidewalks can be made,
and in determining where such openings shall be made. If excavation in
either the street or sidewalk is optional, such excavation shall be made
in the sidewalk.
(b)
All permitted excavations in a public street or sidewalk shall be
backfilled with material satisfactory to the Director of Public Works,
and in such a manner as to provide a firm and safe surface. Any
(c)
Sec. 62-171 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-173
CHCT:657
pavement removed by such excavation shall be replaced in a manner
and with such material as shall be satisfactory to the Director.
Excavations in streets and sidewalks shall be made at the expense of
the persons procuring the permits.
(d)
Sec. 62-173 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 62-173
CHCT:658
Chapter 66
SUBDIVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and building regulations — See Ch.
18.
Environment — See Ch. 34.
Streets, sidewalks and other public
places — See Ch. 62.
Utilities — See Ch. 70.
Land development regulations — See Part III.
Sec. 62-173 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 62-173
CHCT:659

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 66-1. Definitions. [Ord. of 6-20-1995;49 Ord. of 9-15-98(1); Ord.
of 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2000.67, 8-1-2000; Ord. No. 2003.67,
7-1-2003; Ord. No. 2006.13, 3-7-2006]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
Terms or words not defined in this chapter, shall have the definition in
common language. If there is a conflict as to such common language
definition, the word or term shall have the definition found in the American
Heritage Dictionary, second Edition, a copy of which is located in the City
Planner's office.
ABUTTER — A property owner within 200 linear feet, as indicated on
Biddeford Tax Maps of the boundary lines of any proposed project. The twohundred-
foot distance shall be extended to a given property if such distance
ends in a public right-of-way or stream or other such commonly or publicly
owned land or area.
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which complies to accepted
principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized technical or scientific
authorities.
BLOCK — That part of one side of a street lying between the two nearest
cross streets, or between the City limits and the nearest cross streets, or
between the end of a street and the nearest cross street.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Biddeford.
CHAPTER — The Biddeford Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 66 of the
Revised Code of Ordinances).
CITY — The City of Biddeford.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development consisting of residential,
commercial or industrial units as permitted by zoning, controlled by one
developer on a tract five acres or larger. Cluster developments permit a
reduction in dimensional requirements, provided there is no increase in the
overall density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted to
open space, passive recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive
areas, forest management or agriculture.
COASTAL AREA — That portion of the City of Biddeford which is bounded
and described as follows:
49.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 66, Subdivisions, adopted as Ch. 21
of the 1975 Code, as amended.
Sec. 66-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-1
CHCT:661
East: The waters of the Atlantic Ocean from the thread of the Saco River to
the City line with Kennebunkport;
South: Following the City line with Kennebunkport to a point 300 feet
westerly of the center line of State Route 9;
West: Following from the point 300 feet westerly of the center line of
State Route 9 at the City line with Kennebunkport, thence continuing as a
distance of 300 feet westerly, then northerly, of the center line of Route 9 to
a point 1,800 feet southerly of the intersection of Newtown Road and Pool
Road.
North: Following from a point 1,800 feet southerly of the intersection
of Newtown Road and Pool Road, thence continuing in an east-northerly
direction for a distance of 2,900 feet, more or less, to a point being
the southeasterly corner of a parcel of property identified on the City of
Biddeford Tax Assessor's Map as Map 9, Lot 1, thence continuing in a
northerly direction along the easterly line of Map 9, Lot 1 a distance of
900 feet, more or less, to the center line of the Hills Beach Road, thence
continuing in the same direction a distance of 1,100 feet, more or less, to
the thread of the Saco River.50
COMPLETE APPLICATION — The Board's acknowledgement of a plan's
compliance with Sections 66-35 through 66-38 of this chapter.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan, as
amended.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Biddeford.
DESIGNED IMPROVEMENTS — All Planning Board requirements as
indicated on the approved final plan or plans.
DWELLING UNIT — Any part of a structure which, through sale or lease,
is intended for human habitation, including single-family and multifamily
housing, condominiums, apartments and time share units.
ENGINEER — Any person who is currently registered as a "professional
engineer" (P.E.) by the State of Maine Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers.
FISHERIES, SIGNIFICANT — Areas identified by a governmental agency
such as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Atlantic
Salmon Authority, Maine Department of Marine Resources, or City of
Biddeford Comprehensive Plan as having significant value as fisheries.
FRONTAGE ROAD — The horizontal, straight-line distance between the
intersections of the side lot lines with the road right-of-way of a publicly or
privately maintained road which is a commonly traveled thoroughfare but
not including private driveways.
50.Editor's Note: The definition of "Coastal Area Committee," which immediately followed,
was removed from the Code pursuant to Ord. No. 2011.38, adopted 9-20-2011. Said
ordinance disbanded the Coastal Area Committee.
Sec. 66-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-1
CHCT:662
FOREST MANAGEMENT — Timber cruising and other forest resource
evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management
planning activities with the goal of timber stand improvement, timber
harvesting guided by a forest management plan developed by a professional
forester licensed by the State of Maine. Forest products harvesting, and
activities associated with regeneration of forest stands.
FRONTAGE, CUL-DE-SAC — Frontage for lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall
be the straight line distance between the intersection of the side lot lines
with the right-of-way, as measured from a point on the side lot line to the
other side lot line equal to the required setback from the right-of-way and
parallel to the right-of-way. In any case, the minimum frontage at right-ofway
shall be at least 50 feet.
FRONTAGE, SHORE — The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line,
between the intersections of the side lot lines with the shoreline at normal
high-water line.
HIGH-WATER LINE, NORMAL — That line which is apparent from visual
markings, changes in the character of the soils due to the prolonged action
of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes between
predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land.
HISTORIC OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Areas identified by a
governmental agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission
or by the City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan as having significant value
as a historic or archaeological resource.
LOT — Parcel of land considered as a unit. The word "lot" includes the
words "plot" and "parcel."
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within lot lines.
LOT, COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by all buildings and
impervious surfaces.
LOT LINES —
(1) CORNER LOT — A lot with two adjacent sides abutting upon streets.
INTERIOR LOTS — A parcel of land, between corner lots, fronting on a
street.
(2)
(3) LOT SHOREFRONT — Any lot abutting a body of water.
LOT THROUGH — Any interior lot having frontages on two more or
less parallel streets or rights-of-way, or between a street and a body
of water, as distinguished from a corner lot. All sides of through lots
adjacent to streets, rights-of-way, and bodies of water shall be
considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required.
(4)
FRONT LOT LINE —
INTERIOR LOTS — The line separating the lot from the street
right-of-way.
a.
(1)
Sec. 66-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-1
CHCT:663
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the
dimensions of which are recorded on a document or map on file with the
County Register of Deeds. This lot must be legally existing as a separate lot
as of the date of adoption of the chapter.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side boundaries of the lot
measured at the front setback line. On culs-de-sac, shall meet the
description in the frontage requirement for frontage in the definition of culde-
sac, but shall not be less than 50 feet at the edge of the right-of-way.
MAJOR RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE — The private right-of-way which provides
access to a lot or parcel of land. Where two or more private right-of-way
provide or have the potential of providing access, the major right-of-way
shall be the one which the greater number of vehicles generally travel or
have the potential of traveling. Where a public and a private right-of-way
have the potential for providing access, the major right-of-way shall be the
public right-of-way.
MAJOR RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC — The public right-of-way which provides
direct access to a lot or parcel of land. Where two or more public rightof-
way provide or have the potential of providing access, the major rightof-
way shall be the one on which the greater number of vehicles generally
travel. Where a public and private right-of-way provide or have the potential
for providing access, the major access street shall be the public right-of-way.
NATURAL AREAS AND NATURAL COMMUNITIES, UNIQUE NATURAL
AREAS AND NATURAL COMMUNITIES — Areas identified by a
governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Conservation
Natural Areas Program, or by the City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan, as
having significant value as a natural area.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area of contiguous or
noncontiguous size, planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a
single entity and containing one or more structures to accommodate retail,
service, commercial, industrial, office, and residential uses or a combination
of such uses (i.e., mixed uses), and appurtenant common areas and
accessory uses, customary and incidental to the predominant uses.
CORNER LOT or THROUGH LOT — The line separating the lot
from either street or right-of-way.
b.
REAR LOT LINE —
a. The lot line opposite the front line.
On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be imaginary line
between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than
10 feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line.
b.
On a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line
of at lest dimension.
c.
(2)
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot
line.
(3)
Sec. 66-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-1
CHCT:664
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Biddeford.
PRIVATE WAY — A privately owned and maintained right-of-way meeting
the City's road construction standards as specified in as specified in Article
VI, Section 51, of the Performance Standards, or in Chapter 62 (Streets,
Sidewalks and Other Public Places) as required by the City Engineer.
SETBACK, BUILDING — The minimum horizontal distance from a lot line to
the nearest part of a building, including porches, steps, and railings.
SETBACK FROM WATER — The horizontal distance from the normal highwater
line elevation to the nearest part of a structure.
SUBDIVIDER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership,
corporation, trust or any other legal entity, or agent thereof, that undertakes
the activities governed by this chapter. May be referred to as "developer"
and "owner."
SUBDIVISION —
The division of a tract or parcel of land into three or more lots within
any five-year period, which period begins after September 22, 1971,
whether accomplished by sale, lease, development, buildings or
otherwise, devise, condemnation, order of the court, gift to a person
related to the donor by blood, marriage or adoption or a gift to a
municipality, or otherwise, whether the division is accomplished by
immediate platting, or by sale of land by metes and bounds.
(1)
The term shall also include the division of a new structure or structures
on a tract or parcel of land into three or more dwelling units within a
five-year period, and the division of an existing structure or structures
previously used for commercial or industrial use into three or more
dwelling units within a five-year period. The area included in the
expansion of an existing structure shall be deemed to be a new
structure for the purpose of this definition.
(2)
The term "subdivision" shall also include the subdivision of land for
nonresidential purposes, mobile home parks and the resubdivision of
land. The term "subdivision" shall also include cluster housing,
industrial parks.
(3)
The term "subdivision" shall not include the gift of a tract, parcel or
lot of land to a spouse, mother or father, son or daughter, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother or sister of the grantor, provided that only one
such gift to the same grantee within any five-year period is allowed,
and that the total allowed conveyed gifts from the original tract of
the grantor shall be limited to the parcels or lots within any fiveyear
period, and provided that the grantor receives a variation in the
strict application of Chapter 66 from the Board prior to conveying such
parcel. Any parcel or lot of land conveyed to any such grantee shall not
be further subdivided without prior Board approval.
(4)
The term "subdivision" shall not include. The transfer of portions of
land to abutters if such transfer does not result in separate lots; order
(5)
Sec. 66-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-1
CHCT:665
SURVEYOR — Any person who is currently registered as a professional
land surveyor (P.L.S.) by the State of Maine Board of Registration for Land
Surveyors.
TRACING CLOTH — Shall be construed to include any transparent or
semitransparent drafting material upon which clear and distinct lines or
lettering may be made, and which is acceptable to the registrar of the York
County Registry of Deeds for purposes of permanent record. This term shall
also include Mylar or drafting film.
WILDLIFE HABITAT, SIGNIFICANT WILDLIFE HABITAT — Areas identified
by a governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife, or City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan, as having
significant value as habitat for animals.
Sec. 66-2. Intent. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 2000.67, 8-1-2000]
This is a chapter defining subdivision, requiring the approval of any
subdivision by the Board before work may be commenced and establishing
procedures therefore; stating the contents required for preliminary and
final subdivision plans; and establishing minimum standards for subdivision
design and construction in the City. Further, it is the City's intent that
subdivisions in the rural farm zone be clustered with the goal of achieving
maximum preservation of farm and forest area, preserving open space,
protecting critical natural resources identified in the 1999 Comprehensive
Plan, and encouraging agricultural and natural resource-based uses. In
particular, cluster development in the rural farm zone shall encourage
the preservation of prime agricultural soils, of soils identified as being of
of court provided a separate deed is written, and such order and deed
are recorded in the registry of deeds: gift to the municipality; or to
a recognized established land trust or other recognized conservation
agency, provided these gifts do not result in the creation of
nonconforming lots.
In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into three or
more lots, the first dividing of the tract or parcel is considered to create
the first two lots and the next dividing, within a five-year period, of
either of these two lots and the next dividing, within a five-year period,
of either of these two lots into separate parcels is considered to have
created a third lot and constitutes a subdivision, subject to review by
the Planning Board under the provisions of this chapter.
(6)
Further, subdivisions shall be classified as either "major" or "minor":
Major subdivisions are: those projects that propose to develop any
type of additional roadways, whether public or private; or extend
public water or sewer lines; or where more than four lots are
proposed.
a.
Minor subdivisions shall be any subdivision not meeting the
requirements for a major subdivision.
b.
(7)
Sec. 66-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-2
CHCT:666
statewide significance by the Soils Conservation Service, and of unique
soils.
Sec. 66-3. Authority and purpose. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. of
9-15-1998(3); Ord. of 10-6-1998]
Sec. 66-4. Applicability of this chapter. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. of
10-6-1998]
The authority for these provisions is 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 4401 through
4406, as amended, and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, as amended.
(a)
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and safety,
promote the general welfare of the community, and conserve the
environment by assuring that subdivision development is designed and
developed in a manner which assures that adequate provisions are
made for traffic safety and access; emergency access; water supply;
sewage disposal; management of stormwater, erosion and
sedimentation; protection of groundwater; protection of the
environment, wildlife habitat, fisheries, and unique natural areas;
protection of historic and archaeological resources; minimizing the
adverse impacts on adjacent properties; fitting the project
harmoniously into the fabric of the community, and to promote:
(1) The development of an economically sound and stable community;
The provision of safe and adequate streets, utilities and other
services to new land development;
(2)
(3) The provision of convenient and safe traffic circulation and access;
The development of areas in a manner consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for the City;
(4)
Uniform procedures and standards for observance by the Board
and subdividers, utilizing the guidelines of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4404.
(5)
Protection of the environment and to conserve the natural and
cultural resources outlined in the Comprehensive Plan;
(6)
Assuring that a minimum level of services and facilities are
available to the residents of new subdivisions and that the lots
in subdivisions are capable of supporting the proposed uses and
structures;
(7)
Minimizing the potential impacts from new subdivisions on
neighboring properties and on the municipality.
(8)
(b)
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all land and water bodies
within the boundaries of the City.
(a)
The Board, at its discretion, may decide that it is more appropriate
to review a project described in this subsection in accordance with
(b)
Sec. 66-2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-4
CHCT:667
the provisions of Article XI (Site Review) of the Biddeford Zoning
Ordinance, in addition to these provisions, if the process will better
serve the general public benefit.
The Board shall review proposals that include the subdivision of land
for nonresidential purposes, mobile home parks and the resubdivision
of land. This shall also include cluster housing, shopping centers,
motels, industrial parks, office buildings, and apartments,
condominiums, or cooperative housing.
(c)
The Board shall review projects that result in the creation of three or
more lots within a five-year period including; parcels greater than 40
acres; the gift of a tract, parcel or lot of land to a spouse, mother,
father, son, daughter, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother, or sister of
the grantor, or other so called "blood relation transfers."
The Board may grant a variation in the strict application of this
chapter, provided that only one such gift to the same grantee,
within any five-year period is allowed, and that the total allowed
conveyed gifts from the original tract of the grantor shall be limited
to three parcels or lots within any five-year period, and provided
that the grantor receives a variation from the Board prior to
conveying such parcel.
(1)
Because of the nature of variation from the strict application of this
chapter, any parcel or lot of land conveyed to any such grantee
shall not be further subdivided without prior Board approval.
(2)
(d)
Development of land that involves the extension of roads, whether
public or private, or otherwise affects public infrastructure, or
established drainage patterns or disposes runoff into a public drainage
system, shall be reviewed by the Board.
(e)
No plan approved under this section shall be altered or amended,
or otherwise changed without prior Board approval. The Board shall
be provided revised plans, indicating the changes, for formal review
and signature if approved. Diminutive changes, minor changes, as
determined by the City Engineer and City Planner may be authorized.
Such changes shall be explained in a letter and annotated upon the asbuilt
plan to be provided to the Planning Board.
(f)
All plans reviewed and signed by the Board shall be recorded at the
York County Registry of Deeds within 30 days of approval. Recording
fees shall be paid by the developer.51
(g)
51.Editor's Note: Former Subsection (h), which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for consideration of recommendations made by the Coastal Area Committee, was
removed from the Code pursuant to Ord. No. 2011.38, adopted 9-20-2011. Said ordinance
disbanded the Coastal Area Committee.
Sec. 66-4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-5
CHCT:668
Sec. 66-5. Conflicting provisions. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision or provisions of any other ordinance or code of the City, the
stricter provisions shall prevail.
Sec. 66-6. Planning Board to administer chapter. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
The Planning Board shall administer the provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 66-7. (Reserved)
Sec. 66-8. Fee to cover administrative costs. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Application fees.
An application fee in accordance with the structure adopted by the
City of Biddeford shall be paid by the subdivider to the City at
the time of preliminary application. Application fee forms shall be
obtained from the Biddeford Planning Office.
(1)
These fees shall cover the cost of administrative review by City
staff, and shall be passed into the general fund of the City.
(2)
These fees shall be nonrefundable, except through formal written
request to the City Treasurer through the Planning Department.
(3)
Additional fees may be required for any additional studies or
reports deemed necessary by the Planning Board. The applicant
shall bear these costs, either directly or in the form of a draw
fund, the amount of which shall be determined by the Planning
Board and administered by the Planning Department (any funds
remaining after final consideration and determination of project by
the Board shall be returned to the applicant).
(4)
(a)
Mailing costs and notification of abutters.
At the time that preliminary plan application is made, the planning
office shall develop a list of abutters, This list shall be developed
using information from the Assessor's office and/or the City's
computerized master real estate file. The applicant shall, prior
to final consideration by the Board, pay for first class postage
for the notification of each abutter, including the owner of the
property and the applicant. This fee shall be in addition to any
other application fee.
(1)
The applicant shall pay for first class postage for the notification of
abutters for each public hearing that is scheduled by the Planning
Board.
(2)
(b)
Sec. 66-5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-8
CHCT:669
Sec. 66-9. Waiver variation permitted. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-10. Subdivisions to conform to the City's Comprehensive
Plan, local codes and ordinances. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Any proposed subdivision shall be in conformity with the Comprehensive
Plan of the City; and with the provisions of all pertinent local codes and
ordinances, and state laws.
Sec. 66-11. Performance guarantee required; amount; conditions.
[Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 2002.5, 1-15-2002]
The applicant shall pay for first class postage for notification of
abutters for each site walk scheduled for the project by the
Planning Board.
(3)
All fees shall be paid in the form of cash or check made payable to
the City of Biddeford.
(4)
No plan shall be approved or signed by the Board until all fees and
charges are paid by the applicant.
(5)
A waiver or variation in the strict application of this chapter may
be permitted when, in the opinion of the Board, any consideration
warrants such variation, provided that public convenience, safety,
health and welfare will not be affected adversely; and the Board shall
record the reasons for such variation in the minutes of the meeting, and
the applicant shall be notified in writing of the Board's decision.
(a)
Any waiver or variation to the requirements or standards of this chapter
shall be indicated in the notes section of the final plan, and noted in the
Board's written notice of decision.
(b)
The subdivider may request a waiver or variation to specific information
required in Sections 66-35 through 66-38, a request for waiver or
variation from these standards must be requested in writing by the
subdivider. Any waiver approved by the Board shall be annotated on the
final Mylar and entered on a checklist to be included in the permanent
project file.
(c)
A subdivider shall file with the Board at the time of submission of the
final plan a performance guarantee in the amount of 1 1/2 times 150%
the estimated value of the designed improvements.
(a)
Such guarantee may be tendered in the form of a certified check
payable to the City or a faithful performance bond, or letter of credit
(format is Appendix A52) running to the City and issued by a local bank
or surety company acceptable to the City.
(b)
52.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
Sec. 66-8 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-11
CHCT:670
The conditions and amount of such performance guarantee shall be
determined by the Planning Board, with the advice of the City Engineer,
Director of Public Works, or other various City departments and/or
agencies concerned.
(c)
The amount shall be at least equal to 150% of the total cost of
furnishing, installing, connecting and completing all of the street
grading, storm drainage and utilities and other improvements as
specified in the final plan within the guidelines of this chapter.
(d)
Performance bonds or such security, as agreed upon, shall be in effect
for the duration of the secured project and until such time as the
subject improvements have been proven complete and effective, and
or accepted by the City. In no case shall such security be for a period
of more than 30 months from the date of final approval by the Board.
In all cases where a performance bond, letter of credit or other form
of security is established to safeguard the proper placement of
infrastructure, the City Planner shall review, with technical assistance
from the public works director and City Engineer, such improvements
within six months of prior to the expiration of such security instrument,
to determine if satisfactory progress is being made, and to provide
a recommendation for the Board concerning the disposition of the
performance bond or other instrument.
(e)
The time period for the performance bond or security may be extended
upon written request by the subdivider and approval by the Board. This
process will include review and recommendation by the City Engineer
and Public Works Director, in regards to changes in costs for the
remaining work.
(f)
After such performance bond or certified check shall be placed on file
by the Board, it shall be turned over by the Board to the City Treasurer,
who shall deposit the same in a separate account in the City name, and
used only for the applicable subdivision in accordance with this chapter.
(g)
(h) (Reserved)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 66-11(e) and (f) above, a
performance guarantee may be reduced one time upon review and
approval by the Board.
Such reduction may be allowed by the Board provided substantial
improvements have been completed, and such reduction is not
more than 75% of the performance guarantee.
(1)
The reduction in performance guarantee shall be requested in
writing by the applicant. Such a request shall be accompanied by
a listing of infrastructure improvements still to be completed, and
quoted estimates of costs for their completion.
(2)
The City Planner, with the assistance of the City Engineer, shall
provide an opinion of the list and estimated costs.
(3)
(i)
Sec. 66-11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-11
CHCT:671
Sec. 66-12. Waiver of performance guarantee. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-13. Release of obligation required by performance
guarantee. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-14. Extension of guaranteed performance period. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
A subdivider who files a performance guarantee with the City shall
give the City the right to use said guarantee to finish the designed
improvements indicated on the approved final plat if the subdivider fails
to complete those improvements within the time frame specified, or to
the satisfaction of, or standards established by the City at the time of
approval.
(j)
The Board may, at its discretion, waive the requirements of a
performance guarantee required by Section 66-11 and enter into a
properly executed conditional agreement with the City and subdivider.
(a)
Such agreement, if executed (see Appendix I, Conditional Agreement),
shall be endorsed in writing on the final plan, and shall provide that the
Board may approve the final plan, on condition:
That no lot in such subdivision may be sold and/or agreed to be
sold; and or,
(1)
That no permit shall be issued for the construction of any building
on any lot in such subdivision until it has been certified in the
manner set forth in Section 66-13 of this chapter; and
(2)
No transfer of the property, or interest in the development, without
prior Planning Board approval (this approval is contingent upon
satisfactory proof that the purchaser has the necessary technical
and financial capacity to complete the project as approved).
(3)
(b)
These conditions, if elected by the subdivider, and approved by the
Board, shall be annotated to the notes section of the final plan prior to
the Planning Board signing said final plan.
(c)
Before a subdivider may be released from any obligation required by his
guarantee of performance, the subdivider shall request, in writing, that
the Board release the performance guarantee. The foreman request
shall include evidence that the required improvements have been
completed. This evidence shall include as-built plans of the project.
(a)
The Board shall request certification from the various departments
and agencies concerned to the effect that all required or proposed
improvements have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with
the final plan as approved.
(b)
Sec. 66-11 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-14
CHCT:672
Sec. 66-15. (Reserved)
Sec. 66-16. Building permit restrictions. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-17. (Reserved)
Sec. 66-18. Potable water (water suitable for human consumption)
wells required. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
The Board may grant an extension of time up to 12 months to the
guaranteed performance period when the subdivider can demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Board good cause for such extension.
(a)
The subdivider must formally request any extension. The Board shall
consider such a request at the next possible meeting of the Board in
accordance with Section 66-11(f).
(b)
Barring any other restrictions imposed by the Board or implied herein,
building permits for the construction of structures within an approved
subdivision shall not be issued until the following conditions have been
met:
A written agreement has been entered into with the subdivider
stating that the subdivider will maintain, including the plowing of
snow, the dedicated roads within the subdivision until the roads
have been given final acceptance by the City Council as a City
street, as per Chapter 62 of the Biddeford Code of Ordinances; and
(1)
No public services, such as snow plowing, curb side municipal
trash collection or public school bus, shall be provided to the lots
until such time as the streets have been accepted by the City; and
(2)
The access (dedicated streets) to the lots has been built according
to the approved final plan, except that pavement shall not be
required; and
(3)
The Planning Board has given the subdivider its written approval
that the access to the lots are satisfactory, based on the inspection
of the access by the City Engineer, Code Enforcement Officer, local
Fire Marshal, and Public Works Director.
(4)
(a)
Any written agreement referred to in this section shall be signed by
both the members of the Planning Board or its Chairman, and the
subdivider, or the authorized agent for the subdivider.
(b)
Conveyance of any lot in violation of this section shall be a violation of
this article and subject to enforcement procedures outlined in Section
66-109.
(c)
The Board may require that any lot created within an approved
subdivision, not serviced by a public water supply, shall have evidence
(a)
Sec. 66-14 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-18
CHCT:673
Sec. 66-19. (Reserved)
Sec. 66-20. No City services on private ways. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-21. Soils evaluations. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-22. through Sec. 66-25. (Reserved)
that it is serviced by a potable water supply meeting minimum state
standards.
A note shall be affixed to the final plan indicating the proposed water
source, either public water supply or individual or common well.
(b)
Location of proposed wells shall be indicated on the plat to ensure
compliance with state plumbing code requirements for distance from
septic systems.
(c)
A note shall be affixed to the subdivision plat indicating which lots are
serviced by shallow wells, or other wells, not of the deep driven type.
(d)
Additionally, a one-hundred-foot radius shall be indicated around the
proposed septic system location on any lot served by individual septic
system and well.
(e)
Private ways shall not be served with City services, such as snow
plowing, trash pickup, or street building and maintenance of any kind.
(a)
Any private way on a subdivision plat shall be indicated as a "private"
way or road. A note shall be placed on the plat indicating that no City
services shall be provided to lots on such road.
(b)
Soil tests shall be taken according to the State Plumbing Code, and the
evaluator shall be accompanied by the City Plumbing Inspector or his
designated agent in accordance with City ordinances.
(a)
The City Planning Inspector shall be present and witness the excavation
of each test pit. A certification with his signature shall be presented by
the subdivider at time of preliminary plan application.
(b)
A completed HHE 200 Form for each lot shall be submitted with the
final application. This requirement shall also hold in cases where a
common or communal system is proposed.
(c)
Sec. 66-18 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-22
CHCT:674
ARTICLE II
PLANS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 66-26. To be filed. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-27. When plans may be filed or recorded, recording of plat
without approval considered void. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-28. Required paper size. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
All plans for subdivisions shall be on sheets 24 inches (60.96 cm) by 36
inches (91.44 cm), or a size acceptable to the York County Registry of
Deeds.
Sec. 66-29. Metric measurements to be used. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
All plans for subdivisions shall indicate all measurements in common
(English) units, and in addition shall indicate the metric equivalent of each
dimension in parentheses.
The City of Biddeford has a three-tiered subdivision approval process:
(1) Sketch or concept plan review.
(2) Preliminary plan review/approval.
(3) Final plan approval.
(a)
The formal planning process shall be considered initiated when the
subdivider shall formally submit to the Board a complete application.
(b)
No plans of a subdivision of land within the municipal boundaries of the
City shall be filed or recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds until
a final plan has been approved by the Board, and until such approval
shall have been endorsed on such final plan by a legal majority of the
Board, which is three members.
(a)
The recording of a plat without the approval required by this chapter is
void.
(b)
Sec. 66-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-29
CHCT:675

DIVISION 2
SKETCH OR CONCEPT PLAN
Sec. 66-30. Purpose of the sketch or concept plan review. [Ord. of
6-20-1995; Ord. No. 2000.67, 8-1-2000]
Sec. 66-31. Major subdivisions. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. No.
2006.13, 3-7-2006]
Major subdivisions are: those projects that propose to develop any type
of additional roadways, whether public or private; or extend public water
or sewer lines; where five or more lots are proposed; or are considered
planned unit developments.
Sec. 66-32. Minor subdivisions. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Minor subdivisions shall be any subdivision not meeting the requirements
for a major subdivision.
Sec. 66-33. Review of major and minor subdivision plans. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
The sketch or concept plan shall be considered a general layout of
the proposed subdivision. The plan shall contain enough information to
allow the Board to review it and offer comments and concerns relating
to the general nature of the project and its impact on the community.
(a)
During the review the Board will determine whether the subdivision
shall be either:
(1) A major subdivision.
(2) A minor subdivision.
(b)
Clustered development. If a clustered subdivision is proposed, or if the
Planning Board requests that a clustered plan be submitted in order
to achieve the purpose of this chapter, then two sketch plans shall be
submitted:
One plan shall reflect the standards of the zoning district in which
the subdivision is proposed. On this plan, each lot shall meet
minimum lot size as determined utilizing Article VI, Section 44,
of the Zoning Ordinance, and dimensional requirements found in
Article V, Section 6, Table B, of the Zoning Ordinance.
(1)
The second plan shall utilize a clustered layout as permitted under
Article VI, Section 16, of the Zoning Ordinance. The number of
lots in the clustered development shall not exceed the number of
lots proposed on the nonclustered plan. Proposed open space and
reductions in lot size or dimensional requirements shall be clearly
delineated on the clustered sketch plan.
(2)
(c)
Sec. 66-30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-33
CHCT:677
In regards to the review for major subdivisions, the Board shall require
detailed information outlined in Sections 66-35 through 66-38. Specific
waivers may be requested by the applicant.
(a)
Minor subdivisions may be submitted with a minimum of information
that will allow the Board to make a determination of the adequacy of
the plan and the impact that the proposal will have on abutting parcels
and the neighborhood in general. The Board may require additional
information in accordance with Section 66-35(a) and (b).
(b)
The Board may grant simultaneous preliminary and final plan approvals
for minor subdivisions in clear cases where the purposes of this chapter
will not be reduced. Such waiver of the Board's approval process shall
be indicated on the final plan.
(c)
Sec. 66-33 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-33
CHCT:678
DIVISION 3
PRELIMINARY PLAN
Sec. 66-34. Ten copies to be filed with request for approval. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
A request for the approval of a subdivision shall be made to the Board
in writing and shall be accompanied by 10 complete sets of copies of
preliminary plan.
Sec. 66-35. Required information. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. of
9-15-1998(3); Ord. No. 2001.25, 4-17-2001]
In order for any application to be considered complete the following
information must be provided at least three weeks prior to the Planning
Board meeting. All plans for subdivisions shall contain the following
information:
(1) Name of subdivision, owner and engineer or surveyor;
Graphic scale, date drawn, North point and its date, and whether it
is true or magnetic;
(2)
(3) Boundaries of the tract;
(4) Existing zoning;
(5) Ownership and location of abutting properties;
Name, location, width, profile, cross-section, radius of curves,
angles of change in direction and center-line length of all angles of
change in direction and center-line length of all proposed streets;
other public ways, building lines and easements in the subdivision;
intersection of existing streets. All street names shown for
proposed streets located in a subdivision shall be checked against
local records to assure that none are duplicates of existing street
names or so similar as to cause confusion;
(6)
Type, location, profile and cross-section of all existing and or
proposed surface water drainage;
(7)
(8) Location of all existing and/or proposed utilities;
Location of all existing and/or proposed sanitary sewers showing
size, profile, and cross-section, or description, plan, location of
other means of sewage disposal with evidence of successful soil
evaluation. In areas outside of those presently served where
disposal is proposed by use of subsurface disposal systems, the
Board shall require a copy of the soil evaluation report(s),
conducted by a licensed soil evaluator, to be submitted as part of
the subdivision application, establishing that the land is considered
suitable for subsurface disposal systems;
(9)
(a)
Sec. 66-34 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-35
CHCT:679
Topography at two-foot contour intervals, unless otherwise
prescribed by the Board. In addition the location of existing natural
or man-made features influencing the layout of proposed
subdivision shall be shown;
(10)
(11)Lot lines and approximate dimensions;
(12)Proposed uses of property;
(13)Proposed public areas, if any;
(14)Copy of deed, or option for purchase, for land being subdivided;
(15)Reserved fire lane areas;
(16)Location of soil evaluation test pits for each lot on plan;
(17)Location of well or water supply for each lot;
Aesthetics, historic, and natural features. Trees, berms, shrubs,
green strips, parks, wetlands, stonewalls, graveyards, fences,
stands of trees, and other important or unique natural areas and
site features, including but not limited to floodplains, deer
wintering areas, significant wildlife habitats, fisheries, scenic
areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants and animals, unique
natural communities and natural areas, sand and gravel aquifers,
and historic and/or archaeological resources, together with a
description of such features.
(18)
Location and details for sedimentation and erosion control
measures.
(19)
The preliminary of a subdivision shall be drawn at a scale no smaller
than 100 feet (one cm equals 12 m) to the inch.
(b)
A preliminary plan shall include a location map insert, showing the
relationship of the proposed subdivision to adjacent properties and
public access, and drawn at no smaller scale than 2,000 feet (one cm
equals 240 m) to the inch. It is suggested that reduced sections of the
City Tax Maps be used for this purpose. If the preliminary plan does
not allow enough room for a location map insert, an attached separate
sheet, of the location and relationship of the proposed subdivision to the
adjacent properties and public access, and drawn at no smaller scale
than 2,000 feet (one cm equals 240 m) to the inch may be submitted.
(c)
In addition to the above plat information, the subdivider shall provide
the following documents;
Valid deed or option indicating an interest held by the subdivider
in the parcel of land (this shall be kept current during the review
process).
(1)
(2) Completed application form.
(d)
Sec. 66-35 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-35
CHCT:680
Sec. 66-36. and Sec. 66-37. (Reserved)
Sec. 66-38. Board may require studies to be made. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-39. Board action on approval of preliminary plan. [Ord. of
6-20-1995; Ord. of 9-15-1998(3)]
Narrative of the proposed project briefly describing the general
nature of the project, i.e., type of project; residential or
commercial; number of lots intended to create.
(3)
(4) Draft covenants and deeds for each lot proposed.
Easement documents for proposed rights-of-way for utilities,
drainageways, roadways and other travelways or public amenities.
(5)
Statement of financial capability of subdivider to undertake the
proposed project.
(6)
(7) Statement identifying principals involved in the project.
Statement demonstrating that the subdividers have the technical
capability to complete the proposed project as presented.
(8)
Copies of such covenants or deed restrictions as are intended to all
or part of the tract.
(9)
Review by water company, power company and City Engineering,
police, and fire department.
(10)
The City Planner shall be responsible for making a recommendation to
the Board as to the completeness of the application.
(e)
In addition to the preliminary plan, the Board may require the
subdivider or other to undertake studies where deemed necessary or
desirable to protect the public convenience, safety; health and welfare.
These studies may include, but are not limited to: high-intensity soils;
traffic; community fiscal impact; groundwater quality; wildlife habitat;
wetlands; feasibility-market study; legal analysis or opinion.
(a)
The subdivider shall provide an amount of money to be determined by
the Board to serve as an escrow account to cover the cost of these
studies, and possible review by a disinterested third party professional
consultant in the particular field, shall be borne by the subdivider. The
subdivider shall be provided with invoice and results of third party
review.
(b)
Any costs for the required studies shall be paid prior to filing for
final approval. A deposit for the development and review of studies
may be required in accordance with Annex A [Attachment A], Fees
and Charges, of the Biddeford Zoning Ordinance [Land Development
Regulations].
(c)
Sec. 66-35 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-39
CHCT:681
The request for approval of a preliminary plan of a subdivision shall be
considered at a meeting of the Board within 30 days following receipt
of an application. The Board shall, after such consideration and within
30 days following receipt of a complete application and submission of a
preliminary plan, issue a written statement informing the subdivider or
his authorized agent of:
(1) Approval;
(2) Disapproval; or
Approval of plan with conditions.
The statement shall specify any changes required prior to the
submission of the final plan.
(3)
(a)
The Board shall base its decision on the plans meeting the conditions
and requirements outlined in this chapter; and that the plan meets in a
positive fashion, the following:
The project will not result in undue water or air pollution. In
making this determination the Board shall consider:
a. The elevation land, and its relation to the floodplains;
b. The nature of the soils and the subsoils;
c. The ability to adequately support waste disposal;
d. The slope of the land and its affects on effluents;
e. The availability of streams for the disposal of effluents; and
The applicable state and local health and water resources
regulations.
f.
(1)
The project has sufficient water available for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the subdivision;
(2)
The project will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing
water supply, if one is utilized;
(3)
The project will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction
in the capacity of the land to hold water so that a dangerous or
unhealthy, condition may result;
(4)
The project will not cause unreasonable highway or public road
congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to use of the highways
or public roads existing or proposed;
(5)
(6) The project will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal;
The project will not cause unreasonable burden on the ability of
the municipality to disposal of solid waste and sewage if municipal
services are to be utilized;
(7)
(b)
Sec. 66-39 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-39
CHCT:682
The project will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic
or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics, historic sites, or rare
and irreplaceable natural areas or public rights for physical or
visual access to the shoreline. Further, the plan shall reflect the
natural capabilities of the site to support development. Buildings,
lots, and support facilities will be clustered in those portions of
the site that have the most suitable conditions for development.
Environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited to
wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, significant wildlife habitats,
fisheries, scenic areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants
and animals, unique natural communities and natural areas, and
sand and gravel aquifers will be maintained and preserved to the
maximum extent. The development shall include appropriate
measures for protecting these resources, including but not limited
to modification of the proposed design of the site, timing of
construction, and limiting the extent of excavation;
(8)
The project is in conformance with a duly adopted subdivision
regulation or ordinance, Comprehensive Plan, development plan,
or land use plan, if any. In making this determination the Board is
authorized to interpret these ordinances and plans;
(9)
The subdivider has adequate financial and technical capacity to
meet the above stated standards;
(10)
Whenever situated, in whole or in part, within 250 feet of any lake,
pond, river or tidal waters, the project will not adversely affect the
quality of that body of water, or unreasonably affect the shoreline
of that body of water, as indicated on the City of Biddeford, Official
Zoning Map and referenced in the City's Comprehensive Plan;
(11)
The project will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities,
adversely affect the quality or quantity of ground water;
(12)
The subdivider will provide information, based on FEMA flood
boundary, floodway, and flood insurance maps, whether or not the
project is in a flood prone area;
(13)
The project will not unreasonably obstruct abutting properties or
structures access to direct sunlight;
(14)
If any portion of the site has been identified as containing historic
or archaeological resources, the development shall include
appropriate measures for protecting these resources, including but
not limited to modification of the proposed design of the site,
timing of construction, and limiting the extent of construction.
(15)
The written statement shall be accompanied by one copy of each
reviewed drawing or data sheet with the Board approval of conditions,
if any, endorsed on each.
(c)
Sec. 66-39 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-39
CHCT:683
Sec. 66-40. Extension of preliminary approval period. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-41. Board authorized to conduct hearing upon receipt of
plan. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-42. through Sec. 66-44. (Reserved)
The written statement shall specify the date upon which the final plan
must be submitted for final approval. This date shall be no more than
six months from the date of preliminary approval.
(d)
In cases where a proposed subdivision crosses into another community,
approval by that community or district must be provided prior to Board
approval. The Board may arrange for a joint meeting as needed 1-A
M.R.S.A. § 4403, as amended). The Board may grant approval of plans
contingent upon approval of other communities.
(e)
The preliminary approval may be extended, if there are extenuating
circumstances, by the Board upon formal written request by the
subdivider. The request must include the reasons for the extension (i.e.,
still in the process of obtaining DEP approval or U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers permits), as well as copies of receipts that applications have
not been accepted for review by other regulatory agencies.
(a)
The Board shall consider such requests at the next regular meeting
following receipt of the subdivider's formal request. The Board shall
provide the subdivider with a written decision following that meeting.
(b)
Whenever the Board receives a subdivision plan for approval, it may
require that a public hearing be held and that abutters be notified
in writing of the time and place of such hearing, the cost of such
notification being charged to the applicant.
(a)
In cases where a proposed subdivision crosses into another community,
approval by that community or district must be provided prior to Board
approval. The Board may arrange for a joint meeting as needed (1-A
M.R.S.A. § 4403, as amended).
(b)
Sec. 66-39 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-42
CHCT:684
DIVISION 4
FINAL PLAN
Sec. 66-45. Approval, recording of final plan prerequisite to sale of
land, construction, etc. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
The subdivider or his authorized agent shall apply formally to the Board for
approval of a final plan of such subdivision as provided in this chapter and
shall record an attested copy of the final plan so approved and so endorsed
in the York County Registry of Deeds, before any contract for the sale of or
offer to sell such subdivision or any part thereof shall be negotiated [unless
an agreement has been made under Section 66-109(d)(2)], or before any
permit for the erection of a structure shall be granted, or before any utility
installations, ditching, grading, construction of roads, grading of land or
lots shall be done on any part of the subdivision.
Sec. 66-46. Request for final approval to be made to Board; copies
of plan to accompany request. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 2001.25,
4-17-2001]
A request for final approval of a subdivision shall be made to the Board in
writing. Additionally, such request shall be accompanied by 10 copies of the
final plan of such subdivision. The developer shall provide at least three
paper sets including all engineering and detail sheets as well as survey
sheet and plot plans and applicant shall provide two Mylar copies of all
signature sheets and one Mylar set of all other sheets to the Planning Board
at the night of the meeting for final approval. Mylar stock shall be of heavy
quality and be acceptable to engineering for archival purposes. These sets
shall become permanent records in the offices of the City Engineer, Building
Inspector, and City Planner.
Sec. 66-47. When to be prepared. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-48. When to be submitted. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Within six months following approval of a preliminary plan, or any other set
time limit the Board requires or mutually agrees to, the subdivider or his
authorized agent shall submit a final plan. If the final plan is not presented
within the specified time limit, all plans become null and void.
Sec. 66-49. and Sec. 66-50. (Reserved)
Sec. 66-51. To be legibly drawn.
The final plan, required by this division, shall not be presented to the
Board until the subdivider has received from the Board, written notice
from the Board approving a preliminary plan of such subdivision.
(a)
In the case of a minor subdivision, the applicant may request in writing
an exception or waiver to the above.
(b)
Sec. 66-45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-51
CHCT:685
Sec. 66-52. Contents generally. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
The final plan shall contain the following information:
Sec. 66-53. Improvements to be incorporated as-built plans. [Ord.
of 6-20-1995]
The final plan of a subdivision shall be drawn on Mylar, or other
permanent material acceptable to the York County Registry Deeds.
(a)
An original drawing and one copy shall be presented to the Board at the
time of final approval for signatures of the Board.
(b)
All the information required for the preliminary plan and amendments
approved by the Board;
(a)
Existing and final proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements, for
utilities and/or drainage and public areas within the subdivision;
(b)
Sufficient data to determine the exact location, direction and length of
every street line, easement, lot line and boundary line and to reproduce
these lines upon the ground, showing linear dimensions to the nearest
1/100 of a foot (.0254 cm) and angles drawn with a tolerance of 15
seconds;
(c)
Location of all permanent monuments existing and or proposed,
wherever, in the opinion of the Board, such monuments are necessary
to properly determine locations on the ground;
(d)
Lot numbers and letters in accordance with the prevailing policy on
existing tax maps;
(e)
Designation of the location, size, planning and landscaping of such
parks, esplanades or other open spaces as may be proposed or
prescribed;
(f)
The embossed seal of a professional land surveyor attesting that such
final plan is correct;
(g)
Deed restrictions must receive Board approval and be noted on the final
plan in the "Note Section." A copy of all proposed deed restrictions shall
be recorded with the final plan.
(h)
When street trees, esplanades and open spaces are required in
subdivisions by the Board, such improvements shall be incorporated in
the final plans of such subdivisions.
(a)
An as-built plan depicting all approved and installed improvements
shall be provided to the Board prior to the Board's recommendation
to the street committee for street acceptance as a public way. Such
as-built plan shall be completed and sealed by the surveyor/engineer
for the project and show both the approved improvements and those
improvements as installed.
(b)
Sec. 66-51 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-53
CHCT:686
Sec. 66-54. Certification to accompany plan; cost of certification,
inspection. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-55. When to be considered. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
The Board shall consider a final plan at a meeting within 60 days from the
date the Board accepted the written request and the final plan set, or within
such other time limit as may be mutually agreed to, after a public hearing
or submission of such plan.
Sec. 66-56. Right to appeal Board's decision. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
The Board shall issue a written notice of its decision, directed to the
applicant, within 30 days of a public hearing or within 60 days of receiving
a completed application if no hearing is held or within such other time limit
as may be otherwise mutually agreed to. An appeal may be taken from the
decision of the Board to the superior court, as provided by law.
Sec. 66-57. Effect of approval, length of approval. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
The as-built plans shall be accompanied by a report and plan indicated
the specific location of tie ins for water, sewer and drainage lines
indicating the location description of these tie ins to avoid confusion
when the actual tie is to be completed with the structure on site.
(c)
The final plan shall be accompanied by certifications from authorized
local public officials or City department heads, Each department
involved in subdivision development or maintenance, such as Public
Works, Fire Department, School Department, shall provide a written
statement of review. While all departments shall be provided an
opportunity for comment, the Board shall determine if a specific
department should specifically comment on a given project. The City
Planner shall be responsible for coordinating these reviews.
(a)
The cost of such certification and/or inspection shall be borne by the
subdivider. Any fees or costs resulting from this certification shall be
paid by the subdivider prior to final approval by the Board. The City
Planner shall be responsible for tracking any costs.
(b)
The approval of a final plan by the Board shall not be deemed an
acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other public
way or grounds.
(a)
Further, approval by the Board for a given subdivision, or phase of
a subdivision, shall be valid for a period of two years. If within that
time period, proposed infrastructure improvements, such as roadways,
sewer or and water lines, are not completed in such a manner as to
serve, or service, 75% of the lots approved, approval for lots not served,
or serviced, by the existing in-place improvements shall be voided and
no permits shall be issued for such lots not serviced.
(b)
Sec. 66-53 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-57
CHCT:687
Sec. 66-58. Approval to be attested. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
The approval of a final plan shall be attested on said plan by the signatures
of legal majority of the members of the Board, being no less than three
members.
Sec. 66-59. Disposition of plan and copies following approval. [Ord.
of 6-20-1995]
Lots not served by in-place infrastructure shall be reviewed by the
Board as a new, or revised, subdivision application subject to the zoning
and design standards in place at the time of review.
(c)
Any proposed change to an approved subdivision must be reviewed
by the Board, except that under this section, the City Planner, in
conjunction with the City Engineer, may approve minor changes to
specific plans.
Minor changes are defined as any change that does not alter the
approved density, decrease the size of an approved lot by more than
5% etc. Any proposed alteration shall be within the confines of the
limits outlined in the Zoning Ordinance for setbacks and other lot
dimensions.
(1)
Any approval by the Planner and City Engineer shall be recorded
and submitted to the Board. The Board may reject the findings of
the City Planner and Engineer upon cause. Such cause shall be
recorded and conveyed to the developer in a timely manner so that
he may appeal directly to the Board at the Board's next meeting.
(2)
(d)
It is incumbent upon the subdivider to prove to the Board that the
proposed change to the approved plan is necessary. The Board may
hold a public hearing on any application for a proposed change to an
approved subdivision.
(e)
Any change to an approved subdivision, not approved by the Board shall
void the Board's previous approval. No further City permits shall be
authorized until such change has been approved and recorded as an
amendment to the approved subdivision.
(f)
Following approval of a final plan, the original of such plan bearing
the Board members signatures evidencing approval, shall be returned
to the subdivider who shall, at his expense, record it in York County
Registry of Deeds within 30 days of the Board signing the final plan.
Alteration of the plan prior to recordation, or failure to record it within
that period shall automatically void the approval.
(a)
The subdivider shall, within seven days after recording the final plan,
furnish the Board, through the City Planner's office, a certified copy of
such recorded plan from the registry of deeds bearing the recordation
data. The City Planner shall then date stamp the receipt and promptly
(b)
Sec. 66-57 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-59
CHCT:688
Sec. 66-60. through 66-69. (Reserved)
furnish copies of said plan to the Building Inspector, Plumbing
Inspector and Tax Assessor for their files.
No building permits for any lot in the subdivision shall be issued by the
Building Inspector until the Planner certifies that the plan approved by
the Board has been recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds.
(c)
If the recording receipt is not received by the Planning Department
within 30 days of approval, the City Planner shall notify the subdivider
in writing that the subdivision approval is voided in accordance with
Subsection (a) above. Such notification shall be mailed to the subdivider
by certified registered mail.
(d)
Sec. 66-59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-60
CHCT:689

ARTICLE III
DESIGN STANDARDS AND IMPROVEMENTS
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 66-70. Prerequisites to approval of subdivision. [Ord. of
6-20-1995; Ord. No. 2003.33, 3-18-2003]
The City Engineer, or any professional engineer retained by the City, or
the Planning Board as a consultant, shall make a recommendation to
the Planning Board with respect to the grades, drainage, sewage and
road surfacing of a proposed subdivision before such subdivision may
be finally approved.
(a)
The subdivider shall provide plans that meet the following
requirements:
Grades: A detailed plan sheet showing pre- and post-development
grades. Building envelopes shall not include any areas with a slope
of more than 25%; areas with a slope greater than 33% shall be
clearly indicated on the development plan.
(1)
Drainage:
Drainage courses shall be clearly shown on the development
plan. In no case will the post-development off-site drainage
rate exceed the predevelopment rate, unless reviewed by the
City Engineering Department and specifically approved by the
Planning Board upon the Department's recommendation.
a.
Wherever practical, subsurface drainage shall be used, and
directed to a satisfactory drainage collection point. Detailed
plans for drainage lines, catch basins, retention or detention
ponds shall be made part of the plans. Easements for drainage
ways shall be indicated on the plans.
b.
Where sheet drainage is proposed, the subdivider shall show
the effect that all construction shall have on the drainage
plan and it will not increase the rate of flow onto abutting
properties.
c.
Plans for erosion and sediment control shall be provided in
accordance with details based upon the Maine Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook for Construction: Best
Management Practices, as amended.
d.
(2)
Sewage:
Where connection to public sewer is proposed, detailed plans
shall be provided for all lines, connection and pump or lift
stations. In addition, the City's Engineering Department shall
a.
(3)
(b)
Sec. 66-70 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-70
CHCT:691
Sec. 66-71. Status of land susceptible to flooding or not suitable for
development. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-72. Subdividing land designated for public use. [Ord. of
6-20-1995]
Land designated for public use in subdivision shall not be subdivided for
any other purpose. Land to be conveyed for public use shall be conveyed
by deed to the City of Biddeford, subject to approval by the City Council, or
other public nonprofit organization approved by the Planning Board.
Sec. 66-73. Approval of plans prerequisite to construction of
improvements. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
review all such plans and shall provide a written report to the
Board.
Where septic systems are proposed, a complete HHE-200 Form
for each lot shall be provided to include a certification by the
City's Plumbing Inspector.
b.
Roads: Detailed cross sections for all roadways shall be included in
the plans for any proposed roadway. Road design and construction
shall be specified in detail and shall meet the standards specified
in Chapter 62 (Streets and Sidewalks) of the Biddeford Code of
Ordinances.
(4)
Any report and recommendation submitted by the City Engineer or
consulting professional engineer shall be considered by the Board. The
recommendations and findings of the report may be made part of the
basis for the Board's final decision.
(c)
Land susceptible to flooding and land not suitable for development,
which may also be hazardous to life, health or property, shall not be
accepted as part of a proposed subdivision, in terms of buildable lots,
but may be used, subject to approval by the Board and other pertinent
authorities, for open space purposes, public or otherwise.
(a)
Land susceptible to flooding and land not suitable for development shall
be calculated in accordance with the formula established in Article VI,
Section 44, Lot calculations, of the Biddeford Zoning Ordinance for
considering subdivision development.
(b)
Land fitting this criteria shall include areas indicated as being in the
one-hundred-year flood zone; wetland soils as defined in Article II,
Definitions, of the Biddeford Zoning Ordinance; and groundwater
aquifers or recharge areas as depicted in the Maine Geological Survey
Map series; steeply sloped land (slope in excess of 33%).
(c)
The plans for the installation of new water mains, surface drains and
new sewage facilities and the construction of new streets and sidewalks
(a)
Sec. 66-70 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-73
CHCT:692
Sec. 66-74. Lots to have access to streets. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord.
No. 2003.33, 3-18-2003]
Sec. 66-75. (Reserved)53
Sec. 66-76. Authority to require subdivision design to show respect
for natural features. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-77. Trees, esplanades, open spaces may be required. [Ord.
of 6-20-1995]
in subdivision shall be approved by the Board before any construction
begins.
No approval shall be granted until final detailed plans have been
reviewed by the various technical departments of the City.
(b)
Any proposed subdivision shall be designed so that it has access to
a public street. See Chapter 62, Street, Sidewalks and other Public
Places, or Article VI, Section 51, Private ways and road, for right-of-way
width requirements.
(a)
Lots within the proposed subdivision shall meet the required street
frontage for the specific zone or district as specified in the Biddeford
Zoning Ordinance.
(b)
The Board may require that a proposed subdivision design show respect
for such natural features as trees, streams, topography and other site
assets.
(a)
As much as practicable, mature trees of twenty-four-inch caliper, or
more, shall be indicated on plans. Trees to be cut shall be indicated on
the plan. In cases where this is impractical, the limits of tree cutting
will be indicated.
(b)
Street trees, esplanades and open spaces may, at the discretion of the
Board, be required in subdivisions.
(a)
The preservation of natural vegetation is strongly encouraged;
landscaping of individual lots and public areas may be required. Where
necessary to provide present or future shading, or required by the
Board, trees of no less than one inch caliper and four feet in height shall
be planted.
(b)
Plantings shall also be considered effective erosion control measures if
certified by a qualified expert.
(c)
When required by the Board, plans shall be provided showing
landscaping measures for each lot in the proposed development. In
(d)
53.Editor's Note: Former Section 66-75, adopted 6-20-1995, which contained provisions on
drainageways and easements, was repealed 3-18-2003 by Ord. No. 2003.33.
Sec. 66-73 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-77
CHCT:693
Sec. 66-78. Cul-de-sac islands. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. No.
2003.33, 3-18-2003]
The details of cul-de-sac islands are stated in Chapter 62, Street, Sidewalks,
and Other Public Places, Article IV, Streets, Division 2, Design Standards.
Sec. 66-79. Subdivision in the Rural Farm (RF) Zone. [Ord. No.
2001.26, 4-17-2001]
Subdivisions in the RF Zone shall maintain or establish a buffer along
existing roads in order to reduce the visual impact of new development.
cases where major subdivisions are involved, separate landscaping
plans shall be provided. Landscaping shall be completed and sealed by
a registered landscape architect.
Existing trees and undergrowth on a parcel proposed for subdivision
development shall be maintained as a seventy-five-foot wide vegetated
buffer strip for the entire length of the parcel's frontage along an
existing public road.
(1)
Setbacks for those lots adjacent to a public road shall be measured from
the edge of the vegetated buffer furthest from the road.
(2)
In the event that a parcel proposed for subdivision development has
no existing trees or undergrowth on that side of the parcel which
fronts on a public road, than a landscaping plan prepared by a qualified
professional shall be submitted.
The landscaping plan shall incorporate the planting of a mix of
native coniferous and deciduous trees and shrubs with the intent of
providing a visual screen at maturity.
a.
The width of said landscaped buffer strip shall be no less than 50
feet.
b.
The landscaped buffer strip shall run the entire length of the
parcel's frontage along a public road.
c.
(3)
No cutting of trees or clearing of vegetation shall be permitted in the
vegetated buffer strip, whether preexisting or created as part of an
approved landscaping plan, unless otherwise committed by a hazardous
situation.
The vegetated buffer strip shall be shown on the subdivision plan
and clearly labeled as such.
a.
The vegetated buffer strip may be part of the open space of a
clustered subdivision, or may be owned in fee as part of the lot(s)
adjacent to a public road. In the latter case, a deed or deeds with
reference to the vegetated buffer strip shall be submitted prior to
review of the final plan.
b.
(4)
Sec. 66-77 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-79
CHCT:694
Sec. 66-80. Permanent marker required. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord.
No. 2003.33, 3-18-2003]
Sec. 66-81. and Sec. 66-82. (Reserved)
Openings in the vegetated buffer strip shall be limited to the
subdivision access road. Individual lots shall be accessed from the
subdivision access road only.
(5)
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall sell or convey
any land in an approved subdivision unless at least one permanent
marker is set at one lot corner of lot sold or conveyed. The term
"permanent marker" includes, but is not limited to, the following: a
granite monument, a concrete monument, an iron pin or a drill hole in
ledge.
(a)
Sewer and water line connections shall be clearly and separately
marked. Such tie markings and plans shall be reviewed by the
Engineering Department and shall be kept on file by the Engineering
Department.
(b)
The location and description of permanent markers shall be included on
the final plans submitted to the Board.
(c)
Sec. 66-79 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-81
CHCT:695

DIVISION 2
STREETS
Sec. 66-83. Design of streets. [Ord. of 6-20-1995; Ord. No. 2003.33,
3-18-2003]
All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
provisions and requirements of Chapter 62 (Streets, Sidewalks and Other
Public Places) of the City of Biddeford Code of Ordinances. Proposed streets
shall be reviewed by the Capital Projects Committee and then proposed for
acceptance to the Council.
Sec. 66-84. through Sec. 66-104. (Reserved)54
54.Editor's Note: Former Section 66-84, which contained provisions on street signs, former
Section 66-86, which contained provisions on continuation and projection of streets,
former Section 66-95, which contained provisions on construction of streets according to
the final plan, and former Section 66-96, which contained provisions on inspections of
subdivision development, all adopted 6-20-1995, were repealed 3-18-2003 by Ord. No.
2003.33.
Sec. 66-83 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-84
CHCT:697

DIVISION 3
GENERAL COSTS
Sec. 66-105. Development costs. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Sec. 66-106. through Sec. 66-108. (Reserved)
The subdivider, at his sole expense, shall be required as part of his
obligations under this chapter to install all public utilities, drainage
systems, sidewalks, streets (including final paving) and other designed
improvements specified in the final plan, and within the scope of this
chapter.
(a)
There shall be no contribution toward the cost of any of these items
by the City and no rebate or other payment by the City after they are
installed.
(b)
Sec. 66-105 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-106
CHCT:699

ARTICLE IV
ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 66-109. Conveyance by reference to unapproved plan; penalty.
[Ord. of 6-20-1995]
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may sell, lease,
develop, build upon or convey for consideration, offer or agree to sell,
lease, develop, build upon or convey for consideration any land in a
subdivision which has not been approved by the Board and recorded in
the York Registry of Deeds.
(a)
No subdivision plan shall be recorded by the registrar of deeds which
has not been approved as required. Approval, for the purpose of
recording, shall appear in writing on the plan in the form of the original
signatures of at least three members of the Planning Board empowered
to vote on the plan.
(b)
No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company
of any kind shall install services to any lot in a subdivision for which a
plan has not been approved.
(c)
Violation; fines.
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who sells, leases,
develops, builds upon, or conveys with or without consideration,
offers or agrees to sell, lease, develop, build upon or convey [Unless
specifically so permitted under Subsection (d)(2) following] any
land in a subdivision which has not been approved as provided in
this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 for each day such
occurrence continues.
(1)
Upon prior approval in writing by the Board, in exception to
Subsection (d)(1), above, a subdivider may contract lots pending
approval, or approved but not having the required infrastructure,
providing such agreement specifies:
a. Identifies specific lots covered by the agreement;
b. States that specific infrastructure is not in place;
States that the infrastructure shall be in place within a
specified time frame;
c.
That no permits shall be issued until such time as the
infrastructure or other improvements specified, shall be in
place.
d.
The Board shall review the actual proposed agreement
instrument prior to approval. In no case shall such agreement
e.
(2)
(d)
Sec. 66-109 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-109
CHCT:701
be for more than a ninety-day period. The Board may not at any
time extend this time period, but may adopt a new agreement.
The City's Code Enforcement Officer, Planning Board, or the
appropriate municipal officers may institute proceedings to enjoin the
violations of this section; and if a violation is found by the court, the
City, Municipal Planning Board or the appropriate municipal officers
may be allowed attorney fees.
(e)
Sec. 66-109 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-109
CHCT:702
ARTICLE V
AMENDMENTS
Sec. 66-110. Authority. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
The municipal officers may from time to time amend the regulations set
forth in this chapter.
Sec. 66-111. Procedure on amendments. [Ord. of 6-20-1995]
Proposed amendment by municipal officers, Planning Board or upon
petition. If either the municipal officers or the Planning Board desires
to propose any changes to this chapter, or if a citizen petition as set
forth herein is brought, the following procedure shall be followed:
If the proposal is initiated by the municipal officers, they shall
formally request the Planning Board to hold a public hearing as set
forth below and to carry out the other procedural requirements of
this section.
(1)
If the proposal is initiated by the Planning Board, it shall be by
majority vote of the Board.
(2)
If a petition requesting amendment of this chapter, signed by at
least 300 registered voters of the City, is filed with the Planning
Board, the Board shall promptly (1) request the City Clerk to verify
the signatures, and (2) if the Clerk verifies that at least 300 of
the signatures are valid, the Board shall then carry out the other
procedural requirements of this section.
(3)
(a)
Public hearing. As soon as the amendment procedure is initiated by
any of the above methods, the Board shall cause the City Clerk to
give public notice of a public hearing on the proposed changes, which
notice shall be made in a newspaper of general circulation in the City;
and be published in one issue of such paper, at least 15 days prior
to the date of hearing, the notice shall contain the time, date and
place of hearing, and sufficient detail about the proposed changes as
to give adequate notice of their content and import. If the proposed
changes are extensive, a brief summary of the changes, together with
an indication that a full text is available at the City Clerk's office, shall
be adequate notice provided that in fact sufficient copies of the text are
made so available.
(1) The public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board.
As soon as possible after such public hearing and in any event
within 60 days, the Planning Board shall make a written
recommendation for or against the proposed changes to the
municipal officers.
(2)
The municipal officers shall not act on a proposed change until the
recommendation of the Planning Board is before them. A proposed
(3)
(b)
Sec. 66-110 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-111
CHCT:703
change which has been disapproved by the Planning Board may be
enacted by a two-thirds vote of the municipal officers.
Sec. 66-111 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 66-111
CHCT:704
Chapter 70
UTILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buildings and building regulations — See Ch.
18.
Businesses — See Ch. 22.
Solid waste — See Ch. 58.
Street excavations — See Ch. 62, Art. V.
Subdivisions — See Ch. 66.
Industrial sewer use — See Ch. 71.
Sec. 66-111 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 66-111
CHCT:705

ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 70-1. through Sec. 70-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 70-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-1
CHCT:707

ARTICLE II
WASTEWATER SYSTEM
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 70-26. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 19-1.1; Ord. of 8-6-1991, § 1]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICANT — Any person requesting approval to discharge wastewaters
into municipal facilities.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of dissolved
oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter by weight, used in the biochemical
oxidation of wastewater in five days at 20° C. (68° F.) under standard
laboratory procedures.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from a building plumbing connection,
from a point five feet from the face of the building to the public sewer,
private sewer or other place of disposal.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — The national
pretreatment standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutant
properties which may be discharged or introduced into municipally owned
wastewater facilities by specific industrial dischargers.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine, expressed in milligrams
per liter, required to be added to water, wastewater, or other liquid to
achieve a combined chlorine residual after 15 minutes, as specified in the
City's NPDES permit.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both wastewater and surface
runoff from storms.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works of the City. As a general matter,
the Director shall act after being advised by the pretreatment manager.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — A liquid waste discharged from the sanitary
conveniences, such as toilets, washrooms, urinals, sinks, showers, drinking
fountains, home laundries, and from kitchens, cafeterias and floor drains of
dwellings, offices, business buildings, schools, recreational facilities, etc.,
essentially free of industrial wastes or toxic materials. Such wastewater
may or may not contain groundwater or surface runoff.
DRAIN — Storm drain, as defined in this section.
ENVIRONMENTAL SPECIALIST — The Director of the Department of
Public Works.
EXCESSIVE — Amounts or concentrations of a constituent of wastewater
which, in the judgment of the Director:
Sec. 70-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-26
CHCT:709
FACILITIES — Includes structures, conduits, pumping stations, treatment
and disposal works, and other appurtenances for the purpose of collecting,
treating and disposing of domestic and/or industrial wastewater.
GARBAGE — The wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and serving of food. It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter and
its natural moisture content.
INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — The liquid waste from industrial
manufacturing processes, laboratories, trades or businesses in which
chemical or biological wastes predominate over domestic wastes; such term
includes, but is not limited to, the liquid waste from hospitals, commercial
laundries, car washes, etc.
INDUSTRY — An establishment with facilities for manufacturing, testing,
research, altering or repairing of goods for sale or other purposes.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the City sewer system,
treatment process or operation which causes or contributes to a violation
of any requirement of the NPDES permit or which prevents sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations):
LICENSED UTILITY CONTRACTOR — Any contractor licensed by the City
Council to install building sewers and/or private sewers in the City.
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
City of Biddeford, Maine, upon industrial or commercial facilities to
implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b) and Maine Rules 06-096 Chapter 528.[Added
10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(1) Will cause damage to any facility;
(2) Will be harmful to a wastewater treatment process;
Cannot be removed in the treatment works to the degree required in
the limiting stream classification standards of the Saco River;
(3)
(4) Can otherwise endanger life or property; or
(5) Can constitute a nuisance.
(1) Section 405 of the Clean Water Act.
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (including Title D, more commonly
referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act," and
including state regulations contained in any state sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act).
(2)
(3) The Clean Air Act.
(4) The Toxic Substances Control Act.
(5) The Marine Protection Research and Sanctions Act.
Sec. 70-26 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-26
CHCT:710
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
program of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants in quantities or
concentrations which are a cause of or significantly contribute to a violation
of any requirement or condition of the user's permit, the City's ordinances,
codes, regulations or national pollutant discharge elimination system
permit, state or federal law.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
group, trust, municipality or governmental authority.
pH — The negative logarithm (Base 10) of hydrogen ion activity in gram
moles per liter of solution.
PRESSURE SEWER — Any pipe or conduit conveying wastewater from a
low elevation to a higher elevation, and shall include force mains from lift
stations, as well as inverted syphons.
PRETREATMENT — The application of physical, chemical, and/or biological
processes to reduce the amount of pollutant in, or alter the nature of, the
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater
into the publicly owned sewer system.
PRETREATMENT MANAGER — The individual whose job responsibilities
include implementation of any industrial pretreatment program required
by state or federal law. Any reference in this article to "environmental
specialist" shall mean the pretreatment manager.
PRIVATE SEWER — Any sewer located on private property or private ways
that collects wastewater from two or more building sewers and discharges
into a public sewer or other receiving waters.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater
than one-half inch (13 mm) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights and which is controlled by City authority.
RECEIVING WATERS — Any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer,
or any other body of surface water or groundwater receiving discharge of
wastewaters.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries domestic and/or industrial
wastewaters and to which surface runoff from storms and groundwater is
not intentionally admitted.
SEPTAGE — Waste, refuse, effluent, sludge and any other materials from
septic tanks, cesspools or any other similar facilities [30 M.R.S.A.
§ 1303(5)].
SEWAGE — Wastewater, as defined in this section.
Sec. 70-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-26
CHCT:711
SEWAGE, NORMAL — Sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes, which
show, by analysis, the following characteristics:
SEWAGE SURCHARGE — The demand payment for the use of a public
sewer and/or sewage treatment plant for the handling of any sewage,
industrial wastes, or other wastes accepted for admission thereto in which
the characteristics therefor exceed the maximum values of such
characteristics in normal sewage. (See "volume charge.")
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit conveying wastewater by means of gravity
flow. Wherever the term "sewer" is used throughout this article, it shall
mean "gravity sewer."
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of
any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentrations or flow during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN — A pipe or conduit for conveying water, groundwater,
subsurface water, condensate, cooling water or other similar discharge, not
including domestic wastewater and/or industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — Solids that either float on the surface of,
or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which
are removable by laboratory filtering and are referred to as nonfilterable
residue in the laboratory test prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOTAL TOXIC WASTE ORGANICS — Any element or compound, alone
or in combination, which disrupts or inhibits the wastewater treatment
process or operation or which causes or contributes to a violation of any
requirements of the NPDES permit.
VOLUME CHARGE (USER CHARGE) — The demand sewer use charge
which is based, in part or wholly, on the volume of normal sewage
discharged into the POTW. (There may be surcharges.) The volume charge
shall be based on a specific cost for 100 cubic feet. The specific charge
shall be developed by the Wastewater Management Commission and
recommended to the Council for final approval. The monies so obtained
shall be used for current operation and maintenance, for retirement of
bonded indebtedness, and for funding of capital projects, of the POTW. The
basis of volume charge calculations shall be made available to the public, on
demand. The volume charge shall be recalculated annually, as well as the
surcharge rates.
(1) B.O.D. (five-day): 250 mg/L average daily or 400 mg/L maximum daily.
(2) Suspended solids: 300 mg/L average daily or 500 mg/L maximum daily.
Chemical oxygen demand: 350 mg/L average daily or 700 mg/L
maximum daily.
(3)
(4) Oil and grease: 100 mg/L maximum.
Sec. 70-26 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-26
CHCT:712
WASTES — Substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that can be carried
in water.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of the City, and may be a combination
of the liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater and
surface water that may be present.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating wastewater.
WASTEWATER WORKS — All structures, equipment and processes for
collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of wastewater (i.e., "sewer
system").
Sec. 70-27. Construction of sewers. [Code 1975, § 19-2]
Sec. 70-28. Licensed contractors. [Code 1975, § 19-5]
Every sewer or drain designed and/or constructed to serve more than
one structure, or, in the case of a storm drain, to drain more than one
recorded lot of land, shall be considered a main sewer or drain; and no
such sewer or drain shall be constructed and connected to any public
sewer or drain except in a manner and at such a grade as authorized by
the Director and the City Engineer.
(a)
All sewers or drains authorized by the City Council shall be constructed
under the direction of the Director, except where the building of the
sewer or drain is let out by contract, in accordance with plans and
specifications furnished by the City Engineer.
(b)
The City Engineer shall make and prepare all needed plans and
specifications for the construction of all sewers built under the
provisions of this article and shall prepare plans and profiles of such
sewers when so built, showing their location and depth in relation to
the street lines and grades, which plans and profiles shall be deposited
and kept in the office of the City Engineer.
(c)
No underground utility line or structure shall be constructed or
installed so as to interfere with the proper functioning or maintenance
of any existing main sewer or drain. Neither shall any such utility line or
structure be located so as to offer conflict with any main sewer or drain
which has been proposed for construction; and any such underground
facility which is determined to be in such a location so as to interfere
with the construction and operation of any main sewer or drain of such
size, depth and grade as may be required shall be relocated so as to
eliminate such interference. The cost of such relocation shall be borne
by such person owning and/or maintaining the underground structure
causing the interference.
(d)
No person, other than an employee of the Highway Department
working under the control and direction of the Director, shall lay,
(a)
Sec. 70-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-28
CHCT:713
Sec. 70-29. Protection from damage. [Code 1975, § 19-6]
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is part of the wastewater works. Any person violating this provision
shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
construct or repair any private or particular sewer or storm drain or
connect such with a public sewer or storm drain or with any other
private conduit connected with a public sewer or storm drain unless
such person is duly licensed by the City Council; and every person
so licensed shall execute and deliver to the City Clerk a bond in the
amount of $4,000 in such form as the City Solicitor shall approve and
with such surety or sureties as shall be satisfactory to the City Council,
the bond to be conditioned to guarantee the faithful performance of
all such work as the licensee may undertake to execute, to make good
any defects which may appear in any sewer, storm drain or street
work done by him, and to indemnify and save harmless the City and
any other person from all costs, actions, suits and claims whatsoever
arising or occurring in consequence of any act or work done by him
under any permit for such work granted by the Director under the
provisions of Section 70-61(f). The license shall be valid for a period
of two years upon application to the City Council. Should the licensee
cancel his performance bond, or allow it to lapse for any reason, his
license shall immediately become invalid. This bond is in addition to any
bond provided under this Code.
No person licensed by the City Council as a licensed utility contractor
shall allow his name to be used by any employee or other person, either
for the purpose of obtaining permits or for the purpose of doing any
work under his license.
(b)
Any licensed utility contractor violating any of the provisions of this
article, of his license or of any permit under which he may do work
shall, in addition to the general penalty provided for the violation of this
article, forfeit his license.
(c)
No work of laying, constructing or repairing such sewers or storm
drains or their appurtenances, or of entering or connecting with public
sewers or storm drains shall be commenced or allowed to continue
unless the permit to do so is at the job site in the hands of the licensed
utility contractor or his employee; and all work shall be completed
within a reasonable period of time, as determined by the Director.
(d)
In opening any public street or way, all materials for paving or
ballasting shall be removed with the least possible injury or loss of such
materials, and, together with the material excavated from the trench,
shall be placed where they will cause the least practical inconvenience
to the public, or as may be directed by the Director.
(e)
Sec. 70-28 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-30
CHCT:714
Sec. 70-30. Powers and authority of inspectors; confidential
information. [Code 1975, § 19-7]
The Director shall be the enforcing officer of all provisions of this
article, subject to the laws of the state, rules and regulations of the
division of water pollution control, State Department of Natural
Resources, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
(a)
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
the proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article.
The municipality shall have the right to set up on the discharger's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
(b)
Information and data furnished to the City with respect to the nature
and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public without
restriction unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary
information of the discharger.
When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of
a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made
available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses
related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit, state waste discharge license certificate and/
or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions
of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency
in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will
not be recognized as confidential information.
Information accepted by the City as confidential shall not be
transmitted to the general public by the City until and unless a tenday
notification is given to the discharger. No confidentiality
agreement may be used to prohibit the disclosure of information to
any governmental agency. Should a conflict arise between this section
and the provisions of Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71, regarding
industrial pretreatment, the provisions of Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter
71, as amended shall apply. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No.
2010.100]
(c)
While performing any necessary work on private property, City
personnel shall use their best efforts to observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises, as those rules are made known to them.
(d)
Sec. 70-30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-30
CHCT:715
Sec. 70-31. Enforcement of article; violations and penalties. [Code
1975, § 19-8]
In addition to any other enforcement methods provided for in this article,
the provisions of this article may be enforced as follows:
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any
portion of wastewater works lying within such easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining
to the private property involved. This provision shall in no way limit the
authority of the Director and other duly authorized employees of the
City bearing proper credentials and identification under Subsection (b)
of this section.
(e)
The Director or his designee may issue a written administrative
complaint if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person to
whom the complaint is directed has violated: [Amended 10-5-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010.100]
a. This article;
b. Any rule or regulation adopted under this article; or
c. Any order or permit issued under this article.
(1)
The administrative complaint shall specify the provision that allegedly
was violated, and state the alleged facts that constitute the violation.
(2)
After or concurrently with service of a complaint issued under
Subsection (1) of this section, the Director or his designee may:
[Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
Issue an order that requires the person to whom the order is
directed to take corrective action within a time set in the order;
a.
Send a written notice that requires the person to whom the notice
is directed to file a written report about the alleged violation; or
b.
Send a written notice that requires the person to whom the notice
is directed to:
Appear at a hearing, at a time and place scheduled, in order to
answer the charges in the complaint.
1.
File a written report and also appear at a hearing at a time and
place set to answer to charges in the complaint.
2.
c.
(3)
Sec. 70-30 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-31
CHCT:716
Any order issued is effective immediately according to its
terms, when served.
Within 10 days after being served with an order issued under
Subsection (3) of this section, the person served may request a hearing
before the Wastewater Management Commission by filing a written
request for such a hearing with the pretreatment manager. In
connection with any hearing, the pretreatment manager may subpoena,
in the name of the Wastewater Management Commission, any person or
evidence, and order a witness to give evidence. A subpoenaed witness
shall receive the same fees and mileage reimbursement as if the
hearing were part of a civil action.
(4)
Unless the person served with an order issued under Subsection (3)
of this section, makes a timely request for a hearing, the order is a
final order. If the person served with an order makes a timely request
for a hearing, the order becomes a final corrective order when the
Wastewater Management Commission renders a decision following the
hearing. This subsection does not prevent the City or any other
governmental agency from taking appropriate action against a violator
before the expiration of the time limitations or schedules in the order.
(5)
The following provisions govern the procedure before the Wastewater
Management Commission for hearings held under Subsection (5) of this
section:
The Commission may receive any oral or documentary evidence but
shall provide as a matter of policy for the exclusion of irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. Every party has the
right to present the party's case or defense by oral or documentary
evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct any crossexamination
that is required for a full and true disclosure of the
facts.
a.
The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all
papers and requests filed in the proceeding, constitute the record.
All decisions become a part of the record and must include a
statement of findings and conclusions, as well as the reasons or
basis for the findings and conclusions, upon all the material issues
of fact, law or discretion presented and the appropriate order, relief
or denial of relief.
b.
The Commission may reconsider any decision reached under this
section within 30 days of its prior decision. The Commission may
conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence and
testimony.
c.
Any party may take an appeal, within 30 days after the decision is
rendered, to the superior court from any order, relief or denial in
accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
d.
(6)
Sec. 70-31 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-31
CHCT:717
Sec. 70-32. User fees. [Ord. of 8-6-1991, § 2; Ord. No. 2000.110,
10-26-2000; Ord. No. 2001.16, 3-8-2001; Ord. No. 2001.27,
4-17-2001; Ord. No. 2001.89, 10-16-2001]
The violation of any provision of this article is deemed a nuisance. The
City Solicitor may bring an action for an injunction against any person
who violates any provision of this article or any rule, regulation, order,
or permit adopted or issued under this article. In any action for an
injunction, any finding after a hearing held under Subsection (6) of
this section, is prima facie evidence of each fact determined after that
hearing.
(7)
In addition to being subject to an injunctive action, a person who
violates any provision of this article or any rule, regulation, order, or
permit adopted or issued under this article is subject to a civil forfeiture
of not less than $1,000 nor more than $2,500 per violation per day, to
be collected in a civil enforcement proceeding. Any discharger violating
any of the provisions of this article or of any rule, regulation, order, or
permit adopted or issued under this article or who discharges or causes
a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction or causes damage to
or impairs the City's wastewater facilities is liable to the City for
any expense, loss or damage caused by such violation or discharge.
The City shall bill the discharger for the cost incurred by the City
for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation
or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed cost constitutes a separate
violation of this article.
(8)
In addition to being in violation of this article, a person is subject to a
civil forfeiture of $10,000 if the person:
Knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other
document filed or required to be maintained under this article, or
any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued under this
article; or
a.
Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required to be maintained under this
article or any rule, regulation, order, or permit adopted or issued
under this article.
b.
(9)
If the City is the prevailing party, it shall be awarded reasonable
attorneys' fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the court finds
that special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs
unjust.
(10)
In the event of a conflict between this article and Ord. No. 2009.46,
Chapter 71, as may be amended regarding industrial pretreatment,
the provisions of Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71, shall prevail. [Added
10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(11)
Sec. 70-31 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-32
CHCT:718
Purposes. It is the purpose of this section to establish proportionate
user charges that place the cost of abatement directly on the sources
of pollution, conserve potable water, and maintain financial selfsufficiency.
It is determined and declared to be necessary and
conducive to the protection of the public health, safety, welfare and
convenience of the City to collect charges from all users who contribute
wastewater to the City's treatment works. The proceeds of such
charges so derived will be used for the purpose of operating and
maintaining the public wastewater treatment works and providing for
future needs.
(a)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
COD (CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The amount of oxygen
required for the chemical oxidation of carbonaceous (organic) materials
in wastewater using inorganic dichromate as oxidants in a two-hour
test.
COMMERCIAL USER — All retail stores, restaurants, office buildings,
laundries and other private business and service establishments.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Includes any nongovernmental, nonresidential
user of publicly owned treatment works which is identified in the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management
and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions: Division A: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing; Division B:
Mining; Division D: Manufacturing; Division E: Transportation,
Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary; and Division 1: Services.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — Those functions that result in
expenditures during the useful life of the treatment works for materials,
labor, utilities and other items which are necessary for managing and
which such works were designed and constructed.
REPLACEMENT — Expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during
the useful life of the treatment works to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such works were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL USER — Any contributor to the City's treatment works
whose lot, parcel or real estate, or building is used for domestic
dwelling purposes only, but not including hotels, motels, boarding
houses, tourist homes or bed-and-breakfast establishments.
USEFUL LIFE — The estimated period during which a treatment work
will be operated.
USER CHARGE — That portion of the total wastewater service charge
which is levied in a proportional and adequate manner for the cost
of operation, maintenance, replacement and debt service of the
wastewater treatment works.
WATER COMPANY — The Biddeford-Saco Water Company.
(b)
Sec. 70-32 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-32
CHCT:719
WATER METER — A water volume measuring and recording device,
furnished and/or installed by a user and owned by the water company
or the environmental specialist.
Revenues; use.
The revenues collected, as a result of the user charges levied,
shall be deposited in a separate non-lapsing fund known as the
"Sewer System Operation, Maintenance Replacement Fund and
Debt Retirement Fund" (or "Fund").
(1)
Fiscal year-end balances in the Fund shall be used for no other
purposes than those designated. Monies which have been
transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in
the fund shall be returned to their respective accounts upon
appropriation adjustment of the user charge rates for operation,
maintenance replacement and debt retirement. The user charge
rates shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be
returned to their respective accounts within six months of the fiscal
year in which the monies were borrowed.
(2)
(c)
Rates.
Each user shall pay for the services provided by the City based
on his use of the treatment works as determined by his water
consumption according to methods recommended by the
environmental specialist. The cost of treating inflow and infiltration
shall be shared by all users as part of the user rate.
(1)
For residential users, quarterly user charges will be based on
actual water usage as determined by the water company's meter
readings. Commercial and industrial users, who are billed by the
Biddeford and Saco Water Company on a monthly basis, will also
receive sewer user charges on monthly basis. If a user discharges
water into the City's collection system, which has been obtained
from a source other than the water company, the user shall install
and maintain a meter to measure such discharge. All such meters
must be inspected and approved by the Superintendent and must
be available for inspections during the year by the City. If a
residential, commercial, industrial, or institutional user has a
consumptive use of water, or, in some other manner, uses water
which is not discharged into the collection system, the user charge
for that contributor may be based on readings of wastewater
meter(s) or a separate water meter(s) (sub-meter), which must be
purchased through the City to ensure conformity and calibration,
and installed and maintained at the user's expense.
(2)
Each monthly or quarterly user shall pay the set rate and minimum
fee based on usage that has been established by the City Council
for the current fiscal year based on recommendations of the
Wastewater Management Commission.
(3)
(d)
Sec. 70-32 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-32
CHCT:720
For those users whose wastewater has a greater strength than
normal domestic sewage, a surcharge in addition to the normal
user charge, will be collected. The surcharge for operation and
maintenance including replacement is:
$5.50 per 100 pounds BOD and COD.
$7.50 per 100 pounds SS.
$0.10 per pound other pollutant(s).
(4)
Any user who discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge or any
user who discharges any substance which singly, or by interaction
with other substances, causes identifiable increases in the cost of
operation, maintenance or replacement of the treatment works,
shall pay for such increased costs. The charge to each such user
shall be as determined by the appropriate financial personnel and
approved by the City Council.
(5)
The user charge rates established in the section apply to all users
of the City's treatment works.
(6)
Billing; collection.
All users shall be billed quarterly or monthly, as the case may be.
Billings for any particular quarter shall be made within 20 days
after the end of a quarter. Any payment not received within 30 days
after the date of billing is delinquent.
(1)
A late payment penalty of 1% of the user charge bill will be added
to each delinquent bill for each 30 days, or portion thereof, of
delinquency.
(2)
When any bill (including interest penalty) remains unpaid for one
year after the date due, such bill is subject to lien proceedings
under law. If any such lien (including interest and penalty) remains
unpaid for a period of one year after date of recordation, such
property shall be subject to sale procedures authorized by law.
(3)
The City may recover any outstanding balance by any other method
authorized by law. As part of the costs of recovering any
outstanding balance the City is entitled to an award of reasonable
attorneys' fees.
(4)
For purposes of this section, "user" means the owner of real estate
served by the sewer system or the person against whom taxes on
that real estate are assessed.
(5)
(e)
Waste of unusual strength. All users contributing more than 750,000
gallons per month and whose waste strength is greater than normal
sewage shall prepare and file with the environmental specialist a report
that shall include pertinent data relating to the wastewater
characteristics, including the methods of sampling and measurement to
(f)
Sec. 70-32 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-32
CHCT:721
obtain these data, and these data be used to calculate the use charge
for the user. The City may inspect the waste stream and take its own
samples. Should the City do so and should the results be substantially
different, as determined by the environmental specialist, from the data
submitted by the user, the user charge for that user shall be revised
for the next billing cycle/period. The requirements of this section may
be satisfied by complying with the applicable provisions of Ord. No.
2009.46, Chapter 71, as may be amended. [Amended 10-5-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010.100]
Review of charge.
Any user who feels his sewer bill is in error may make written
application to the Commission requesting a review of his/her user
charge. Said written request shall, where necessary, show the
actual or estimated average flow and/or strength of his/her
wastewater in comparison with the values upon which the charge
is based, including how the measurements or estimates were made.
(1)
In lieu of abatement — request of payment equal to last quarter/
monthly amount to be based on previous history before coming to
the wastewater Commission, if there is no previous history, amount
must be paid in full.
(2)
Review of the request shall be made by the Commission and, if
substantiated, the Commission shall direct that appropriate action
be taken. Any charge abated shall become a credit against the next
billing period if under $50 and refunded if over $50.
(3)
(g)
Review of rates.
During the first year after enactment of this article, the City
Council shall review the user charges quarterly and revise the rates
as necessary to ensure that adequate revenues are generated to
pay the costs of operation and maintenance including replacement
and debt retirement and that the system continues to provide for
the proportional distribution of such costs among users and user
classes. During subsequent years, the City Council shall review
and, if necessary, revise the rates at least semiannually.
(1)
The City will notify each user at least annually of the rate being
charged under this article.
(2)
(h)
Measurement of flow. The volume of flow to be used in computing sewer
service charges and abnormal sewage surcharges shall be based upon
metered water consumption as shown on the records of meter readings
maintained by the Biddeford and Saco Water Company. In the event that
a person discharging wastes into the POTW produces evidence, to the
Wastewater Management Commission demonstrating that a substantial
portion of the total amount of metered water does not reach the POTW,
then the Commission shall either establish a percentage of the total
metered water to be used as a basis for such computations, or direct
(i)
Sec. 70-32 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-32
CHCT:722
Sec. 70-33. through Sec. 70-40. (Reserved)
the installation of appropriate flow measuring (and totalizing) devices
to measure and record the actual amount of flow into the POTW. In the
event that a person discharging wastes into the POTW procures all or
part of his water supply from unmetered sources, the Commission shall
either direct the installation of water meters of the other sources of
water supply, or direct the installation of appropriate flow measuring
devices to measure and record the actual amount of flow into the POTW.
Any water meters and/or flow measuring devices installed pursuant to
this section shall be of a type and design acceptable to the Commission
and shall be installed, maintained, and periodically tested as required
by the owner, at his expense. All such meters and/or flow measuring
devices shall be subject to periodic inspection, testing, and reading by
the City of Biddeford. Any person discharging wastes into the POTW
may install a flow measuring device at his option, of the type, design,
installation, and maintenance standards of the Superintendent, at the
owner's expense.
Sec. 70-32 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-33
CHCT:723

DIVISION 2
WASTEWATER MANAGEMENT COMMISSION
Sec. 70-41. Purpose. [Code 1975, § 19-1(1)]
There shall be a Wastewater Management Commission responsible for the
management and control of the operation and maintenance of the public
sewage system as it now exists or as may be extended.
Sec. 70-42. Appointment of members, qualifications, term, filling of
vacancies; election of officers; conduct of business. [Code 1975,
§ 19-1(2); Ord. of 12-15-1992(1); Ord. No. 2006.20, 3-21-2006]
Sec. 70-43. Powers and duties. [Code 1975, § 19-1(3)]
The Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, shall appoint a
Wastewater Management Commission composed of five members, who
shall be residents of the City, and not more than one member shall
be connected with City government. The majority of the Commission
members shall be residents connected to the collection system of the
City sewers. The term of office of a member shall be for three years.
Where there is a permanent vacancy, the Mayor, subject to confirmation
by the Council, shall appoint a person to serve for the unexpired term.
(a)
The Wastewater Management Commission shall annually elect a
Chairman and Secretary from its own membership and may adopt
such bylaws as are necessary for the orderly conduct of business.
At any meeting of the Commission, three Commission members shall
constitute a quorum, and all matters requiring the action of such
Commission shall be determined by a majority vote.
(b)
The Wastewater Management Commission, subject to the approval of
the City Council, shall establish rules and regulations for the
management and control of the operation and maintenance of the
public sewage system and shall administer such system under the
general supervision of the Mayor.
(a)
The wastewater Management Commission shall formulate a budget for
the sewage division of the public works Department for submission
to the finance committee on or before February 1 of each year, and
recommend to the Mayor and City Council such extensions and/or
improvements to the system as it may deem advisable for the benefit
and development of the City in accordance with the City's Master Plan.
(b)
The Wastewater Management Commission shall advise the City Council
as to what rates for user fees and other charges are to be made relative
to the use of the sewage system, but all such charges shall be fixed by
the City Council.
(c)
Sec. 70-41 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-43
CHCT:725
Sec. 70-44. through Sec. 70-55. (Reserved)
The Wastewater Management Commission shall perform such other
duties relative to the management and control of the operation and
maintenance of the system as the City Council may require.
(d)
Sec. 70-43 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-44
CHCT:726
DIVISION 3
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 70-56. Connection to public sewer required. [Code 1975,
§ 19-3(2)]
No person shall install, renew or repair any new, old or existing subsurface
wastewater disposal system, including septic tanks, if a connection to the
City's facilities is or can be installed within a reasonable distance, as
determined by the Director.
Sec. 70-57. Connection permit required. [Code 1975, § 19-3(3)]
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or drain, or appurtenance thereof, or to
any private sewer, or connect them, without first obtaining a written permit
from the Director.
Sec. 70-58. Sewer connection permit required prior to issuance of
building permit. [Code 1975, § 19-3(1)]
No building permit shall be issued by the City for new building construction
within the City unless a written permit has been obtained for a sewer
connection from the proposed building to the City facilities, provided the
proposed building is located within a reasonable distance from such facility,
or reasonable extension thereof, as determined by the Director.
Sec. 70-59. Permit classes; application; fees. [Code 1975, § 19-3(4)]
There shall be two classes of building sewer and/or private sewer permits:
Sec. 70-60. Installation, connection costs; indemnification of City.
[Code 1975, § 19-3(5)]
All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer and/or private sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
(1) For residential and commercial service; and
For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on
a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall
be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director. A permit,
inspection, and inflow/infiltration fee for a residential or commercial
building sewer and/or private sewer permit, and for an industrial
building sewer and/or private sewer permit, shall be paid to the City at
the time the application is filed. See also Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71,
as may be amended. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(2)
Sec. 70-56 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-60
CHCT:727
indirectly be occasioned by the installation or repair of the building sewer
and/or private sewer.
Sec. 70-61. Permit for connection into public sewer. [Code 1975,
§ 19-3(6), (7)]
Sec. 70-62. Manner of laying, connecting and disconnecting
building sewer. [Code 1975, § 19-3(9)]
Issuance; records. The Director may grant permits to licensed utility
contractors to connect building sewers or drains into the public sewers
or drains, or into private sewers or drains entering such public sewers
or drains, in accordance with the terms of this article and the rules
and regulations made therefor by the City Council. The Director shall
cause to be kept a complete record of all such permits granted, giving
the name of the street and the number of the estate, if any, the name
of the owner or owners, and of the applicant for such permit, the size
and kind of drain or sewer entered, the name of the contractor making
the entrance, and such other facts in connection therewith as may be of
importance as matters of record.
(a)
Application; excavation permit; notice of change in volume of industrial
discharge. Applications for permits to connect any private drain with
a public drain, or with a private drain entering such public sewer or
drain, must be made in writing to the Director by a licensed utility
contractor at least 45 days prior to the proposed connection. Such
applications must be accompanied by a clear description of the
premises to be drained and of the drains required. All such applications
must include an agreement on the part of the contractor to abide by
all the provisions of this article and applicable provisions of Section
62-161 et seq., and to waive claim for damage in case of revocation
as provided in this division. Issuance of such permit shall not relieve
the licensed utility contractor of the need to obtain an excavation
permit under Section 62-161 et seq. A written statement from the
property owner authorizing the contractor to install a building sewer
to serve his specified property must be presented with the application.
Once connected into the system, any industrial user that proposes a
substantial change in the volume or nature of the pollutants being
discharged must notify the Director at least 45 days prior to the
proposed change for his approval or as otherwise required in Ord. No.
2009.46, Chapter 71, as applicable. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.100]
(b)
Connections between the building plumbing and the building sewer
shall be made at a point outside of the building foundation at a distance
of at least five feet (1.5 m) from the building.
(a)
The building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer only in
the manner specified in the permit issued for such connection. In the
absence of a wye or tee fitting laid with the sewer main, the connection
(b)
Sec. 70-60 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-62
CHCT:728
Sec. 70-63. Independent building sewers required; exception. [Code
1975, § 19-3(13)]
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway or under
other unique conditions as determined in the discretion of the Director.
Under these circumstances, and upon approval of the Director and
Plumbing Inspector, the building sewer from the front building may be
extended to the rear building, and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
Sec. 70-64. Removal of material during excavation. [Code 1975,
§ 19-3(10)]
In opening any public street or way, all pavement shall be removed with the
least possible injury or loss of the remaining pavement and, together with
the material excavated from the trench, shall be placed where it will cause
the least practical inconvenience to the public, or as may be specified by the
Director.
Sec. 70-65. Backfilling of building sewer. [Code 1975, § 19-3(11)]
No portion of the building sewer shall be covered until inspected.
Backfilling shall be conducted in accordance with accepted good practice,
and in the presence of the inspector. Materials used for the backfill shall be
approved by the inspector and shall be placed by hand and properly tamped
in layers not exceeding four inches (10 cm) in depth, to a point 12 inches
(30 cm) over the top of the pipe. Machine backfilling may be used for the
remaining depth. Special care shall be taken in backfilling areas which are
within the traveled way to assure minimum of settlement. Where required
by the Director, an eight-inch (20 cm) concrete slab shall be installed under
the final pavement to avoid the expense and difficulty of repeated reworking
to the sewer shall be made by means of a proper saddle fitting securely
fastened and bonded to the main sewer. Any other type of connection
must be specifically approved by the Director.
All changes in direction of the building sewer shall require a cleanout
connection to the surface; a change in direction of 90° (1.59 radians) or
more shall be made at a proper manhole.
(c)
In cases where buildings are abandoned, demolished or destroyed by
flooding, hurricane or other similar event, it shall be the duty of the
owner to inform the Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Director
of Public Works and pretreatment manager of plans to cap and cease
use of the sewer prior to demolition or abandonment. Such notice shall
be given not more than 30 days after the event or occurrence. The
owner shall give the Director and the pretreatment manager seven
days' advance notice before commencing any capping procedure.
(d)
Sec. 70-62 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-65
CHCT:729
of a settling trench. Such slab shall extend over undisturbed earth on both
sides of the trench for a minimum of eight inches (20 cm).
Sec. 70-66. Inspection, approval of work under permit. [Code 1975,
§ 19-3(12)]
Sec. 70-67. Size, slope, alignment, materials of construction,
excavation methods. [Code 1975, § 19-3(16)]
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer
and/or private sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of
the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the
requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules
and regulations of the City Council. In the absence of code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
Such rules and regulations will be printed in a booklet which may be
obtainable if requested from the environmental specialist.
Sec. 70-68. Gravity flow; lift. [Code 1975, § 19-3(17)]
Wherever possible, the building sewer shall enter the building at a point
below the basement floor. If this requirement makes it impossible to achieve
the minimum recommended pitch of the building sewer (WFPC Manual No.
9, Chapter 7-6), the Director may allow entrance through the basement
wall, provided special precautions are taken to assure sufficient protection
from damage and from freezing. For a building in which any plumbing
connections are too low to permit gravity flow to any sewer, public or
private, the wastewater from such a connection shall be pumped or lifted by
an approved device and discharged to an adequate sewer.
Sec. 70-69. Conformance with technical codes, other regulations;
connections to be gas and watertight. [Code 1975, § 19-3(18)]
The connection of the building sewer or private sewer into the public sewer
shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or
other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM or the WPFC Manual of
Inspection of the completed work shall be done by the Director or
his designee. Requests for inspection made up to 10:00 a.m. shall be
honored on the same day. Requests made after 10:00 a.m. may be
deferred until the following day, depending upon the schedule of the
inspector. Any inspections after 3:00 p.m. or on Saturday or Sunday
shall be made at the rate of $20 per hour or portion thereof, with
a minimum of two hours allowed for each inspection. Any inspection
made during the week shall be made at a flat rate of $30 for each
inspection.
(a)
Upon final inspection and approval, the inspector shall sign the
contractor's copy of the permit.
(b)
Sec. 70-65 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-69
CHCT:730
Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Director before installation.
Sec. 70-70. Barricading, lighting of excavations; restoration of
streets and other public property. [Code 1975, § 19-3(19)]
All excavations for building sewer and/or private sewer installation shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public
from hazard. Streets, esplanades, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Director.
Sec. 70-71. Construction of private sewer collecting from two or
more building sewers. [Code 1975, § 19-3(14)]
A private sewer for the collection of two or more building sewers shall be
constructed only upon receipt of written approval by the Director.
Sec. 70-72. Connection of old building sewers to new buildings.
[Code 1975, § 19-3(15)]
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found upon examination and test by the Director to meet all
requirements of this article.
Sec. 70-73. Prohibited and restricted discharges. [Code 1975,
§ 19-3(21)]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to
any sanitary sewer, building sewer and/or private sewer, or to interior
piping which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm drains, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted
process waters may be discharged, on approval of the state Department
of environmental protection, the Director, and the pretreatment manager,
to a storm drain, combined sewer, or natural outlet. All new or altered
connections to the sanitary sewer system shall conform with this section.
Sec. 70-74. Revocation of permits. [Code 1975, § 19-3(8)]
Permits to connect with a public sewer or drain or with a private conduit
connecting a public sewer or drain may at any time be revoked and annulled
by the City Council for such cause as it may deem sufficient, and all parties
in interest shall be held to have waived the right to claim damages on
account of such revocation or annulment.
Sec. 70-69 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-75
CHCT:731
Sec. 70-75. Treatment capacity of City facilities. [Code 1975,
§ 19-3(20)]
At such time that the City's treatment facilities reach 80% of the treatment
capacity, new permits to connect to the City's facilities shall be closely
reviewed and justified incrementally. No new permits shall be issued after
such time unless they are justified or previously issued permits are
abandoned, or revoked, or additional capacity is added to the facilities.
Sec. 70-76. through Sec. 70-85. (Reserved)
Sec. 70-75 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-76
CHCT:732
DIVISION 4
USE REGULATIONS
Sec. 70-86. Prohibited discharges. [Code 1975, § 19-4(a), (b)]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers or drains:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(1)
Any pollutants, including, without limitation, oxygen demanding
pollutants, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
create a public nuisance, or are not susceptible to treatment or
which may interfere with the biological processes or efficiency
of the treatment system, or that will pass through the system
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater
treatment plant or causing any other interference.
(2)
Any acidic waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0, or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, acids, sulfides,
concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds and substances
which will react with water to form acidic products.
(3)
Solid or vicious substances in quantities or of such size as would
be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater works,
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground
garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails,
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or
ground by garbage grinders, unless approved in writing by the
Director.
(4)
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 140° F. (60°
C.); provided, that such discharges do not result in a temperature
at the plant influent greater than 104° F. (40° C.). In such cases
where the 104° F. (40° C.) influent criterion is violated, the
temperature of the wastewater from the industrial user shall be
lowered to a point that will be determined by the Director.
[Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(5)
National categorical pretreatment standards as promulgated by
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the
act shall be met by all dischargers. An application for modification
of the national categorical pretreatment standards may be
considered for submittal to the regional administrator by the City
(6)
(a)
Sec. 70-86 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-86
CHCT:733
when the City's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of the pollutants as defined by 40 CFR 403.7.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely
in the opinion of the Director that such wastes can harm either the
sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, or
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the Director will give consideration
to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows
and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the wastewater treatment process, capacity of the wastewater
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the wastewater
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited
are:
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 200 milligrams per liter (mg/1) or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° and 140° F. (0° and 60° C.). [Amended
10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100
(1)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-fourths horsepower (0.76 horsepower metric) or greater
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director.
(2)
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(3)
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding local
limits as published by the Director and as may be amended, or as
established to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies or jurisdictions for such discharge to the receiving
waters. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(4)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
(5)
(6) Any alkaline waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids, such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues,
or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate). [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.100]
a.
(7)
(b)
Sec. 70-86 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-86
CHCT:734
Color or turbidity in such an amount that it will prevent the
City from discharging a treated effluent in compliance with the
water quality standards.
b.
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the wastewater treatment plant.
c.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs.
d.
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment plant processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
(8)
Septic tank solids that are not diluted sufficiently to assure that
all particles will be carried freely under all flow conditions in the
wastewater facilities.
(9)
Any waters containing metals such as, but not limited to, iron,
chromium, copper and zinc, and similar hazardous or toxic
substances to such degree that any such material received in the
composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment plant exceeds
the local limits established by the Director for such material.
[Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(10)
Any waters containing organic compounds such as volatile
organics, semivolatile organics, pesticides and similar hazardous or
toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received
in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment plant
exceeds the limits established by the Director for such materials.
(11)
Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction, are capable of creating a public nuisance
or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair.
(12)
Any substance which may cause the City's wastewater facilities
effluent or residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
(13)
Any substance which will cause the City wastewater facility to
violate its NPDES permit and/or state waste discharge license
certificate.
(14)
Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the
wastewater treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
(15)
Sec. 70-86 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-86
CHCT:735
Sec. 70-87. Additional limitations authorized. [Code 1975,
§ 19-4(c); amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
The City reserves the right to amend this article to provide for more
stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the City wastewater
facilities where deemed necessary to comply with objectives set forth in
this article and the provisions of Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71 et seq., as
amended.
Sec. 70-88. State discharge limitations. [Code 1975, § 19-4(c)]
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall be met by all
discharges which are subject to such standards in any instance in which
such requirements and limitations are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this article or any other applicable
ordinance.
Sec. 70-89. Dilution of discharge. [Code 1975, § 19-4(c); amended
10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
No discharger shall increase the use of potable or process water in any way
for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards set forth
in this division or Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71 et seq., as amended.
Sec. 70-90. Protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
material; notification requirements. [Code 1975, § 19-4(c)]
Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
(16)
Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this
division. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge
of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the
discharger's cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and
operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted
to the City for review and shall be approved by the City before
construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures by the City shall not relieve the discharger from
the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this section.
(a)
Dischargers shall notify the City immediately upon the occurrence of
a slug or accidental discharge of substance prohibited by this division.
The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time
thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective
actions taken. Any discharger who discharges slugs of prohibited
materials shall be liable for any expense, loss or damage to the City
wastewater facility in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on
the City on account thereof under state or federal law.
(b)
Sec. 70-86 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-90
CHCT:736
Sec. 70-91. Discharge limitations; enforcement of unlawful
discharges. [Code 1975, § 19-4(d); amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No.
2010.100]
Signs shall be permanently posted in conspicuous places on
dischargers' premises advising employees whom to call in the event of
a slug or accidental discharge. Employers shall instruct all employees
who may cause or discover such a discharge with respect to emergency
notification procedures.
(c)
If, for any reason, a facility does not comply with or will be unable
to meet any prohibition or limitations in this division, the facility
responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the Director so
that corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system.
In addition, a written report addressed to the Director detailing the
date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and
characteristics of the discharge and corrective action taken to prevent
future discharges shall be filed by the responsible industrial facility
within seven calendar days of the occurrence of the noncomplying
discharge.
(d)
Users subject to industrial pretreatment must comply with the
provisions of Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71, as may be amended.
[Added 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(e)
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain substances in
excess of the local limits or possess the characteristics which, in the
judgment of the Director, may have a deleterious effect upon the
wastewater works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Director may:
(1) Reject the wastes.
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers as per Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71, as may be
amended.
(2)
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
Require payment of a surcharge to cover the added cost of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges. The amount to be assessed shall include not only the
aforementioned costs but also costs of ascertaining
responsibilities; the surcharges shall be assessed for the
conventional pollutants of BOD, COD and TSS. Surcharges will be
assessed per 100 pounds of pollutant discharged. The twenty-fourhour
average concentration for BOD is 250 mg/1; for COD is 500
mg/1; and for TSS is 300 mg/1. Surcharges will be assessed for
the higher of the two BOD or COD but not for both. The rate per
(4)
(a)
Sec. 70-90 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-91
CHCT:737
Sec. 70-92. Pretreatment or equalization requirements; approval
required for discharge of beryllium, mercury, arsenic or selenium.
[Code 1975, § 19-4(e); amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
If the Director permits or requires the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Director, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws, and all federal
and state pretreatment requirements. Any waters or wastes containing
heavy metals, including, but not limited to, arsenic, barium, cadmium,
chromium, cobalt, copper, lead, nickel, tin, silver, gold or zinc, require
approval of the Director prior to discharge to the City's system.
Pretreatment requirements shall be as authorized in Ord. No. 2009.46,
Chapter 71, as may be amended.
Sec. 70-93. Grease, oil and sand interceptors. [Code 1975, § 19-4(f)]
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
or other harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Director and shall be located as
to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Sec. 70-94. Maintenance of preliminary treatment or flowequalizing
facilities. [Code 1975, § 19-4(g)]
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in a condition
satisfactory to the Director and be effectively operated by the owner at the
owner's expense.
100 pounds shall be fixed by the Council upon recommendation
of the Wastewater Management Commission. In no case shall the
pollutant concentration exceed the local limit daily maximum for
BOD, COD or TSS.
Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable
or necessary to achieve the purpose of this division.
(5)
The Director shall notify in writing any owner or other person violating
any of the provisions of this division, stating specifically the nature and
degree of the violation and establishing a reasonable time limit within
which the violation is to be eliminated [see Section 70-31(1)]. Failure to
meet the time limit shall be considered a violation of the provisions of
this section.
(b)
Sec. 70-91 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-95
CHCT:738
Sec. 70-95. Analysis, data requirements. [Code 1975, § 19-4(h)]
Furnishing analysis, flow data, etc., required by this article shall be the
responsibility of the owner. The Director will stipulate the minimum analysis
and other data that shall be obtained and shall conduct such wastewater
sampling and measuring programs as are required, or as requested by the
owner. Expenses thus incurred by the City shall be assessed to the owner.
Sec. 70-96. Accepting waste of unusual strength; septage. [Code
1975, § 19-4(i), (j)]
Sec. 70-97. Industrial discharge permit system. [Code 1975,
§ 19-4(k); amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
Sec. 70-98. Administration. [Code 1975, § 19-4(l); amended
10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
Sec. 70-99. Enforcement. [Code 1975, § 19-4(m)]
Waste of unusual strength may be accepted by the City for treatment,
subject to payment thereof by the industrial concern, as outlined in
Section 70-91(a)(4). Under no circumstances will waste be accepted
which results in the exceedance of federal standards, or technically
based local limits, whichever are more stringent.
(a)
No septage shall be discharged to the City sewer system except in
compliance with this chapter.
(b)
All industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge into any part of
the wastewater treatment system must first obtain a discharge permit
in accordance with Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71, as may be amended.
(a)
It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage, industrial wastes or other
wastes to any sewer outlet within the jurisdiction of the City and to the
City wastewater facilities without having first complied with the terms
of this division.
(a)
Industrial dischargers shall complete and file with the City a disclosure
declaration in the form prescribed by the City, and accompanied by
the appropriate fee. Existing industrial dischargers shall file disclosure
forms within 60 days after being notified by the City, and proposed
new dischargers shall file disclosure forms at least 90 days prior to
connecting to the City wastewater facilities. The disclosure to be made
by the discharger shall be made on written forms provided by the City
in accordance with Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71, as may be amended.
(b)
The City may for good cause shown suspend the wastewater treatment
service to a discharger when it appears to the City that an actual
or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or
substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, substantial
danger to the environment, interfere with the operation of the City
(a)
Sec. 70-95 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-99
CHCT:739
wastewater facilities, or violate any pretreatment limits imposed by
this division. Any discharger notified of the suspension of the City's
wastewater treatment service shall cease all discharges. In the event
of failure of the discharger to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the City shall commence judicial proceedings immediately
thereafter to compel the discharger's compliance with such order. The
City shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service and terminate
judicial proceedings pending submission of proof by the discharger that
the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating
the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth in this section
have been corrected.
The City may seek to terminate the wastewater treatment services,
or take other appropriate enforcement action, including issuing a
compliance order, to any discharger which fails to:
Factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of
its discharge;
(1)
Report significant changes in wastewater constituents or
characteristics;
(2)
Refuses reasonable access to the discharger's premises by
representatives of the City for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring; or
(3)
Violates the conditions of this division or any final judicial order
entered with respect thereto.
(4)
(b)
Whenever the City finds that any discharger has engaged in conduct
which justifies termination of wastewater treatment service pursuant
to Subsection (b) of this section, the City shall serve or cause to be
served upon such discharger a written notice, either personally or by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, stating the nature
of the alleged violation. Within three days of the date of receipt of the
notice, the discharger shall respond personally or in writing to the City
advising of its position with respect to the allegations. Thereafter, the
parties shall meet to ascertain the veracity of the allegations and where
necessary establish a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof.
(c)
Where the violation of Subsection (b) of this section is not corrected
by timely compliance by means of administration adjustment, the City
may order any discharger which causes or allows conduct prohibited
by Subsection (b) of this section to show cause before the City or its
duly authorized representative why the proposed service termination
action should not be taken. A written notice shall be served on the
discharger by personal service, certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, specifying the time and place of a hearing to be
held by the City or its designee regarding the violation, the reasons
why the enforcement action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement
action, and directing the discharger to show cause before the City or
its designee why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken.
(d)
Sec. 70-99 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-99
CHCT:740
The notice of the hearing shall be served no less than three days before
the hearing. Service may be made on any agent, officer or authorized
representative of a discharger. The proceedings at the hearing shall
be considered by the City, which shall then enter appropriate orders
with respect to the alleged improper activities of the discharger. Appeal
of such orders may be taken by the discharger in accordance with
applicable local or state law.
Following the entry of any order by the City with respect to the conduct
of a discharger contrary to the provisions of Subsection (b) of this
section, the attorney for the City may, following the authorization of
such action by the City, commence an action for appropriate legal and/
or equitable relief in the appropriate local court.
(e)
A list of all significant dischargers which were the subject of
enforcement proceedings pursuant to this section during the 12
previous months shall be published annually by the City in the largest
daily newspaper published in the City, or by the largest daily newspaper
servicing the City, summarizing the enforcement actions taken against
the dischargers during the same 12 months whose violations remained
uncorrected 45 or more days after notification on noncompliance, or
which have exhibited a pattern of noncompliance over that twelvemonth
period, or which involve failure to accurately report
noncompliance.
(f)
Any discharger or any interested party may, within two days of any
action by the City for which an interpretation or ruling is requested,
make a request in writing for an interpretation or ruling on any matter
covered by this division, and the City shall provide a prompt written
reply. If such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of
performance of compliance with this section for which enforcement
activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a
discharger's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending
receipt of the aforesaid written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order
entered pursuant to this division may be taken in accordance with local
and state law.
(g)
Any discharger which experiences an upset in operations which places
the discharge in a temporary state of noncompliance with this division
shall inform the City thereof within 24 hours of first awareness of the
commencement of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a
written follow-up report thereof shall be filed by the person with the
City within five days. The report shall specify:
Description of the upset, the cause thereof, and the upset's impact
on a discharger's compliance request.
(1)
Duration of noncompliance, including exact dates and times of
noncompliance, and, if the noncompliance continues, the time by
which compliance is reasonably expected to occur.
(2)
(h)
Sec. 70-99 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-99
CHCT:741
Sec. 70-100. Records retention. [Code 1975, § 19-4(n)]
All discharges subject to this division shall retain and preserve, for no
less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports,
correspondence, and any and all summaries thereof relating to monitoring,
sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a discharger in
connection with its discharge. All records which pertain to matters which
are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or
litigation activities brought by the City pursuant to this division shall be
retained and preserved by the discharger until all enforcement activities
have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all
appeals have expired.
Sec. 70-101. Fees. [Code 1975, § 19-4(o)]
Sec. 70-102. (Reserved)55
All steps taken or to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of such an upset or other conditions of
noncompliance.
A documented and verified bona fide operating upset shall be
an affirmative defense to any enforcement action brought by the
City against a discharger for any noncompliance with this division
which arises out of violations alleged to have occurred during the
period of the upset.
(3)
The pretreatment manager shall promulgate an enforcement response
program, setting out the procedure to be followed in cases of violations
of any permit, compliance order or standard. The response program
shall establish a uniform administrative process.
(i)
It is the purpose of this division to provide for the payment of fees from
dischargers to the City's wastewater disposal system, to compensate
the City for the cost of administration of the pretreatment program
established in Ord. No. 2009.46, Chapter 71, as may be amended.
[Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
(a)
The City shall adopt charges and fees which may include:
(1) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
(2) Fees for filing appeals.
Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and proposed
construction work at the industrial discharger's facility.
(3)
Analysis of compliance monitoring conducted by the POTW on an
industrial user's waste stream, which shall be billed directly to that
industrial user.
(4)
(b)
Sec. 70-99 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-103
CHCT:742
Sec. 70-103. Miscellaneous provisions. [Code 1975, § 19-4(p) — (r);
amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100]
Sec. 70-104. General rules and regulations for customers of sewer
system. [Ord. of 11-8-1995]
If any provision, paragraph, word, subsection or section of this division
is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
provisions, paragraphs, words, subsections and sections shall not be
affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
(a)
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this division are hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistency or conflict unless otherwise noted.
(b)
Agreement. The following rules and regulations, and such regulations
as may be hereafter established by the Street Committee shall be
considered binding with every customer who uses the sewer, and such
customer shall be bound thereby.
(a)
Definitions and statements.
APPLICANT — The same as customer and may be used interchangeably.
CUSTOMER — Any person, firm, corporation, governmental unit or
subdivision supplied with sewer service by the City and is the owner or
agent thereof for the property being serviced.
SERVICE CONNECTION — The point of connection of the customer's
piping at the City main.
All sewer mains within the limits of the highway, of appropriate
easements, including manholes and appurtenances, shall be owned
and maintained by the City of Biddeford. From the service connection
at the main in the right-of-way to the premises served, shall be owned
and maintained by the customer.
SEWER MAIN(S) — The pipe or pipes which convey the customer's
effluent away from his premises. The sewer main is generally dedicated
for sanitary purposes, however, a combined storm drain/sewer line
may also serve a sewer main in the absence of a dedicated line if the
combined line was in use for this purpose.
Sewer mains installed in a private road (not City accepted) as part
of a private subdivision shall remain the property of the developer.
These lines will not be accepted by the City for the operation and
maintenance unless the roadway is accepted by the City in the future.
Construction of the sewer lines will be in accordance with state and
City requirements.
(b)
55.Editor's Note: Former Section 70-102, Industrial wastewater monitoring and reporting,
adopted as § 19-4(s) of the 1975 Code, was repealed 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.100. For
current provisions, see Ch. 71, Utilities/Industrial Sewer Use.
Sec. 70-103 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-104
CHCT:743
SEWER SERVICE — The connection between the tap at the City main
and the customer's source of sewage and shall include all of the pipe,
fittings, and couples necessary to make the connections.
Enforcement. Any violation of the rules and regulations hereby
established or failure on the part of any customer utilizing the sewer to
promptly pay any and all claims of the Department, shall be considered
sufficient cause for the Sewer Department to take the appropriate steps
as allowed by law to recover their interests.
(c)
Required use. As specified in federal, state and local ordinances and/or
regulations all buildings located within a reasonable distance from said
sewer connection or reasonable extension thereof shall be connected to
the municipal sewer determined by the authorized agent of the City of
Biddeford. Any request for a variance will be appealed as outlined in
Section 70-104(o) of these general rules.
(d)
Application for service. All applications for sewer entrances must be
made at the City Clerk's office stating fully and truly the uses to which
the entrance is required. Such applications must be signed by the
customer or his duly authorized agent. A fee of $400 shall be made
with each application before work is begun on a new service. If the
service as determined by the authorized City representative must enter
a manhole then this connection requires boring and the proper booting
contractor should secure a private company to do this work. In the
event no private company is available, then the City can be contracted
for the boring and an additional $300 must be paid for this work.
All septage haulers that discharge septage waste at the Biddeford
WWTP shall be licensed by the Sewer Department. License fee of $25
per year will be paid on or before July of each year. If no violations
occur in that twelve-month period, the next year's license will be
granted at the same charge. Failure to obtain a license or revocation
of the license will prohibit the septic hauler from pumping septic tanks
within the City of Biddeford or discharging any waste at the Biddeford
WWTP.
Exceptions:
Subdivisions: The entrance fee for subdivisions shall be the
entrance fee of $400 plus $100 per lot. Said charges to be paid
before the subdivision will be opened for use.
(1)
Easements: Certain sewer easements may exempt the customer
from the entrance fee. This will be clearly stated in the easement
itself.
(2)
(3) Liens: See Section 70-104(p).
Apartments and condominiums: The entrance fee for an apartment
building/complex or for a condominium complex shall be the
(4)
(e)
Sec. 70-104 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-104
CHCT:744
entrance fee of $400 plus $100 per unit. These charges shall be
paid before the connections are started.
Size of service. The minimum size of the service connection shall be
four inches. Actual sewer services may be four inches or six inches as
the situation dictates. Any sewer serving a single building containing
three or more units will be a minimum of six inches.
(f)
Installation.
The customer shall make arrangements and pay for the remaining
sewer service from the service connection at the main to the house
entrance. Service pipe and fixtures shall conform to the
requirements of the Sewer Ordinance (Article II of Chapter 70 of
the Municipal Code of Ordinances).
(1)
A minimum slope of 1/4 inch per foot (two-percent slope) and a
minimum of three feet of cover is standard practice for sewer
service as stated in the design and construction of sanitary and
storm sewers, MREP No. 37 or MOP No. 9. One-way valves are
recommended for all lines and are required when sewer services
are installed at minimum slope.
(2)
Except as provided in the Sewer Ordinance or approved by the
Street Committee each building shall have an independent sewer
connection.
(3)
Ordinarily no new sewer services or extensions for mains will be
installed during winter conditions (November 15 to April 15) unless
the customer shall defray all extra expenses incurred.
(4)
Service connections shall not be made in manholes unless the
depth of the sewer main is in excess of 15 feet in which case an
inside drop may be used if approved by the City Engineer or an
authorized City representative. All services entering a manhole will
be bored and booted.
(5)
(g)
Pipes and fixtures.
No persons except those duly authorized by the City Council as
specified in Section 70-28 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Biddeford will tap any sewer main or connect any sewer service
thereto.
(1)
Applicants desiring more than one sewer service on the same
premises shall pay all costs in connection therewith.
(2)
Repairs and/or modifications to applicant's service connections,
whether required as a result of freezing or other causes, will be
charged to the customers on a cost basis. All work must be done
under authorization and/or supervision of the authorized City
representative.
(3)
(h)
Sec. 70-104 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-104
CHCT:745
No service pipe shall be laid in the same trench with gas pipes,
water pipes, or any facility of a public utility not within three feet
of any open excavation or vault.
(4)
No cross connection between the sewer service and any drainage
appurtenances will be allowed. No connection capable of causing
blockages in the City mains or enabling drainage overflows into the
sewer will be permitted.
(5)
Connecting and disconnecting. Twenty-four hours' advance notice is
required for connecting and disconnecting sewer connections. The
requested service will be provided as soon as possible thereafter. All
expenses involved will be the responsibility of the applicants. Overtime
charges at the rate of time and 1/2 will be charged before or after duty
hours, with a minimum two-hour charge.
(i)
Miscellaneous charges. Charges for labor and material shall be billed
upon completion of the work which the bill covers. If such bills are not
paid within 30 days, the sewer will be disconnected or become a lien on
the property or both. Collection procedures will be taken and any costs
will be charged to the customer.
(j)
Interruption of service. The City of Biddeford reserves the right to
shut off service temporarily whenever it becomes necessary to make
extensions, alterations or repairs.
(k)
Violations.
Failure to pay charges when due or violations of any regulations
established by the street committee whether by a current or past
owner shall result in the filing of an attachment against the
property being served as provided by state statutes. The customer
shall be responsible for all costs associated with the filing.
(1)
Violations for septage haulers that will be cause for revocation of
license include but not limited to:
a. Failure to pay monthly bills in a timely manner.
Failure to pretreat septage hauled as requested by the
Superintendent and/or plant operator of the WWTP.
b.
Failure to notify the Superintendent and/or plant operator of
the WWTP of the strong or abnormal waste prior to discharge
to any point in the City's collection system or treatment works.
c.
(2)
(3) Failure to provide required information on dump slips.
Revocation of the license will be subject to a majority vote of the
City Council. The septage hauler will be notified of the date of the
hearing and may be present to defend the charges.
(4)
(l)
Sec. 70-104 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-104
CHCT:746
A septage hauler that has had his/her license revoked has the right
to appeal to the City Council.
(5)
Inspection. Any employee acting as authorized representative of the
City of Biddeford with proper identification shall be allowed access
to the customer's premises between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. for examination of pipes, fixtures, connection, and the manner of
use. In case of emergency, no prior notice need be given and, in the
event of refusal of entry, application can be made to the courts for an
appropriate order with all legal costs being charged to the customer.
Any residence or commercial establishment found to have roof,
drain, floor drain, foundation drain, etc. (refer to Section 70-73
Biddeford Code of Ordinances) hooked into the City sewer after
August 15, 1978, upon notification will cease such violation within
30 days or be subject to penalties as stated in the Biddeford Code
of Ordinances Section 70-31.
(1)
Any residence or commercial establishment found to have items
(refer to Section 70-73), tied into the City sewer system prior to
August 15, 1978, shall pay a minimum fee of $75 to offset the
costs of required additional treatment. A higher fee may be set if
excessive quantities of inflow are discharged. This determination
will be made by the environmental specialist or Director of Public
Works.
(2)
(m)
Rates.
Actual rates are as recommended by the Street Committee and
are reviewed annually. The City Council shall approve all rate
recommendations.
(1)
All property owners are liable for the entire cost of installation,
maintenance, repairs, alterations or removal from their house to
their service connection at the main.
(2)
Labor rate of $12.50 per hour. Minimum labor charge of two hours.
Overtime charges at a rate of time and 1/2 will be charged before
or after duty hours being 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. with a minimum
two-hour charge.
(3)
Any calls for a sewer blockage at the same address that exceeds
three calls in a twelve-month period and are determined to be the
owners problem in each case will subject to the charges stated
herein.
(4)
Rates for special equipment shall be as follows:
a. Sewer jet $110 per hour with a two-hour minimum charge.
b. Dye testing $40 per one hour minimum charge.
(5)
(n)
Sec. 70-104 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-104
CHCT:747
Boring machine $300 per hole (when machine becomes
available).
If another community needs emergency help, the above
charges will be negotiable or won't apply.
c.
All monies from fees and rates charged will be placed into a special
account within the sewers and drains budget to offset capital and
ongoing costs created by the adoption of these general rules.
Excess revenue will be reflected in the following years
recommendation for fees and rates.
(6)
Variance/appeals.
All requests for variances or appeals to these regulations and
the Sewer Ordinance are to be directed to the Street Committee
all requests to meet with the street committee must be received
at least two weeks prior to the meeting to allow for proper
notification. Appeals of street committee decisions go to the City
Council.
(1)
Total variance from the mandatory use requirement [Section
70-104(d)] will not be granted as that violates state and federal
laws. Time extensions will be granted for good causes allowing
more than 90 days for the hook-up period. Conditional variances
are possible.
(2)
The Street Committee recognized that some buildings might be
located in excess of 500 feet from the sewer line while the property
line may be within five feet. In these situations, the committee
will consider requests for variances and make a decision based
on the specific conditions involved. A conditional variance may be
granted.
(3)
(o)
New mains and liens.
When a subdevelopment is built, the costs of all work associated
with the installation of sewer service is borne by the developer
as provided in the Subdivision Ordinance and Construction
Ordinance.
(1)
Should the City of Biddeford install a main line or extend a sewer
main, whether by petitions of the abutters or for the public good,
the total City cost shall be determined and be proportionate cost
for each abutter shall become a lien on such abutting property as
provided by the construction ordinance. Payment must be made
prior to any connection to the City line and may be arranged
through the City treasurer. Note: Payment of a lien supersedes the
entrance fee, provided it is larger than the entrance fee as outlined
in Section 70-104(e).
(2)
(p)
Sec. 70-104 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-104
CHCT:748
Sec. 70-105. through Sec. 70-125. (Reserved)
Any individual dissatisfied with the determination of his/her
proportionate share of costs may appeal as outlined in Section
70-104(o).
(3)
If an individual/company beyond the terminus of an existing sewer
main desires to connect to the line, that individual/company shall
extend the sewer main along his/her entire lot frontage (or to
the limits of gravity flow with the City of Biddeford). All costs
for this extension shall be borne by the individual/company unless
the extension is installed via petition in which case the preceding
paragraphs dealing with liens overrides this paragraph.
(4)
Changes to these rules and regulations. The forgoing rules and
regulations are subject to change with the pleasure of the Biddeford
Street Committee, but all such changes will be given reasonable
publicity and final approval will be the decision of the City Council.
(q)
Sec. 70-104 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-105
CHCT:749

ARTICLE III
WASTEWATER SYSTEM CAPACITY MANAGEMENT
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 70-126. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 19-61]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AFFILIATE — A person with whom an applicant under this article has a
direct financial, business or management interest.
CAPACITY — Not only the ability of the treatment plant to physically receive
a particular amount of flow per day but the ability of the treatment plant
to properly and effectively treat the flow within all limits established by any
federal or state license.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION — The placement of the
foundation, whether a frost wall, floating slab, or complete cellar, the walls
and/or the floor of which must be considered complete by the Building
Inspector.
Sec. 70-127. Entry of wastewater, permit required; permit
limitations. [Code 1975, § 19-62]
No person may undertake any development activity which will create
new wastewater flow into the City sewer system or which will increase
existing flow from any property without first obtaining a sewer use
permit from the City Engineer under this article. Sewer use permits
shall not be required for the replacement or addition of plumbing
fixtures within existing residential units.
(a)
Neither the Building Inspector nor the Plumbing Inspector may issue
any building permit, occupancy permit, or any other type of permit, to
anyone who, prior to September 18, 1990, had received a sewer use
permit under this article, or for any project appearing in the appendix
to the ordinance from which this chapter was derived which is on file in
the City Clerk's office, unless the applicant presents a certificate from
the City Engineer that the applicant has complied within the provisions
of this chapter.
(b)
Regardless of allotted capacity, as determined for any period, and as
shown in the documents on file in the City Clerk's office for any period,
no sewer use permit may be issued during periods when no capacity
remains, as determined by the City Engineer. The prohibition set forth
in this subsection applies notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter.
(c)
Sec. 70-126 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-128
CHCT:751
Sec. 70-128. Findings, statement of emergency and purpose. [Code
1975, § 19-60]
The design capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, 3,300,000
million gallons per day, is met or exceeded during spring runoffs when
groundwater, infiltration, inflow, cellar sumps and yard drains are tied
into the sewer system. Rainfall also leads to exceeded capacity by
entering through combined sewer systems and roof drains. These flow
conditions overburden hydraulic equipment at the treatment plant
causing overflow situations. Current average hydraulic loading to the
treatment plant is between 3,000,000 million and 3,100,000 million
gallons per day. Current design is 3,300,000 million gallons a day.
Estimated time for completion of upgrade of the wastewater facility is
four years. The City has estimated an allocation of 240,000 gallons over
the four-year period. This estimate is subject to change. This article
provides for periodic review, by the City Engineer, of the actual capacity
remaining to be allocated.
(a)
During periods when no remaining capacity exists, new flow into the
system will be prohibited until capacity is restored or created through
upgrade or removal of infiltration and inflow or other methods.
Educational efforts will be required by both the public and private
sectors to encourage conservation, to help create available capacity.
While the City is taking steps to cure these problems and to increase
the system's capacity, these steps cannot all be accomplished
immediately. Accordingly, it is the intent of this article that new or
additional sewage be discharged into the system in moderate amounts
to permit some growth and to ensure that any excess capacity which
develops is portioned out fairly and over a period of time until the
City has taken all steps necessary to cure the system's problems and
significantly increase its capacity.
(b)
An additional element of this article is the implementation of voluntary
and mandatory conservation measures designed to effectively increase
available capacity.
(c)
Because existing plant capacity could be greatly exceeded if immediate
efforts are not undertaken to control and manage new wastewater flow
and because this article is a vital part of the City's efforts to plan for
orderly growth, the City Council determines that the facts justifying
this article constitute an emergency within the meaning of Article III,
Section 8, of the Charter.
(d)
It is the intent of the City to establish, in the long run, a program under
which anyone seeking to enter new flow into the system will be required
to remove a defined percentage of the amount of the proposed new flow
through the elimination of infiltration and inflow. Once the inflow and
infiltration removal program is in place, the allocation system may be
eliminated.
(e)
Sec. 70-128 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-129
CHCT:752
Sec. 70-129. Capacity of plant. [Code 1975, § 19-63]
Sec. 70-130. Expiration of article; program monitoring;
amendments. [Code 1975, § 19-69]
Sec. 70-131. Penalties for violation of article. [Code 1975, § 19-72]
Any person who violates this article commits a civil violation for which a
forfeiture of $2,500 shall be imposed. Each day of violation constitutes a
separate violation. The City Solicitor, in addition to seeking forfeitures, may
request injunctive relief, as necessary.
Sec. 70-132. Growth management program renewed. [Ord. of
6-21-1994]
The provisions of this Article III (Wastewater System Capacity
Management), of the Biddeford Code of Ordinances, as most recently
revised and ordained on March 5, 1991, be renewed in its entirety in
accordance with the provisions of Section 70-130 hereof, and that this
measure take effect upon passage.
Sec. 70-133. through Sec. 70-140. (Reserved)
At the time of any reenactment or amendment of this article, and at
such other times as the City Council may direct, the City Engineer
shall establish the total remaining capacity of the wastewater treatment
plant, determine the nature and extent of efforts to remove infiltration
and inflow from the system, and report that information to the City
Council.
(a)
Until such time as the final inflow and infiltration removal program set
out in this chapter is implemented, any applicant for a sewer use permit
is subject to the interim provisions of Section 70-172.
(b)
Any person who received a sewer use permit prior to September 18,
1990, or whose project appears in the documents on file in the City
Clerk's office, is subject to the provisions of Section 70-127(b).
(c)
This article shall be in effect for one-hundred-eighty-day renewable
periods and should be maintained by future City Councils until such
time as a capital improvement program is completed that increases the
City's treatment plant capacity to 5,500,000 million gallons per day.
(a)
The capital improvement program shall be reviewed and monitored by
the City Council through the City Engineer to determine the program's
effectiveness. Amendments deemed necessary should be made at the
time of renewal under this section or at such times as deemed
necessary by the City Council.
(b)
Sec. 70-129 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-133
CHCT:753

DIVISION 2
PERMITS
Sec. 70-141. Application; fee; determination of discharges. [Code
1975, § 19-66]
Sec. 70-142. Expiration of permits. [Code 1975, § 19-67]
Permits issued under this article shall expire if construction of the
development for which each permit is issued has not commenced within one
year of the permit being issued, except that the City Engineer may extend
the life of such permits if the holder is able to demonstrate that he has been
delayed in his development by natural conditions beyond his control or that
he has been diligently pursuing other licenses required for the development
but has not yet received approval through no fault of his own. Decisions of
the City Engineer under this section may be appealed to the City Council.
Sec. 70-143. Nontransferability. [Code 1975, § 19-68]
Permits issued under this article may not be transferred to other
development projects on other real estate but shall run with the real estate
which is the subject of the proposed development for which the permit is
issued, but only for the life of the permit as indicated in Section 70-142.
Sec. 70-144. through Sec. 70-155. (Reserved)
Applications for permits under this article shall be on forms provided
by the City Engineer, and shall be accompanied by such plans as he
may require. As the case may be, applications must be accompanied
by written evidence of final approval from the Planning Board, Zoning
Board or Building Inspector, where approvals of or permits for the
development activity are required from those boards or officials.
Applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $50.
(a)
In determining the amount of wastewater flow likely to be discharged
from any development activity, the City Engineer shall be guided by the
State of Maine Internal Plumbing Rules. His determination is final.
(b)
Sec. 70-141 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-144
CHCT:755

DIVISION 3
CONSERVATION
Sec. 70-156. Mandatory. [Code 1975, § 19-70]
Sec. 70-157. Voluntary. [Code 1975, § 19-71]
In order to avoid requiring conversion to low-volume toilets in the City's
existing households and businesses, the City requests users of the City's
sewer system to, as an example, reduce discharge volumes by installing
displacement devices such as bricks and milk containers in toilet holding
tanks. The installation of water flow reduction devices in showerheads
and faucets are other inexpensive means of reducing both residential and
nonresidential wastewater discharge.
Sec. 70-158. through Sec. 70-170. (Reserved)
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the following
provisions apply to development which will create new wastewater flow
into the City sewer system or which will increase existing flow from any
property.
All toilet fixtures, whether for residential or nonresidential uses,
must have flushing volumes less than or equal to 1.6 gallons.
(1)
All shower and faucet fixtures for residential and nonresidential
uses must be installed with volume reduction devices. This
requirement may be waived for certain nonresidential uses by the
Codes Enforcement Officer at his discretion when the requirement
interferes with the fixture's purpose, such as but not limited to
industrial showers designed to treat burn victims.
(2)
(a)
The standards of this section must be met by all units inspected by the
City Plumbing Inspector as of the date of passage of the ordinance from
which this article derives, in order to receive a certificate of occupancy.
(b)
Sec. 70-156 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-158
CHCT:757

DIVISION 4
INFLOW AND INFILTRATION REMOVAL
Sec. 70-171. Study by City Engineer; report; amendment of article.
[Code 1975, § 19-81]
Sec. 70-172. Issuance of permit; interim fee. [Code 1975, § 19-82;
Ord. of 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 2001.1, 1-16-2001]
The City Engineer shall forthwith investigate the areas within the
existing sewer system which may be changed, altered or repaired
to remove infiltration and inflow, and determine both the nature and
extent of such repairs, the specific amounts of gallons per day removed
for any particular repair project, and the associated cost per gallon per
day of any such repair. He will, in addition, determine an average cost
per gallon per day of removal for all projects in such a fashion that
the average cost may be adjusted from time to time to reflect changing
conditions. The determinations by the City Engineer will be used to
create a fee to be charged to applicants of the removal of infiltration
and inflow in an amount equal to a specific percentage of the amount
of new flow into the system which the applicant is proposing to create.
That percentage shall conform to any requirements imposed on the City
by state or federal agencies.
(a)
The City Engineer shall report the results of his study under this section
to the City Council. The City Council may then, consistent with the
terms of federal and state approvals, implement and adopt a mandatory
inflow and infiltration removal requirement. Under the terms of the
requirement, a sewer use permit may only be obtained to remove an
adequate amount of inflow and infiltration from the system or if the
sewer user has paid the appropriate fee in lieu of completing a project.
(b)
At the time of the submittal of the results of his study under this
section, the City Engineer shall present to the City Council a proposed
amendment to this article setting out the method of administration
of the removal requirement, and demonstrating compliance with any
provisions of law restricting the creation of such a program, including
the creation of any dedicated fund into which fees will be placed.
(c)
Pending completion of the study, report and presentation set forth
in Section 70-171, and subject to the availability of capacity at the
treatment plant and compliance with all other provisions of this article,
a sewer use permit may be given after an applicant complies with this
section.
(a)
An applicant for a sewer use permit shall, in addition to other
information required by this article, pay the interim fee set out in
Subsection (c) of this section. The City Engineer may require such other
information as he deems necessary.
(b)
Sec. 70-171 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-172
CHCT:759
Except as indicated in Subsection (d) of this section, applicants shall
pay a fee equal to five times $2.72 times the number of gallons of
proposed new flow, as that flow is finally determined by the City
Engineer under Section 70-141(b). Fees received under this subsection
shall be segregated from the projects designed to remove inflow and
infiltration from the sewer system as finally determined after the
completion of the study, report and presentation set forth in Section
70-171. Fees, or any portion of those fees, actually paid, which exceed
the actual cost of removal, or which are not expended according to the
removal schedule to be finally adopted, shall not be refunded. These
unexpended fees shall be deposited in a designated enterprise account
segregated from the City's general revenues and be earmarked to help
defray the cost of future more costly inflow and infiltration removal
projects.
(c)
Persons who had received a sewer use permit prior to September 18,
1990, projects appearing in Appendix B of this section which is on file
in the City Clerk's office and lots of record as of September 18, 1990,
which were within 200 feet of the existing sewer system at the time, are
subject to a fee equal to one times $2.72 times the number of gallons
of proposed new flow, as that flow is finally determined by the City
Engineering Department under Section 70-141.
FORMULA:
For 180-day period commencing:
Total remaining capacity:
Divided by semiannual terms remaining:
Equals semiannual allotment:
Minus preferred allotment:
Equals remaining allotment:
__________ % remaining allotment = Residential allotment of
__________ % remaining allotment = Nonresidential allotment of
*All noted figures in thousands of gallons per day.
City Engineer
(d)
An applicant for a sewer use permit where said permit is proposed to
be issued and includes flows to the pump station located adjacent to
528 Alfred Road shall pay an impact fee for said pump station equal
to $3.35 times the number of gallons of proposed new flow as that
flow is finally determined by the City Engineer under Section 70-141(b).
Fees collected under this provision shall be deposited in a designated
account segregated from the City's general revenues and reserved for
inflow and infiltration removal projects. The City reserves the right to
verify the estimate of flow for up to five years and to increase the
impact fee as necessary.
(e)
Sec. 70-172 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-173
CHCT:760
Sec. 70-173. through Sec. 70-195. (Reserved)
Sec. 70-173 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-173
CHCT:761

ARTICLE IV
SEPTIC TANK SLUDGE DISPOSAL
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 70-196. Definitions. [Code 1975, § 19-21]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICANT — Any person requesting approval to discharge septic tank
sludge wastes into City facilities.
CESSPOOL — A lined excavation in the ground which receives the
discharge of a drainage system, or part thereof, so designed as to retain the
organic matter and solids discharging therein, but permitting the liquids to
seep through the bottom sides.
CONTRACTOR — Any person who pumps, conveys or in any manner
otherwise disposes of waste, refuse, effluent, sludge or other materials from
septic tanks, cesspools or other private sewage disposal systems, whether
for consideration or otherwise, and shall include the owner of the premises
concerned, his agents, servants or employees.
EFFLUENT — Something that flows out; waste material, liquid, industrial
refuse or sewage and pollutant.
FACILITIES — Structures, conduits, pumping stations, treatment and
disposal works, and other appurtenances for the purpose of collecting,
treating and disposal of domestic and/or wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL MANUFACTURER — Any industry, shop, commercial
establishment, repair station, storage warehouse, or any similar place of
business which is not used solely for residential purposes.
REFUSE — The worthless or useless part of something; leavings, trash,
garbage.
SEWAGE — Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in
suspension or solution and may include liquids containing chemicals in
solution. The term "sewage" shall not include industrial waste.
SLUDGE — A muddy or slushy mass, deposit or sediment as precipitated
solid matter produced by water and sewage treatment process, or a
precipitate or settling.
WASTES — Substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that can be carried
in water.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of the City, and may be a combination
of the liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings,
industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater and
surface water that may be present.
Sec. 70-196 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-197
CHCT:763
Sec. 70-197. Purpose. [Code 1975, § 19-20]
The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general
welfare of the people of the City by regulating the disposal of wastes, refuse,
effluent, sludge or any other materials from septic tanks and cesspools or
other private sewage disposal systems within the City and deposited at the
site designated by the City Council.
Sec. 70-198. Industrial septage waste. [Code 1975, § 19-22]
Sec. 70-199. Penalty for violation of article; continuing violations;
injunctive relief. [Code 1975, § 19-48]
Sec. 70-200. through Sec. 70-210. (Reserved)
The liquid waste from an industrial manufacturer, stored in a septic
tank or holding tank, shall be considered industrial septage waste and
not domestic septage.
(a)
Any industrial manufacturer shall notify the pretreatment manager
14 days prior to having any septage pumped to be conveyed to the
wastewater treatment plant.
(b)
The City may sample the septic tank or holding tank waste and analyze
for specific parameters which the pretreatment manager believes are
indicative of the industrial manufacturer. The Director or pretreatment
manager may request that the industrial manufacturer have a contract
laboratory sample and analyze the waste for such specific parameters.
The analysis may include, but is not limited to, parameters as outlined
in Chapter 71, Section 71-8(b). The industrial manufacturer is
responsible for all costs and expenses associated with any sampling and
analysis.
(c)
The City shall review the analytical results for compliance with Chapter
71, Section 71-8(b), and any other relevant section of this chapter,
before allowing any disposal of industrial septage waste. If all
parameters are in compliance, then the Director or pretreatment
manager shall notify the industrial manufacturer that he may dispose of
the waste at the wastewater treatment plant.
(d)
Any person or contractor who violates any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be fined in an amount not more than $10,000 for each
violation.
(a)
Each day in which any violation of this article shall continue shall be
deemed a separate violation.
(b)
In addition to the foregoing penalties set out in this section, the City
may seek injunctive or other relief to prohibit violations of this article
and to correct conditions caused by violations thereof.
(c)
Sec. 70-197 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-200
CHCT:764
DIVISION 2
LICENSE
Sec. 70-211. Required. [Code 1975, § 19-27]
All contractors or other persons engaged in the conveyance or
transportation of septic tank sludge wastes within the boundaries of the
City shall be required to be duly licensed by the City by January 1 of each
year. For purposes of this article, all contractors performing such service
shall be licensed within 30 days after adoption of this article.
Sec. 70-212. Filing date. [Code 1975, § 19-28]
The application for the license required by this division shall be filed with
the Wastewater Management Commission by December 1 of each year and
must be first approved by the Commission at a regular meeting before it
may be issued by the pretreatment manager.
Sec. 70-213. Fee. [Code 1975, § 19-29]
The fee for a license certificate under this article shall be $25 per year.
Sec. 70-214. Contents of application. [Code 1975, § 19-30]
The application for a license under this article shall include but is not
limited to the following information:
Sec. 70-215. Form of license. [Code 1975, Ch. 19, Exhs. A, B)
The form of the septic tank sludge disposal license shall be as follows:56
The form of the waste disposal permit shall be as follows:57
Sec. 70-216. through Sec. 70-225. (Reserved)
(1) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) D.E.P. license number.
(3) Number of vehicles used.
(4) Vehicle serial number of each vehicle used.
(5) Volume of each septic tank pumper or conveyance vehicle.
Certification, by person responsible for receiving septic tank sludge
wastes, of compliance by the applicant in accordance with this article.
(6)
(7) Violations.
56.Editor's Note: The form of the Septic Tank Sludge Disposal License is included at the end
of this chapter.
57.Editor's Note: The form of the Waste Disposal Permit is included at the end of this
chapter.
Sec. 70-211 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-216
CHCT:765

DIVISION 3
PERMIT
Sec. 70-226. Form; assessment of fees. [Code 1975, § 19-36]
The application permit required by this article is a four-part form. A fee is
assessed for each load at a rate as established by the City Council. Payment
shall be made prior to any discharge of the waste at the wastewater
treatment plant. If the flow meter at the wastewater treatment plant is
inoperative, then the plant operator shall determine the amount discharged.
Sec. 70-227. Individual permit for low volume septic haulers, fee.
[Code 1975, § 19-37]
Low volume septic haulers may obtain an individual permit at the treatment
plant site for a fee of $3, as issued by the treatment plant Superintendent.
Sec. 70-228. Verification required. [Code 1975, § 19-38]
The owner, resident, business or origin of the septic tank sludge waste
shall sign the application form, verifying that the waste material was in fact
picked up on their property and that the volume is true.
Sec. 70-229. Contractor responsibility. [Code 1975, § 19-39]
Every contractor, prior to disposal of any material or substance which is
regulated by this article, shall present a permit application, fully completed
with the information required, to or with the person designated responsible
for receiving septic tank sludge wastes, at the City facility selected by the
City Council.
Sec. 70-230. Endorsement of application. [Code 1975, § 19-40]
Upon receipt of the permit application, the designated responsible person
at the City facility shall endorse the application in the space provided and
give the contractor back one copy for his records.
Sec. 70-231. Routing and filing. [Code 1975, § 19-41]
After the permit application is endorsed, the designated responsible person
at the City facility shall promptly forward one of the two remaining copies
of the permit to the environmental specialist, and retain one file copy for
his records. Summary reports of permits exercised under this article will be
forwarded to the City Planner.
Sec. 70-232. Failure to produce completed permit. [Code 1975,
§ 19-42]
If the contractor fails to produce a fully completed application permit as
required by this article, the person responsible for receiving the septic tank
sludge wastes at the City facility has the right and authority to refuse the
Sec. 70-226 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-232
CHCT:767
off-loading of any vehicle. A sample application permit for septic tank sludge
wastes is on file in the City Clerk's office.
Sec. 70-233. through Sec. 70-239. (Reserved)
Sec. 70-232 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-233
CHCT:768
ARTICLE V
[AddFeadts4,- 7O-i2ls0 1A5ndB yGrOerads.e N Coo. n2t0r1o5l .12]
DIVISION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 70-240. Purpose and policy.
The purpose of this article is to facilitate the maximum beneficial
public use of the City's sewer services and facilities while preventing
blockages of the sewer lines resulting from discharges of fats, oils, and
grease (FOG) to the sewer facilities, and to specify appropriate FOG
discharge requirements for food service establishments (FSEs).
(a)
This article establishes quantity and quality standards on all
wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG, which may alone
or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer
facilities causing or potentially causing or contributing to the
occurrence of sewer backups and/or sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) or
combined sewer overflows (CSOs).
(b)
The specific objectives of this article are to:
Prevent the introduction of wastewaters containing fats, oils and
grease (FOG) in amounts which may cause excessive maintenance
of sewer lines, stoppages or obstruction of flow, or in any other
way prevent or inhibit operation of the publicly owned treatment
works (POTW), including the sanitary sewer collection system and/
or treatment plant;
(1)
Prevent the introduction of pollutants that may be incompatible
with the POTW;
(2)
Enable the City of Biddeford (City) to comply with its National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
conditions, sludge disposal conditions, sludge use and disposal
requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the
POTW is subject; and
(3)
Protect the environment and the health, safety and welfare of the
public and the POTW workers by regulating the pretreatment,
transport and disposal of FOG-related wastes.
(4)
(c)
This article enables the City to protect public health in conformity with
all applicable local, state, and federal laws relating thereto, including
but not limited to the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and
the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). This article shall
be interpreted in accordance with the definitions set forth in Sec.
70-241. The provisions of this article shall apply to the direct or indirect
discharge of wastewater or waste containing FOG carried to the sewer
facilities of the City.
(d)
Sec. 70-240 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-240
CHCT:769
Sec. 70-241. Definitions.
This rule shall apply to all food service establishment (FSE) users and
to persons or entities outside the City's political boundary who are, by
permit, contract, or agreement with the City, users of the Biddeford
POTW wastewater facilities or collection system.
(e)
Unless otherwise defined herein, terms related to water quality shall be
as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Environment Federation. The testing procedures for waste constituents
and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal
Regulations).
(a)
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, terms and phrases as
defined in Chapter 70, Sewer Use Rule of the City of Biddeford, Maine
(most recent version), shall apply.
(b)
Subject to the foregoing provisions, the following definitions shall apply
in this article:
ADDITIVES — Enzymes, bacteria and/or other products designed to
emulsify FOG and/or biologically treat FOG for grease remediation.
AUTOMATIC GREASE RECOVERY UNIT (AGRU) — A grease control
device capable of automatic collection and skimming FOG or diverting
collected FOG into a dedicated container.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions, practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG to
the POTW.
CHANGE IN OPERATIONS — Any change in the ownership, food types,
or operational procedures that have the potential to increase the
amount of FOG generated and/or discharged by food service
establishments in an amount that, alone or collectively, causes or
creates a potential for sewer backups and/or SSOs (sanitary sewer
overflows).
CITY OF BIDDEFORD CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICE — Local public
codes office responsible for, among other things, implementation and
enforcement of the International Plumbing Code.
CITY OF BIDDEFORD WASTEWATER DIVISION — Municipal division
charged with operating the City's sewage collection system and
wastewater treatment plants.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A collection of individual samples obtained
from one location (discharger) at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time. The resulting mixture (composite
sample) forms a representative sample of the waste stream discharged
during the sample period.
(c)
Sec. 70-240 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-241
CHCT:770
DIRECTOR OF WASTEWATER (DIRECTOR) — Director or his/her
authorized agents or representatives. The Director is responsible for
the operation and maintenance of all public wastewater facilities of the
City, including oversight of the FOG control program.
DISCHARGER — Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of
wastewater directly or indirectly to the POTW. "Discharger" shall mean
the same as "user."
EFFLUENT — Any wastewater outflow from the food service
establishment that is discharged to the POTW.
FATS, OILS, and GREASE (FOGs) — Any substance such as a vegetable
or animal product that is used in, or is a by product of, the cooking or
food preparation process, and that turns or may turn viscous or solidify
with a change in temperature or other conditions.
FOG CONTROL PROGRAM — The program as outlined in Fats, Oils and
Grease (FOG) Control Rule as approved by the Biddeford City Council.
FOG WASTEWATER DISCHARGE ORDER — A compliance mechanism
issued by the Director or his/her designee subjecting the recipient
to requirements and conditions specific to the compliant discharge of
FOG-containing waste into the POTW.
FOOD GRINDER — Any device installed in the plumbing or sewage
system for the purpose of grinding food waste or food preparation byproducts
prior to discharge.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE) — Any permanent facility
within the boundaries of the City of Biddeford, which prepares and/
or packages food or beverages for distribution, sale, or consumption,
on or off site, which has any process or device that uses or produces
FOG. Excluding private residences, FSEs include but are not limited
to food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, food processors,
restaurants, sandwich shops, grocery stores, bakeries, butchers,
limited food service establishments, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing
homes, churches, and school cafeterias.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample taken from a waste stream at a single point
in time, regardless of flow and discharge duration, as required under
40 CFR 136 to monitor for FOG content in wastewater effluent.
GREASE CONTROL DEVICE — Any grease interceptor, grease trap
or other mechanism, device, which attaches to, or is applied to,
wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of which is to trap,
collect, or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the sewer system.
"Grease control device" may also include any other proven method to
reduce FOG subject to the approval of the Director.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR (GI) — A device, usually located underground
and outside between a food service establishment and the connection to
the sewer system, designed to collect, contain, and remove food wastes
and grease from the process waste stream while allowing the remaining
Sec. 70-241 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-241
CHCT:771
wastewater to be discharged to the POTW. Each grease interceptor
shall constitute a separate device.
GREASE TRAP — A grease control device, usually located inside the
building immediately downstream from a sink or other appliance,
designed to collect, contain, and remove food wastes and grease from
the process waste stream while allowing the remaining wastewater
to be discharged to the collection system. Each grease trap shall
constitute a separate grease control device.
HOT SPOTS — Areas in the sewer collection system that have
experienced sanitary sewer overflows or that must be cleaned or
maintained frequently to avoid interference, blockages, or overflows.
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR (IPC) — Individual
responsible for, among other things, administering the FOG Program.
INSPECTOR — A person authorized by the Director to inspect any
existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing,
and/or disposal facility.
INTERFERENCE — Any discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the City's sewer
system, treatment processes or operations; or is a cause of violation of
the City's NPDES permit; or prevents lawful sludge use or disposal.
LIMITED FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (L-FSE) — A food service
establishment generally engaged only in reheating, hot holding, or
assembly of ready-to-eat food products, and as a result, wastewater
discharges contain insignificant amounts of FOG. A L-FSE is not
engaged in deep frying or grilling.
MANIFEST — A receipt or form which is retained by the generator of
wastes for disposing of recyclable wastes or liquid wastes as required
by the City. For purposes related to this FOG Control Rule, manifest
generally means the receipt from a waste hauler for disposal of FOG
waste from a grease interceptor grease trap, or automatic grease
recovery unit.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — The permit issued to control the discharge of
liquids or other substances or solids to receiving waters of the United
States.
NEW CONSTRUCTION (FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT) — Any
work at a new, proposed, or modified food service establishment
commencing after the effective date of this article.
NONCOMPLIANCE FEE — One or more fees established by the City
and levied against a user as a result of violation(s) against provisions
of this article. Noncompliance fees are used to compensate the City for
costs of additional inspection and followup, including, but not limited
to, sampling, monitoring, lab analysis, cleaning of sewers,
administrative inquiries, and administrative processing incurred as a
result of the noncompliance.
Sec. 70-241 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-241
CHCT:772
NONPOLAR FOG — Petroleum-based oil and grease.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation
or public agency, including the State of Maine and the United States of
America.
POLAR FOG — Animal and/or vegetable-based fats, oils, and grease.
PUBLIC AGENCY — The State of Maine and/or any city, county, other
local governmental authority or public body of or within the State of
Maine.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer owned and operated by the City, or other
local public agency, which is tributary to the City's sewer treatment
facilities.
REGULATORY AGENCY — Those agencies having regulatory
jurisdiction over the operations of the City, including, but not limited to,
United States Environmental Protection Agency and Maine Department
of Environmental Protection.
REMODELING — A physical change or operational change causing
increased FOG generation that exceeds the current amount of FOG
discharge to the sewer system by the FSE or construction exceeding a
cost of $25,000 to a food service establishment that requires a building
permit and involves any one or combination of the following:
RESIDENCE — A private building or space used as a permanent or
temporary home by one or more individuals. Each residential unit shall
be considered a separate residence.
SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW (SSO) — An overflow of untreated
wastewater from the sanitary sewer system into the environment.
SAMPLE POINT — A location approved by the Director, from which
wastewater can be collected that is representative in content and
consistency of the entire flow of wastewater being sampled.
SAMPLING FACILITIES — Structure(s) provided at the user's expense
for the City or user to measure and record wastewater constituent mass
and concentrations, to collect a representative sample, or to provide
access to plug or terminate the discharge.
SEWAGE — Wastewater.
SEWER FACILITY OR SYSTEM — Any property belonging to the City
used for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating and disposing of
wastewater and sludge.
(1) Under-slab plumbing in the food processing area;
(2) An increase of 30% in the net public seating area;
(3) An increase of 30% in the size of the kitchen area; or
(4) Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment.
Sec. 70-241 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-241
CHCT:773
SEWER LATERAL — The private wastewater connection between the
building's wastewater facilities and the public sewer system.
SLUDGE — Any solid or semisolid from a manufacturing process, utility
service, pretreatment facility, or FSE.
TENANT FINISH (FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT) — A portion of
an existing building that is subsequently occupied by a food service
establishment, oftentimes requiring building and/or plumbing
modification to meet the specifications and needs of the tenant. Tenant
finish differs from new construction in that a sewer connection permit
may have already been issued for the premises.
TWENTY-FIVE-PERCENT RULE — Requirement for grease control
device to be maintained such that the combined FOG and solids
accumulation does not exceed 25% of the design hydraulic depth of
the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic
retention time and required available hydraulic volume is maintained
to effectively intercept and retain FOG prior to discharge to the sewer
system.
USER — Any person who discharges or causes a discharge of
wastewater directly or indirectly to a public sewer system. "User" shall
mean the same as "discharger."
WASTE — Sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid,
gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation or of human
or animal nature, including such wastes placed within containers of any
nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.
WASTE HAULER — Any person carrying on or engaging in vehicular
transport of waste as part of, or incidental to, any business for that
purpose.
WASTE MINIMIZATION PRACTICES — Plans or programs intended
to reduce or eliminate discharges to the sewer system or to conserve
water, including, but not limited to, product substitutions,
housekeeping practices, inventory control, employee education, and
other steps to minimize wastewater production.
WASTEWATER — The liquid- and water-carried wastes of the
community and all constituents thereof, whether treated or untreated,
discharged into or permitted to enter a public sewer.
WASTEWATER CONSTITUENTS AND CHARACTERISTICS — The
individual chemical, physical, bacteriological, and other parameters,
including volume and flow rate and such other parameters that serve to
define, classify or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater.
Words used in this article in the singular may include the plural and
the plural the singular. Use of masculine shall mean feminine and
use of feminine shall mean masculine. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is
permissive or discretionary.
(d)
Sec. 70-241 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-241
CHCT:774
DIVISION 2
GENERAL LIMITATIONS, PROHIBITIONS, AND REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 70-242. FOG discharge limitations.
No food service establishment (FSE) shall discharge or cause to be
discharged into the sewer system polar or nonpolar FOG that exceeds
a concentration specified in Sec. 70-86 or a lower concentration that
accumulates and/or causes or contributes to blockages in the sewer system
or at the sewer system lateral which connects the food service
establishment to the sewer system.
Sec. 70-243. Prohibitions.
In additions to the prohibitions found in Sec. 70-86, the following
prohibitions shall apply to all food service establishments:
Sec. 70-244. FOG pretreatment required.
Discharge of wastes through food grinders and/or garbage-disposaltype
devices to sewer lines intended for grease control device service
is prohibited unless an appropriately sized solids trap is installed
immediately after such grinder or device.
(1)
Discharge of food waste, including food grinder waste that cannot pass
through a one-quarter-inch sieve, is prohibited.
(2)
Discharge of wastes that do not require separation (e.g., urinals, toilets,
wash basins, etc.) to sewer lines intended for grease control device
service is prohibited.
(3)
Introduction of any additives into a food service establishment's
wastewater system for the purpose of emulsifying FOG or biologically/
chemically treating FOG for grease remediation or as a supplement
to interceptor maintenance is prohibited, unless a specific written
authorization from the Director is obtained prior to use.
(4)
Disposal of bulk waste cooking oil into drainage pipes connected to the
POTW, with or without a grease interceptor, is prohibited. To the extent
practical, all waste cooking oils shall be collected and stored properly in
receptacles such as barrels or drums for recycling or other acceptable
methods of disposal.
(5)
Discharge to the POTW of any waste and solid materials removed
from a solids interceptor is prohibited. Solids removed from solids
interceptors shall be disposed of according to applicable regulations.
(6)
All food service establishments, including L-FSEs, shall comply with
applicable provisions specified in Division 4 of this article. A limited
food service establishment, as defined in this article, may or may not be
required to install a grease control device. The Director will make such
determinations on a case-by-case basis.
(a)
Sec. 70-242 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-244
CHCT:775
General compliance shall be established as follows:
New construction/tenant finish food service establishments. New
construction FSEs shall include and install one or more grease
control devices as approved by the Director or his/her designee
prior to commencing discharges of wastewater to the POTW, unless
otherwise specified. Potential FSE spaces and tenant finish FSE
spaces shall provide space and plumbing segregation for the future
installation of one or more grease control devices for each tenant
space prior to commencing discharges to the sewer system as
determined by the Director.
(1)
Existing food service establishments.
For existing food service establishments with existing grease
control devices, the grease control device shall be properly
operated and maintained in accordance with manufacturers'
instructions and established BMPs.
a.
Existing food service establishments with grease control
devices which have caused or contributed to grease-related
blockage(s) in the sewer system, or which have sewer laterals
connected to "hot spots," or which contribute significant FOG
to the POTW based on inspection or sampling may be required
to service and clean their grease control devices on a modified,
more frequent schedule as determined by the Director.
b.
Existing food service establishments without grease control
devices which have caused or contributed to grease-related
blockage(s) in the sewer system, or which have sewer laterals
connected to "hot spots," which contribute significant FOG to
the POTW based on inspection or sampling as per Sec. 70-242,
may be required to install an appropriately sized grease
control device.
c.
Food service establishments that undergo remodeling or a
change in operations, as defined in this article, may be
required to install an appropriately sized grease control
device.
d.
(2)
Except for specifically identified L-FSEs, all FSEs shall have a FOG
control plan.
The facility FOG control plan shall be located at the facility and
readily available. The FOG control plan may be in the form of a
paper copy or an electronic copy.
a.
b. The facility must implement the FOG control plan.
(3)
A FOG control plan shall be a written plan that includes the four
minimum elements. In all cases, a copy of published documents,
including manufacturers' publications, may be used to satisfy the
(4)
(b)
Sec. 70-244 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-244
CHCT:776
Sec. 70-245. Commercial properties.
Separate grease control devices shall be installed at food service
establishment located on a single real property parcel unless otherwise
approved by the Director. Maintenance of grease control devices shall be
the responsibility of the FSE operator unless a lease or other contractual
document specifies otherwise.
Sec. 70-246. Sewer system overflows (SSOs), abatement orders and
cost recovery.
Sec. 70-247. through Sec. 70-248. (Reserved)
requirements of a FOG control plan. The four minimum elements of
a FOG control plan are as follows:
Written best management practices (BMPs) as identified in
Sec. 70 Sec. 70-255(1)b through e.
a.
Written maintenance and operating procedures for each
grease control device, including the maintenance and cleaning
schedule.
b.
c. Written disposal practices for recovered liquid and solid FOG.
Written training program, training schedule, and topics to be
covered during training.
d.
Food service establishments found to have contributed to increased
sewer maintenance due to FOG discharges, a sewer blockage, SSO or
any POTW interferences resulting from the discharge of wastewater or
waste containing FOG may be ordered to take steps deemed necessary
by the Director to prevent future problems, including, but not limited
to, the installation and maintenance of a grease control device, and
may be subject to a more restrictive operation and maintenance plan
to abate the nuisance and future problems. Furthermore, sewer lateral
failures and SSOs occurring within the limits of private property caused
by food service establishments, alone or collectively, are the
responsibility of the private property owner or FSE(s).
(a)
If the City must act immediately to clear a sewer blockage or contain
and clean up an SSO caused by blockage of a private or public sewer
lateral or system serving a FSE, or acts at the request of the property
owner or operator, the City's costs for such abatement shall be entirely
borne by the property owner or operator, and shall constitute a debt to
the City.
(b)
Sec. 70-244 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-247
CHCT:777

DIVISION 3
FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS
All food service establishments shall comply with the following
requirements, where applicable:
Sec. 70-249. Drawing submittal requirements.
Sec. 70-250. Grease interceptor installation requirements.
Sec. 70-251. Grease interceptor maintenance requirements.
New and tenant-finish FSEs shall be required to submit three copies
of facility site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewer locations and connections, grease control
devices or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation for evaluation. The submittal shall also include
a description of any food processing that is or will occur on site,
including but not limited to the type of food service (sit down or take
out), types of cooking (saute, deep fry, etc.), a description of the menu,
and a list of kitchen fixtures with potential to contribute FOG to the
sanitary sewer; schematics of process areas illustrating drains and
discharge points connected to the sewer; and specific performance
goals and implementation schedule, including cleaning frequency and
waste disposal procedures if the business will self-clean grease traps.
The submittal may be submitted online or to the Director or Director's
designee, in a form and content acceptable to the City for expeditious
review prior to construction. The review of the plans and procedures
shall in no way relieve the FSE of the responsibility of modifying
the facility or procedures in the future, as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge, and to meet the requirements of this article or
any requirements of other regulatory agencies. The Director will confer
with the Codes Department and IPC to determine the adequacy of the
proposed FOG control mechanism(s), and may require changes to the
plans when needed.
(a)
The Director or Codes Office may require the drawings be prepared by
a Maine registered professional engineer.
(b)
Grease interceptor sizing shall conform to the specifications of the
current edition of the International Plumbing Code, Maine version, as
enforced by the Biddeford Code Enforcement Office, as specified by
the Director for good cause, or as recommended by the manufacturer,
whichever is more stringent. Minimum outside grease interceptor size
shall be 1,000 gallons.
(a)
The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be
at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of
accumulated grease.
(b)
Sec. 70-249 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-251
CHCT:779
New and existing grease interceptors shall be operated and maintained
in accordance with established best management practices,
manufacturers' instructions, as specified in this article, or as required
by the Director, whichever is more stringent. At a minimum,
maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, removal of the full
contents of the interceptor, including wastewater, accumulated FOG,
floating materials, sludge and solids from interceptor walls, baffles and
floors. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of
the interceptor or use of any method that does not remove the entire
contents of the collection device does not constitute maintenance under
this article. The grease interceptor shall be filled with clean water
before being returned to service.
(a)
All existing and newly installed grease interceptors shall be maintained
in a manner consistent with a maintenance frequency approved by the
Director pursuant to this section.
(b)
No FOG or sludge removed from a grease interceptor during
maintenance activities shall be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral,
sewer system, storm drain, or public right-of-way.
(c)
The maintenance frequency for all food service establishments with a
grease interceptor shall be determined by one of the following methods
as determined by the Director:
Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned at a
frequency such that the combined FOG and solids accumulation
does not exceed 25% of the total design hydraulic depth of the
grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic
retention time and required available hydraulic volume is
maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG discharged to
the sewer system.
(1)
The Director reserves the right, at any time, to require modification
of a food service establishment's FOG plan to increase the cleaning
frequency, if the grease interceptor's solids and grease layers
exceed 25% of its capacity at any time in the previous 12 months
on a twelve-month rolling basis.
(2)
All food service establishments with a grease interceptor shall fully
pump and clean the grease interceptor not less than every 90 days
unless a waiver is obtained as per Sec. 70-251(d)(4).
(3)
If a FSE wishes to clean its grease interceptor less often than the
minimum specified in this article (every 90 days), a waiver request
is required. The owner/operator of a food service establishment
may submit a request to the IPC requesting a change in the
maintenance frequency at any time. The food service establishment
must demonstrate that the requested change in frequency reflects
actual operating conditions based on the average FOG
accumulation over time and meets the requirements described
in Sec. 70-251(d)(1), and that it is in full compliance with the
(4)
(d)
Sec. 70-251 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-251
CHCT:780
Sec. 70-252. Grease trap installation requirements.
Sec. 70-253. Grease trap maintenance requirements.
conditions of this article. Upon determination by the IPC and
approval by the Director that the requested revision is justified,
the maintenance frequency will be amended and documented in
a letter to the owner/operator. Upon determination that the
requested revision is not justified, the FSE will be required to
continue maintaining the grease interceptor at the original
frequency.
If at any time the FSE becomes aware that the grease interceptor
contains FOG and accumulated solids in excess of the 25% rule
described in Sec. 70-251(d)(1), the food service establishment shall
have the grease interceptor serviced within five business days in
accordance with Sec. 70-251(a).
(5)
If it is determined that an overflow or blockage situation exists, the
interceptor shall be serviced immediately.
(6)
Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge/solids, and
other materials removed from the grease interceptor shall be properly
disposed off site by waste haulers in accordance with federal, state and/
or local laws.
(e)
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements related to grease
interceptor maintenance are detailed in Division 4.
(f)
Sizing and installation of grease traps shall conform to the
specifications of the current edition of the International Plumbing Code,
Maine version, as enforced by the Biddeford Code Enforcement Office,
as specified by the Director for good cause, or as recommended by the
manufacturer, whichever is more stringent.
(a)
The grease trap shall be installed and maintained at a location where
it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and
removal of accumulated grease.
(b)
New and existing grease traps shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with established best management practices,
manufacturers' instructions, as specified in this article, or as required
by the Director, whichever is more stringent. At a minimum,
maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, removal of
accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge, and solids from trap
walls, baffles and floors. The grease tap shall be filled with clean water
before being returned to service.
(a)
All existing and newly installed grease traps shall be maintained in a
manner consistent with a maintenance frequency as recommended by
the manufacturer and in accordance with site conditions.
(b)
Sec. 70-251 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-253
CHCT:781
Sec. 70-254. Monitoring facilities requirements.
Sec. 70-255. Requirements for best management practices.
All Food Services Establishments and other identified entities shall
implement minimum best management practices (BMPs) to minimize the
discharge of FOG to the sewer system. Detailed requirements for minimum
best management practices are specified in this article and explained in
the Fats, Oils, and Grease Control Program Toolkit (2006), published by
the National Restaurant Association. These may include kitchen practices
and/or employee training programs that are effective in minimizing FOG
discharge.
No FOG removed from a grease trap during maintenance activities shall
be allowed to pass into any sewer lateral, sewer system, storm drain, or
public right-of-way.
(c)
New and existing grease traps shall be inspected periodically to check
for leaking seams and pipes, and for effective operation of the baffles
and flow-regulating device. Grease traps and their baffles shall be
maintained free of all caked-on FOG and waste. Removable baffles shall
be removed and cleaned during the cleaning and maintenance process.
The grease trap shall be filled with water before being returned to
service.
(d)
Reporting and recordkeeping requirements related to grease trap
maintenance are detailed in Division 4.
(e)
The Director or his designee may require a food service establishment
to construct and maintain in proper operating condition, at the food
service establishment's sole expense, constituent monitoring and/or
sampling facilities.
(a)
The location of the monitoring or metering facilities shall be subject to
approval by the Director.
(b)
Food service establishments shall be required to provide City
inspectors with immediate, clear, safe, and uninterrupted access to the
food service establishment's monitoring and metering facilities.
(c)
All food service establishments shall be required, at a minimum, to
comply with the following best management practices:
Installation of floor drain grates/screens. Approved floor drain
grates/screens shall be installed in accordance with the
International Plumbing Code on all floor drain pipes in food
preparation areas.
a.
Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil. All waste cooking
oil shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such as
barrels or drums. Such receptacles shall be protected from the
weather and maintained properly to ensure that they do not leak.
b.
(1)
Sec. 70-253 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-255
CHCT:782
Sec. 70-256. (Reserved)
Waste cooking oil shall be disposed of through recycling,
rendering, fuel conversion, or any other legal method except
discharge to the POTW.
Segregation and collection of waste FOG solids. All waste FOG
solids shall be collected and stored properly in receptacles such
as barrels or drums. Such receptacles shall be protected from
the weather and maintained properly to ensure that they do not
leak. Waste FOG solids disposed of through recycling, rendering,
fuel conversion, MSW disposal, or any other legal method except
discharge to the POTW.
c.
Disposal of food waste. All food waste shall be disposed of directly
into the trash or garbage, recycled, or composted, but not disposed
of in sinks.
d.
Employee training. Employees of the food service establishment
involved in any aspect of food preparation, bussing, or cleaning
shall be trained by ownership/management within 30 days of hire
on the following subjects:
How to "dry wipe" pots, pans, dishware and work areas before
washing to remove grease.
1.
2. How to properly dispose of food waste and solids.
The location and use of absorption products to clean floors
under fryer baskets and other locations where grease may be
spilled or dripped.
3.
How to properly dispose of grease or oils from cooking
equipment into a grease receptacle such as a barrel or drum
without spilling.
4.
e.
Maintenance of kitchen exhaust filters. Filters shall be cleaned
as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good operating
condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning the exhaust
filter shall be disposed properly through a grease interceptor or
grease trap. Collected grease solids shall be disposed of through
recycling, rendering, or any other method approved by the
Director. Grease and oil accumulation on the roof or the exhaust
filter discharge shall be evidence of inadequate cleaning methods
or cleaning frequency.
f.
Kitchen signage. Best management and waste minimization
practices shall be posted conspicuously in the food preparation and
dishwashing areas at all times.
g.
Sec. 70-255 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-256
CHCT:783

DIVISION 4
MONITORING, REPORTING, NOTIFICATION, AND INSPECTION
REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 70-257. Monitoring and reporting conditions.
Monitoring for program compliance and general reporting.
The Director may require periodic reporting on the status and
implementation of best management practices.
(1)
In the course of determining the source of a FOG-related blockage
or interference, the Director may require remote visual or direct
visual monitoring, at the sole expense of the FSE or designee, to
document the actual conditions of the food service establishment's
sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream of the grease control
device.
(2)
Other reports may be required such as compliance schedule
progress reports, FOG control monitoring reports, and any other
reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the Director to ensure
compliance with this article.
(3)
(a)
Specific reporting requirements.
Food service establishments with grease interceptors shall submit
appropriate documentation of all grease interceptor cleaning,
pumping and/or maintenance activities to the IPC within seven
business days of any such activity. Appropriate documentation
includes, but is not limited to, waste hauler manifests, pump-out
report, etc. Documentation maybe faxed, mailed, e-mailed or handdelivered
to the IPC.
(1)
Food service establishments with grease traps shall maintain
accurate and complete inside grease trap/solids interceptor
maintenance logs. A template shall be made available through the
City website.
(2)
(b)
Recordkeeping requirements. The food service establishment or
designee shall be required to keep all manifests, receipts and invoices
of all cleaning, maintenance, grease removal of/from the grease control
device, and disposal carrier and disposal site location for no less than
three years. The FSE or designee shall, upon request, make such
documentation available to any City representative or inspector. These
records may include:
A logbook of grease interceptor, grease trap, solids interceptor
or grease control device cleaning and maintenance. At the FSE's
option, receipts for cleaning and maintenance may be used to
satisfy the requirements of this subsection for grease interceptor
recordkeeping.
(1)
(c)
Sec. 70-257 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-257
CHCT:785
Sec. 70-258. Inspection and sampling conditions.
Sec. 70-259. Notification of planned changes.
The food service establishment or Designee shall notify the IPC at least
90 days prior to any facility change in operations/remodeling or process
modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG
discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. The food service
establishment or designee shall provide notice to the IPC, in writing, of
the proposed change in operations or remodeling and shall submit any
additional information needed to evaluate the impact or effect of the
changes as may be required by the Director.
Sec. 70-260. through Sec. 70-265. (Reserved)
A record of best management practices being implemented,
including employee training.
(2)
Copies of records and manifests of grease interceptor or grease
trap waste hauling activities.
(3)
Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG
and solids accumulation in grease interceptors (25% Rule).
(4)
Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the sewer lateral. Any
other information deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure
compliance with this article.
(5)
Falsifying information or tampering with process. It shall be unlawful to
make any false statement or representation, or to submit or prepare a
false record, report, plan, or other document that is filed with the City,
or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease control
device, monitoring device, or access point required under this article.
(d)
The Director may inspect and/or sample or order the inspection and
sampling of the wastewater discharges of any food service
establishment to ascertain whether the intent of this article is being
met and the FSE is complying with all requirements.
(a)
The Director shall have the right to place or order the placement on a
food service establishment's property or other locations as determined
by the Director such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or
metering operations.
(b)
The Director shall have the right to inspect and copy all notices,
monitoring reports, waste manifests, and records maintained by the
FSE as required by this rule, including, but not limited to, those related
to wastewater generation and wastewater disposal.
(c)
Any grab or composite sample taken from a sample point is considered
to be representative of the discharge to the POTW at that sampling
location.
(d)
Sec. 70-257 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-260
CHCT:786
DIVISION 5
FACILITY REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 70-266. FOG registration.
Registration shall be required for all food service establishments in order
to aid the City in the administration and enforcement of this article.
Maintaining an accurate and up-to-date list of food service establishments
will serve to ensure that the sewer facilities are protected and are able to
operate with the highest degree of efficiency, and to protect public health
and the environment.
Sec. 70-267. FOG registration fee.
The Director shall charge a FOG wastewater discharge registration fee of
$75 for any registration submitted after the applicable due date of June 30,
2015, for existing FSEs, any registration renewal submitted after June 30
of any subsequent year, or any registration request by a new FSE or a FSE
modification after the initial startup date.
Sec. 70-268. through Sec. 70-269. (Reserved)
Registration shall be accomplished by completing a registration form
provided by the Director. The registration form shall be submitted on
or before the due date specified in 70-266(3). Registration may be
submitted through the municipal website (online registration), via mail,
or hand delivery.
(1)
For compliance purposes, the registration date shall be the date of the
online registration as recorded by the online registration system or in
the case of other methods, the postmark (mail deliveries) or date of
receipt for hand delivery, faxes, and emails.
(2)
FOG registration shall be required at the following schedule:
Existing FSE sources. All existing FSEs, including L-FSE, are
required to register as a FOG facility no later than June 30, 2015,
and annually thereafter by June 30.
a.
Modified FSE source. Any FSE undergoing remodeling,
modification, or a change in operations after the effective date of
this article is required to register as a modified FOG facility at least
30 days prior to initial start-up and annually thereafter by June 30.
b.
New FSE source. Any FSE commencing construction or operation
after the effective date of this article is required to register as a
FOG facility at least 30 days prior to initial start-up and annually
thereafter by June 30.
c.
(3)
Sec. 70-266 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-268
CHCT:787

DIVISION 6
COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 70-270. Right of entry.
Sec. 70-271. FOG enforcement response plan.
The Director shall develop a written FOG enforcement response plan (ERP)
to include enforcement procedures, enforcement mechanisms and a fine
structure in accordance with Secs. 70-272 and 70-273. The ERP shall be
posted to the FOG website and be available to all food service
establishments. The Wastewater Management Commission may amend or
modify the FOG ERP at any time, other than the fee structure, which
may only be amended by the City Council. No enforcement procedure is
contingent upon the completion of any lesser activity. Nothing in this article
or the FOG enforcement response plan shall limit the authority of the
Director or his designee to take any action necessary for the protection of
the POTW system, the environment, or public health and safety, including
termination of sanitary sewer service, without first issuing a notice of
violation or other less severe action.
Sec. 70-272. Violations; enforcement.
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the Director, or other City representatives under
the direction of the Director, reasonable access to all parts of the
wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of
inspection and sampling during all times the discharger's facility is
open and operating or at any other reasonable time.
(a)
Where a food service establishment has security measures in force,
the FSE shall make necessary arrangements so that representatives of
the City shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of
performing their specific responsibilities.
(b)
No person shall interfere with, delay, resist, or refuse entrance to City
representatives attempting to inspect any facility involved directly or
indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the POTW.
(c)
In general, the Director or his designee shall determine noncompliance
with the provisions of this FOG control rule through registrations,
visual inspections, records review, sampling, monitoring, and any other
reasonable method.
(a)
Upon review of evidence suggesting a violation may have occurred,
the Director or his designee shall conduct an investigation. Inquiries,
if required, shall be in writing and submitted in the form of an
administrative notice (AN). If the investigation indicates that there is
reasonable evidence indicating a violation has occurred, the Director
or his designee shall proceed with enforcement. Enforcement may
entail a written administrative warning (AW), notice of violation (NOV),
(b)
Sec. 70-270 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-272
CHCT:789
or compliance order (CO); each may include a noncompliance fee as
established in Sec. 70-273. Failure to respond to an AN shall
automatically result in a AW. Failure to comply with the terms and
conditions on an AW shall automatically result in a NOV. Failure to
comply with the terms and conditions of a NOV shall automatically
result in a CO.
The Director or his designee may pursue one or more of the
following enforcement options:
Administrative warning (AW). The Director or his designee may
issue an administrative warning for a noncompliance event
not warranting a notice of violation or compliance order. The
administrative warning shall indicate the nature of the
noncompliance event, any action required to comply with
conditions of the administrative warning, including corrective
action, and a specific date upon which a reply is required, if
applicable.
a.
Notice of violation (NOV). The Director or his designee may
issue a notice of violation for a noncompliance event, including,
but not limited to, failure to respond to an administrative
warning or to comply with the terms or conditions of the
administrative warning, failure to register, a recordkeeping or
reporting failure, or other provisions of this article. The NOV
shall indicate the date of noncompliance, if known, the nature
of the noncompliance event, any action required to comply
with conditions of the NOV, including corrective action, the
amount of any noncompliance fees, and a specific date upon
which a reply is required.
b.
Compliance order (CO). The Director or his designee may issue
a FOG wastewater discharge compliance order for a
documented noncompliance event, including, but not limited
to, failure to respond to a NOV or the terms or conditions
of a NOV; repeated violations of this article, for discharges
resulting in or contributing to a blockage, interference, or
SSO; or repeated failure to comply with one or more provisions
of this article. Should a compliance order require a cease
and desist order, all costs for physical termination of service
shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food service
establishment or designee as well as all costs for reinstating
service.
c.
(1)
Appeals. A food service establishment or other regulated entity
may appeal an administrative warning, notice of violation, or
compliance order to the City of Biddeford Wastewater Management
Commission (WWMC). The appeal must be submitted, in writing,
through the Director within 30 days of the date of the
administrative warning, notice of violation, or compliance order.
The written notice must reference the document being appealed,
(2)
Sec. 70-272 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-272
CHCT:790
Sec. 70-273. Noncompliance fees.
Noncompliance fees shall be assessed for violations of this article in
accordance with the schedule provided in Table 1 Fats, Oils, and Grease
Enforcement Response Plan Noncompliance Fees.58
Sec. 70-274. through Sec. 70-279. (Reserved)
the reason for the appeal, and a requested resolution. Failure to
submit a complete and timely appeal will result in denial of the
appeal. The WWMC shall consider the appeal at the next scheduled
WWMC meeting corresponding to the agenda submittal deadline.
The WWMC's decision shall be final.
58.Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Sec. 70-272 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-274
CHCT:791

DIVISION 7
SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the validity of this entire Rule or any of the
remaining portions hereof.
Sec. 70-280. through § 70-290. (Reserved).
Sec. 70-280 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 70-280
CHCT:793
Chapter 71
UTILITIES/INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Utilities — See Ch. 70.
Sec. 70-280 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 70-280
CHCT:794
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 71-1. Purpose and policy.
Sec. 71-2. Administration.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator may be delegated by the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee to a duly authorized City or contracted employee.
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly
owned treatment works for the City of Biddeford, Maine, and enables
the City of Biddeford, Maine, to comply with all applicable state and
federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.)
and the general pretreatment regulations (Title 40 of the Code of
Federal Regulations [CFR] Part 403). The objectives of this chapter are:
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will interfere with its operation;
(1)
To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned
treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or
otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment
works;
(2)
To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who
may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their
employment and the general public;
(3)
To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludge from the publicly owned treatment works;
(4)
To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned
treatment works; and
(5)
To enable the City of Biddeford, Maine, to comply with its Maine
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge
use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws
to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject.
(6)
(a)
This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment
works. The chapter authorizes the issuance of individual wastewater
discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and
enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures;
requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the
equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
(b)
Sec. 71-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-3
CHCT:795
Sec. 71-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD — Biochemical oxygen demand.
BMP — Best management practice.
BMR — Baseline monitoring report.
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations.
CIU — Categorical industrial user.
COD — Chemical oxygen demand.
EPA — United States Environmental Protection Agency.
gpd — Gallons per day.
IU — Industrial user.
mg/l — Milligrams per liter (also known as "ppm" or parts per million).
ng/l — Nanograms per liter.
ug/l — Micrograms per liter.
MEDEP — Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
MEPDES — Maine Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NSCIU — Nonsignificant categorical industrial user.
POTW — Publicly owned treatment works.
RCRA — Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
M.R.S.A — Maine Revised Statute Annotated.
SIC — Standard industrial classification.
SIU — Significant industrial user.
SNC — Significant noncompliance.
TDS — Total dissolved solids.
TSS — Total suspended solids.
U.S.C. — United States Code.
Sec. 71-4. Definitions.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The State of Maine.
Sec. 71-3 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-4
CHCT:796
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE USER
—
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 71-5(a) and (b) [40
CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures for five days at 20° C., usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g. mg/l).
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
If the user is a corporation:
The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions
for the corporation; or
a.
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided that the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty of
making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate
and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term
environmental compliance with environmental laws and
regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established
or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
b.
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or his or her
designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3) above, may
designated a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to
the City of Biddeford, Maine.
(4)
Sec. 71-4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-4
CHCT:797
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear
in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
CITY — The City of Biddeford, Maine, or the City Council of Biddeford,
Maine.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City of Biddeford, Maine.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed
in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the
course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a
concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement
of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that
day.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United States
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional
Water Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of pollutants
into the POTW from any nondomestic source.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any
discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow
rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW,
its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or
disposal and therefore is a cause of a violation of the City's MEPDES
permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance
with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued
thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of
the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred
to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act" (RCRA); any state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act;
Sec. 71-4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-4
CHCT:798
the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and
Sanctuaries Act.
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the
City of Biddeford, Maine, upon industrial or commercial facilities to
implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and
blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The sum of all daily discharges measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of daily discharges measured during
that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE LIMIT — The highest allowable average of daily
discharges over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all daily
discharges measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
daily discharge measured during that month.
NEW SOURCE —
Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is
(or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Act that will be applicable to such source
if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that
section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located; or
a.
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
b.
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
c.
(1)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in
a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection (1)b or c above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
(2)
Sec. 71-4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-4
CHCT:799
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the City's MEPDES permit, including an increase in
the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural
and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH,
temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants
into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an
applicable pretreatment standard.
Construction of new source as defined under this subsection has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
1.
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
2.
a.
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
b.
(3)
Sec. 71-4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-4
CHCT:800
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a
pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES —
Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these
prohibitions appear in Section 71-5 of this chapter.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW — A treatment works,
as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by
the City of Biddeford, Maine. This definition includes any devices or systems
used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of
sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant.
SEPTIC TANK WASTE — Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — Human excrement and gray water (household showers,
dishwashing operations, etc.).
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — Except as provided in
Subsections (3) and (4) of this definition:
(1) An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or
An industrial user that:
Discharges an average 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater
to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler
blow down wastewater);
a.
Contributes a process waste stream which makes up 5% or more of
the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant; or
b.
Is designated as such by the City of Biddeford, Maine, on the
basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
c.
(2)
The City may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical
pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial
user never discharges more than 100 gallons per day (gpd) of total
categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewater, unless specifically included in the
pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to the City's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements;
a.
(3)
Sec. 71-4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-4
CHCT:801
SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in Section 71-5 of this chapter. A slug discharge is any discharge
of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a non-customary batch discharge which has a reasonable potential
to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the
POTW's regulations, local limits or permit conditions.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including
snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the City of Biddeford,
Maine, to supervise the operation of the POTW (Director of Wastewater),
and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this chapter.
The term also means a duly authorized representative of the Director of
Wastewater.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total
suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended in water,
wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering.
USER or INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage
from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and
manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated,
which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal
sewage and industrial waste.
The industrial user annually submits the certification statement
required in Section 71-43(b) [See 40 CFR 403.12(q).], together
with any additional information necessary to support the
certification statement; and
b.
The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated
wastewater.
c.
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (2) of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, the City of Biddeford, Maine, may at any time, on its own
initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user,
and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine
that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(4)
Sec. 71-4 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-4
CHCT:802
ARTICLE II
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 71-5. Prohibited discharge standards.
General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass-through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the
POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards
or requirements.
(a)
Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced
into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(1)
Wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 or more than 11.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or
equipment.
(2)
Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference.
(3)
Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW.
(4)
Wastewater having a temperature greater than 104° F. (40° C). or
which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
140° F. (40° C).
(5)
Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(6)
Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(7)
Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, in
accordance with Section 71-14 chapter.
(8)
Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is
sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair.
(9)
(b)
Sec. 71-5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-5
CHCT:803
Sec. 71-6. National categorical pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with the categorical pretreatment standards found at 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471.
Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to
the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the City's MEPDES
permit.
(10)
Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(11)
Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
de-ionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee.
(12)
Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes or other package wastewater treatment plants.
(13)
Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee in an individual wastewater
discharge permit.
(14)
Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test.
(15)
Detergents, surface-active agents or other substances that might
cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(16)
Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 200 mg/l.
(17)
Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at
the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
of more than 10% or any single reading over the lower explosive
limit of the meter.
(18)
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the POTW.
(c)
Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater,
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with Subsections (5) and
(6).
(1)
When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Director
(2)
Sec. 71-5 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-6
CHCT:804
of Wastewater or his/her designee may convert the limits to equivalent
limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or
effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations
applicable to individual industrial users.
When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee shall impose an alternate
limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3)
A CIU may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical pretreatment
standard in accordance with the following paragraphs of this section.
Categorical pretreatment standards may be adjusted to reflect the
presence of pollutants in the industrial user's intake water in
accordance with this section. Any industrial user wishing to obtain
credit for intake pollutants must make application to the City.
Upon request of the industrial user, the applicable standard will
be calculated on a net basis (i.e., adjusted to reflect credit for
pollutants in the intake water) if the requirements of Subsection
(4)b of this section are met.
a.
Criteria.
Either the applicable categorical pretreatment standards
contained in 40 CFR Subchapter N specifically provide that
they shall be applied on a net basis; or the industrial user
demonstrates that the control system it proposes or uses to
meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards would, if
properly installed and operated, meet the Standards in the
absence of pollutants in the intake waters.
1.
Credit for generic pollutants, such as biochemical oxygen
demand (BOD), total suspended solids (TSS), and oil and
grease, should not be granted unless the industrial user
demonstrates that the constituents of the generic measure in
the user's effluent are substantially similar to the constituents
of the generic measure in the intake water or unless
appropriate additional limits are placed on process water
pollutants either at the outfall or elsewhere.
2.
Credit shall be granted only to the extent necessary to meet
the applicable categorical pretreatment standard(s), up to a
maximum value equal to the influent value. Additional
monitoring may be necessary to determine eligibility for
credits and compliance with standard(s) adjusted under this
section.
3.
Credit shall be granted only if the user demonstrates that the
intake water is drawn from the same body of water as that
into which the POTW discharges. The City may waive this
4.
b.
(4)
Sec. 71-6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-6
CHCT:805
requirement if it finds that no environmental degradation will
result.
When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, an industrial user may request that the City
of Biddeford, Maine, convert the limits to equivalent mass limits. The
determination to convert concentration limits to mass limits is within
the discretion of the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee. The
City of Biddeford, Maine, may establish equivalent mass limits only if
the industrial user meets all the conditions set forth in Subsections
(5)a1 through (5)a5 Below.
To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the industrial user must:
Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water use
during the term of its individual wastewater discharge permit;
1.
Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate
to achieve compliance with the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard and not have used dilution as a
substitute for treatment;
2.
Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual
average daily flow rate for all waste streams, based on data
from a continuous effluent flow monitoring device, as well
as the facility's long-term average production rate. Both the
actual average daily flow rate and the long-term average
production rate must be representative of current operating
conditions;
3.
Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels
that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not
appropriate to control the discharge; and
4.
Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the
industrial user's request for equivalent mass limits.
5.
a.
An industrial user subject to equivalent mass limits must:
Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the
equivalent mass limits;
1.
Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a
continuous effluent flow-monitoring device;
2.
Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee whenever
production rates are expected to vary by more than 20% from
its baseline production rates determined in Subsection (5)a3
of this section. Upon notification of a revised production rate,
3.
b.
(5)
Sec. 71-6 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-6
CHCT:806
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee will reassess
the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as necessary to
reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
Continue to employ the same or comparable water
conservation methods and technologies as those implemented
pursuant to Subsection (5)a1 of this section so long as it
discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
4.
When developing equivalent mass limits, the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee:
Will calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of
the industrial user by the concentration-based daily maximum
and monthly average standard for the applicable categorical
pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit conversion
factor;
1.
Upon notification of a revised production rate, will reassess the
equivalent mass limit and recalculate the limit as necessary to
reflect changed conditions at the facility; and
2.
May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
individual wastewater discharger permit terms if the industrial
user's actual average daily flow rate was reduced solely as a
result of the implementation of water conservation methods
and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used
in the original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were
not based on the use of dilution as a substitute for treatment
pursuant to Section 71-10. The industrial user must also be
in compliance with Section 71-70 regarding the prohibition of
bypass.
3.
c.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may convert the mass
limits of the categorical pretreatment standards of 40 CFR Parts 414,
419, and 455 to concentration limits for purposes of calculating
limitations applicable to individual industrial users. The conversion is
at the discretion of the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee.
(6)
Once included in its permit, the industrial user must comply with
the equivalent limitations developed in this Section 71-6 in lieu of
the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.
(7)
Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit
for calculating maximum monthly average, or four-day average,
limitations. Where such standards are being applied, the same
production or flow figure shall be used in calculating both the average
and the maximum equivalent limitation.
(8)
Sec. 71-6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-6
CHCT:807
Sec. 71-7. State pretreatment standards.
Users must comply with State of Maine pretreatment standards codified as
state law.
Sec. 71-8. Local limits.
Any industrial user operating under a permit incorporating equivalent
mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based
standard shall notify the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee
within two business days after the user has a reasonable basis to
know that the production level will significantly change within the next
calendar month. Any user not notifying the Director of Wastewater or
his/her designee of such anticipated change will be required to meet
the mass or concentration limits in its permit that were based on the
original estimate of the long-term average production rate.
(9)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee is authorized to
establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c).
(a)
Local limits established.
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against
pass-through and interference. No person shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following local limits (daily
maximum mg/l) unless otherwise stated: [Amended 10-5-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010.101]
Substance Limit
pH (lower than 5.0 never, higher than 11.45
for five minutes only)
5.0 to 11.5 s.u
Ammonia 1480 mg/l
Arsenic 0.10 mg/l
BOD5 4218 mg/l
Cadmium 0.23 mg/l
Chromium (total) 5.39 mg/l
Copper 0.80 mg/l
Cyanide 0.54 mg/l
Lead 0.52 mg/l
Mercury 2180* ng/l
Molybdenum 1.66 mg/l
Nickel 4.79 mg/l
Oil and/or grease 200 mg/l
Selenium 1.82 mg/l
Silver 0.99 mg/l
(1)
(b)
Sec. 71-6 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-8
CHCT:808
Sec. 71-9. Right of revision.
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements
on discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter.
Sec. 71-10. Dilution.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or in any way attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or
requirement. The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may impose
mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the
imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
Substance Limit
Total suspended solids 2426 mg/l
Zinc 1.05 mg/l
TTO (total toxic organics) 4.00 mg/l
NOTE:
* Clean mercury is in ng/l and is set by State of Maine collected
data. This limit is suggestive and is not subject to violation,
however, corrective pollution control measures may be
administered if the clean mercury is above suggestive limit.
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is
discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances
are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee may impose mass limitations in
addition to the concentration-based limitations above.
(2)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may develop best
management practices (BMPs) by ordinance or in individual
wastewater discharge permits to implement local limits and the
requirements of Section 71-5.
(c)
Sec. 71-8 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-10
CHCT:809

ARTICLE III
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
Sec. 71-11. Pretreatment facilities.
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this
chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 71-5 of
this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, whichever is more stringent.
Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities
and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee for review and shall be acceptable to the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee before such facilities are constructed. The
review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the
user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to
produce a discharge acceptable to the City of Biddeford, Maine, under the
provisions of this chapter.
Sec. 71-12. Additional pretreatment measures.
Whenever deemed necessary, the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee may require users to restrict their discharge during peak
flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only
into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge,
separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and
such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(a)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain on his/her property
and at his/her expense a suitable storage and flow-control facility to
ensure equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit
may be issued solely for flow equalization.
(b)
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, they are
necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive
amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of
a type and capacity approved by the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee, shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
by the user at his/her expense.
(c)
Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
(d)
Sec. 71-11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-13
CHCT:811
Sec. 71-13. Accidental discharge/slug discharge control plans.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, shall evaluate whether
each SIU needs an accidental discharge/slug discharge control plan or
other action to control slug discharges. The Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee, may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan or take such other action that may be necessary to
control slug discharges. Alternatively, the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee, may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/
slug discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
Sec. 71-14. Hauled wastewater.
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(1)
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section
71-35 of this chapter; and
(3)
Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials,
loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker
training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
(4)
Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee and at
such times as are established by the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee. Such waste shall not violate Article II of this chapter or
any other requirements established by the City of Biddeford, Maine.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may require septic tank
waste haulers to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits.
(a)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may require haulers
of industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may require generators
of hauled industrial waste to obtain individual wastewater discharge
permits. The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee also may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of
hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this
chapter.
(b)
Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee. No load
may be discharged without prior consent of the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee. The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee
(c)
Sec. 71-13 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-14
CHCT:812
shall have each load sampled and analyzed for all local limits before
discharge to ensure compliance with applicable standards.
Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous
wastes.
(d)
Sec. 71-14 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-14
CHCT:813

ARTICLE IV
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS
Sec. 71-15. Wastewater analysis.
When requested by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, a user
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater
within 60 days of the request. The Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require uses to update this information.
Sec. 71-16. Permit required.
Sec. 71-17. Existing connections.
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of
this chapter and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future shall,
within 90 days after said date, apply to the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee for an individual wastewater discharge permit in accordance
with Section 71-19 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges
to the POTW to continue after 45 days of the effective date of this chapter
except in accordance with an individual wastewater discharge permit
issued by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee.
Sec. 71-18. New connections.
Any user required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit who
proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain
such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An
application for this individual wastewater discharge permit, in accordance
No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the
POTW without first obtaining an individual wastewater discharge
permit from the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee chapter
except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely
application pursuant to Section 71-17 of this chapter may continue to
discharge for the time period specified therein.
(a)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may require other
users to obtain individual wastewater discharge permits as necessary
to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(b)
Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual wastewater
discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out
in Articles X through XII of this chapter. Obtaining an individual
wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards
or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and
local law.
(c)
Sec. 71-15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-18
CHCT:815
with Section 71-19 of this chapter, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the
date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence.
Sec. 71-19. Application contents.
All users required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
must submit a permit application. Users that are eligible may request a
general permit under Section 71-20. The Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee may require users to submit all or some of the following
information as part of a permit application:
Identifying information.
The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operator and owner.
a.
Contact information, description of activities, facilities, and
plant production processes on the premises.
b.
(1)
Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
(2)
Description of operations.
A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
(including each product produced by type, amount, processes,
and rate of production), and standard industrial classifications
of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description
should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates
points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
a.
Types of wastes generated, and a list of all raw materials and
chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could
accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW.
b.
Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and
proposed or actual hours of operation.
c.
Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day).
d.
Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by
size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge.
e.
(3)
(4) Time and duration of discharges.
(5) The location for monitoring all wastes covered by the permit.
Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average
daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW
from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in Section
71-6, Subsection (3) [40 CFR 403.6(e).]
(6)
(a)
Sec. 71-18 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-19
CHCT:816
Sec. 71-20. Application signatories and certifications.
Measurement of pollutants.
The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process and any new categorically regulated
processes for existing sources.
a.
The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee of regulated
pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
b.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations or mass, where required, shall be reported.
c.
The sample shall be representative of daily operations and
shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in
Section 71-39 of this chapter. Where the standard requires
compliance with a BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the
user shall submit documentation as required by the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee or the applicable standards to
determine compliance with the standard.
d.
Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures
set out in Section 71-40 of this chapter.
e.
(7)
Any requests for a monitoring waiver (or a renewal of an approved
monitoring waiver) for a pollutant neither present nor expected to
be present in the discharge based on Section 71-33(b) [40 CFR
403.12(e)(2).]
(8)
Any request to be covered by a general permit based on Section
71-20.
(9)
Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee to evaluate the permit
application.
(10)
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
(b)
All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports and
certification statements must be signed by an authorized representative
of the user and contain the certification statement in Section 71-43(a).
(a)
If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate
because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization
satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee prior to or together with any
reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(b)
Sec. 71-19 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-20
CHCT:817
Sec. 71-21. Decisions on issuance.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee will evaluate the data
furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 45
days of receipt of a complete permit application, the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee will determine whether to issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit. The Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee may deny any application for an individual wastewater discharge
permit.
A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, pursuant to Section
71-4, the definition of "significant industrial user," Subsection (3), must
annually submit the signed certification statement in Section 71-43(b).
(c)
Sec. 71-20 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-21
CHCT:818
ARTICLE V
INDIVIDUAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE
Sec. 71-22. Duration of permit.
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit.
An individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of
less than five years, at the discretion of the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee. Each individual wastewater discharge will indicate a specific
date upon which it will expire.
Sec. 71-23. Contents of permit.
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as
are deemed reasonably necessary by the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the
water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health
and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
Individual wastewater discharge permits must contain:
A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit
issuance date, expiration date and effective date.
a.
A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is
nontransferable without prior notification to the City of Biddeford,
Maine, in accordance with Section 71-26 of this chapter and
provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of
the existing wastewater discharge permit.
b.
Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards.
c.
Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants (or best management practice) to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on federal, state, and local law.
d.
The process for seeking a waiver from monitoring for a pollutant
neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge in
accordance with Section 71-33(b).
e.
A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or
local law.
f.
(1)
Sec. 71-22 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-23
CHCT:819
Sec. 71-24. Permit appeals.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee shall provide public notice
of the issuance of an individual wastewater discharge permit. Any person,
including the user, may petition the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee to reconsider the terms of an individual wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance.
Requirements to control slug discharge, if determined by the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee to be necessary.
g.
Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee [Section 71-33(b)] must be included as a
condition in the user's permit.
h.
Individual wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be
limited to, the following conditions:
Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time
of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and
equalization;
a.
Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the treatment works;
b.
Requirements for the development and implementation of spill
control plans or other special conditions, including management
practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental,
unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges;
c.
Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
d.
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
e.
Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices;
f.
A statement that compliance with the individual wastewater
discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility
for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment
standards, including those which become effective during the term
of the individual wastewater discharge permit; and
g.
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee to ensure compliance with this
chapter and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
h.
(2)
Sec. 71-23 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-24
CHCT:820
Sec. 71-25. Permit modification.
Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
(1)
In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the individual
wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for
this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in
the individual wastewater discharge permit.
(2)
The effectiveness of the individual wastewater discharge permit shall
not be stayed pending the appeal.
(3)
If the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee fails to act within
30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied.
Decisions not to reconsider an individual wastewater discharge permit,
not to issue an individual wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify
an individual wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final
administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
(4)
Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
individual wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing
a complaint with the York County Superior Court for equitable relief
within 30 calendar days from the issuance of the decision of the
Wastewater Director or his/her designee.
(5)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may modify an
individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but
not limited to, the following reasons:
To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
(1)
To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the
time of the individual wastewater discharge permit issuance;
(2)
A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(3)
Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving waters;
(4)
Violation of any terms or conditions of the individual wastewater
discharge permit;
(5)
Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required
reporting;
(6)
Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(7)
(a)
Sec. 71-24 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-25
CHCT:821
Sec. 71-26. Transfer of permit.
Sec. 71-27. Permit revocation.
To correct typographical or other errors in the individual
wastewater discharge permit; or
(8)
To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with Section
71-26.
(9)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may modify a general
permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:
To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
(1)
A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
(2)
To correct typographical or other errors in the individual
wastewater discharge permit; or
(3)
To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new
owner or operator where requested in accordance with Section
71-26.
(4)
(b)
Individual wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new
owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days' advance
notice to the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, and the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee approves the individual
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee must include a written certification by
the new owner or operator which:
States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility's operations and processes;
(1)
(2) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
individual wastewater discharge permit.
(3)
(a)
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the individual
wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
(b)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may revoke an
individual wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but
not limited to, the following reasons:
(a)
Sec. 71-25 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-27
CHCT:822
Sec. 71-28. Reissuance of permit.
A user with an expiring individual wastewater discharge permit shall apply
for individual wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a
complete permit application, in accordance with Section 71-19 of this
chapter, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
individual wastewater discharge permit.
Sec. 71-29. Waste received from other jurisdictions.
Failure to notify the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee
of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge;
(1)
Failure to provide prior notification to the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee of changed conditions pursuant to Section
71-34 of this chapter;
(2)
Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the wastewater discharge permit application;
(3)
(4) Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
(5) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
Refusing to allow the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee
timely access to the facility premises and records;
(6)
(7) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(8) Failure to pay fines;
(9) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(10)Failure to meet compliance schedules;
Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
(11)
Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(12)
Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
(13)
Individual wastewater discharge permits shall be voided upon cessation
of operations or transfer of business ownership. All individual
wastewater discharge permits issued to a user are void upon the
issuance of a new individual wastewater discharge permit to that user.
(b)
If another municipality, or user located within another municipality,
contributes wastewater to the POTW, the Director of Wastewater or
his/her designee shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the
contributing municipality.
(a)
Sec. 71-27 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-29
CHCT:823
Prior to entering into an agreement required by Subsection (a) above,
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee shall request the
following information from the contributing municipality:
A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
(1)
An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and
(2)
Such other information as the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee may deem necessary.
(3)
(b)
An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection (a) above,
shall contain the following conditions:
A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this chapter and
local limits, including required baseline monitoring reports
(BMRs), which are at least as stringent as those set out in Section
71-8 of this chapter. The requirement shall specify that such
ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect
changes made to the City's ordinance or local limits;
(1)
A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(2)
A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit
issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be
conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these
activities will be conducted by the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly
by the contributing municipality and the Director of Wastewater or
his/her designee;
(3)
A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee with access to all
information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its
pretreatment activities;
(4)
Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW;
(5)
Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
(6)
A provision ensuring the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee, access to the facilities of users located within the
contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the
purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed
necessary by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee; and
(7)
(c)
Sec. 71-29 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-29
CHCT:824
A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the intermunicipal agreement.
(8)
Sec. 71-29 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-29
CHCT:825

ARTICLE VI
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 71-30. Baseline monitoring reports.
Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard; or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee a report which contains the information
listed in Subsection (b) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement
of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical
industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the Director of Wastewater or
his/her designee a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection (b) below. A new source shall report the method of
pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards.
A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(a)
Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
All information required in Section 71-19(a)(1)a, (a)(2), (a)(3)a, and
(a)(6).
(1)
Measurement of pollutants.
The user shall provide the information required in Section
71-19(a)(7)a through d.
a.
The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements
of this subsection.
b.
Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment
exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate
compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along
with supporting data shall be submitted to the control
authority.
c.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
Section 71-39;
d.
(2)
(b)
Sec. 71-30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-30
CHCT:827
Sec. 71-31. Compliance schedule progress reports.
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
Section 71-30(b)(4) of this chapter:
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may allow the
submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical
data so long as the data provides information sufficient to
determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
e.
The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
f.
Compliance certification: a statement, reviewed by the user's
authorized representative as defined in Section 71-4 and certified
by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(3)
Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will
be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional
pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance
schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in Section 71-31 of this chapter.
(4)
Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with Section 71-43(a) of this
chapter and signed by an authorized representative as defined in
Section 71-4.
(5)
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for
the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (Such events
include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components,
commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation.);
(1)
(2) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
The user shall submit a progress report to the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee no later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum,
whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason
(3)
Sec. 71-30 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-31
CHCT:828
Sec. 71-32. Reports on compliance with deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user
subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee a report containing the
information described in Sections 71-19(a)(6) and (7) and 71-30(b)(2) of
this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in Section 71-6, this report
shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate.
For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed
in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other
measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production
during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be
signed and certified in accordance with Section 71-43(a) of this chapter. All
sampling will be done in conformance with Section 71-40.
Sec. 71-33. Periodic compliance reports.
for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to
return to the established schedule; and
In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee.
(4)
Except as specified in Subsection (c), all significant industrial users
must, at a frequency determined by the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee, submit no less than twice per year (by August 15 for
January through June and by February 15 for July through December,
unless other dates are specified by the Director of Wastewater) reports
indicating the nature, concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or
estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative,
the user must submit documentation required by the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee, or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. [Amended
10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.101]
(a)
The City may authorize an industrial user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated
by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has
demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the
pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge,
or is present only at background levels from intake water and without
any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This
authorization is subject to the following conditions:
(b)
Sec. 71-31 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-33
CHCT:829
The waiver may be authorized where a pollutant is determined
to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from
the facility, provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated
by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no
process wastewater.
(1)
The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective
period of the individual wastewater discharge permit, but in no
case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for
the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent
individual wastewater discharge permit. See Section 71-19(a)(8).
(2)
In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the
facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the
facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes.
(3)
The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with Section 71-4, definition of "authorized or duly authorized
representative of the user," and include the certification statement
in Section 71-43(a) [40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii)]
(4)
Nondetectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from
40 CFR Part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that
pollutant was used in the analysis.
(5)
Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee must be included as a condition in the user's
permit. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information
submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be
maintained by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee for
three years after expiration of the waiver.
(6)
Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's
permit by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, the
industrial user must certify on each report with the statement in
Section 71-43(c) below, that there has been no increase in the
pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the industrial user.
(7)
In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's
operations, the user must immediately comply with the monitoring
requirements of Subsection (a), or other more frequent monitoring
requirements imposed by the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee, and notify the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee.
(8)
This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards,
except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment
standard.
(9)
Sec. 71-33 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-33
CHCT:830
Reduced reporting.
The City may reduce the requirement for periodic compliance
reports to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a
year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard
or by the State of Maine, where the industrial user's total
categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following:
Six thousand five hundred gallons is the POTW's value for
0.01% of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity
of the POTW, or 5,000 gallons per day, whichever is smaller,
as measured by a continuous effluent flow-monitoring device
unless the industrial user discharges in batches;
a.
Four thousand one hundred twenty pounds is the POTW's value
for 0.01% of the design dry-weather organic treatment
capacity of the POTW; and
b.
The POTW's value for 0.01% of the maximum allowable
headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which
approved local limits were developed in accordance with
Section 71-8 of this chapter. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.101].
Parameter
Allowable
Headworks
Loading
(pounds)
0.01% of Allowable
Headworks Load
(pounds)
Ammonia 9200.4 92.0
Arsenic 0.62 0.0062
BOD5 303098.1 3030.98
Cd 1.43 0.0143
Cr(T) 32.53 0.3253
Cu 6.65 0.0665
Total cyanide 3.25 0.0325
Lead 3.25 0.0325
*Mercury
(Clean)
0.0178 0.000178
Molybdenum 10.21 0.1021
Nickel 29.09 0.2909
Selenium 11.11 0.1111
Silver 6.02 0.0602
Total suspended
solid
22329.1 223.291
c.
(1)
(c)
Sec. 71-33 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-33
CHCT:831
Sec. 71-34. Reports of changed conditions.
Each user must notify the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee of
any significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter
the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the
change.
Parameter
Allowable
Headworks
Loading
(pounds)
0.01% of Allowable
Headworks Load
(pounds)
Zinc 9.76 0.0976
NOTE:
* Clean mercury is not a proposed local limit but an
investigative limit only.
Reduced reporting is not available to industrial users that have in
the last two years been in significant noncompliance, as defined
in Article IX of this chapter. In addition, reduced reporting is not
available to an industrial user with daily flow rates, production
levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that, in the
opinion of the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee,
decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would
result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring
during the reporting period.
(2)
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 71-43(a) of this chapter.
(d)
All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order
at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample
results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
(e)
If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors
any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more
frequently than required by the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee, using the procedures prescribed in Section 71-40 of this
chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(f)
Users that send electronic (digital) documents to the City of Biddeford,
Maine, to satisfy the requirements of this section must utilize the
reporting templates provided by the City and/or have a written
statement from the IP Coordinator that any submissions in electronic
format other than those provided by the City meet the requirements of
the program. The preferred method of submittal is by PDF format but
Word documents will also be accepted as well as scanned documents.
(g)
Sec. 71-33 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-34
CHCT:832
Sec. 71-35. Reports of potential problems.
Sec. 71-36. Reports from users not requiring permits.
All users not required to obtain an individual wastewater discharge permit
shall provide appropriate reports to the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee, as the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may require.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may require the user to
submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the
changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge
permit application under Section 71-19 of this chapter.
(1)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may issue an individual
wastewater discharge permit under Section 71-28 of this chapter or
modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 71-25 of
this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
(2)
In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, a slug discharge or slug load, that
might cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee of the incident. This notification shall include the location of
the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and
corrective actions taken by the user.
(a)
Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived
by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, submit a detailed
written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the
measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which might be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person
or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines,
penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this
chapter.
(b)
A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of
a discharge described in Subsection (a) above. Employers shall ensure
that all employees who could cause such a discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
(c)
Significant industrial users are required to notify the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee immediately of any changes at its
facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge.
(d)
Sec. 71-34 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-37
CHCT:833
Sec. 71-37. Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting.
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis
and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
Resampling by the industrial user is not required if the City of Biddeford,
Maine, performs sampling at the user's facility at least once a month, or if
the City of Biddeford, Maine, performs sampling at the user between the
time when the initial sampling was conducted and the time when the user
or the City of Biddeford, Maine, receives the results of this sampling, or if
the City of Biddeford, Maine, has performed the sampling and analysis in
lieu of the industrial user.
Sec. 71-38. Notification of discharge of hazardous waste.
Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into
the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a
hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include
the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the
EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous,
batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of
such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information
is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the
hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream
discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass
of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during
the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later
than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under
this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste
discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be
submitted under Section 71-34 of this chapter. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already
reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under
the self-monitoring requirements of Sections 71-30, 71-32 and 71-33 of
this chapter.
(a)
Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Subsection(a) above
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous
wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification.
(b)
Sec. 71-37 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-38
CHCT:834
Sec. 71-39. Analytical requirements.
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part
136 and amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where
the EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques
are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee or other parties approved by
EPA.
Sec. 71-40. Sample collection.
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on
data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during
the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative of
conditions occurring during the reporting period.
Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such
quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification.
In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Director of Wastewater or his her designee, the EPA Regional Waste
Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the
effective date of such regulations.
(c)
In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall
certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
(d)
This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(e)
Except as indicated in Subsections (2) and (3) below, the user must
collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite
sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee. Where time-proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the City of Biddeford, Maine, the
samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a
(1)
Sec. 71-38 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-40
CHCT:835
Sec. 71-41. Date of submission of reports.
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
Sec. 71-42. Recordkeeping.
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain
and make available for inspection and copying all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices established
under Section 71-8(c). Records shall include the date, exact place, method,
and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the
dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall
be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the
user or the City of Biddeford, Maine, or where the user has been specifically
notified of a longer retention period by the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee.
twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples may be
composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and
oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the City of Biddeford, Maine, as appropriate. In addition,
grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous
limits.
Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
(2)
For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninetyday
compliance reports required in Sections 71-30 and 71-32 [40 CFR
403.12(b) and (d)], a minimum of four grab samples must be used
for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile
organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do
not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available,
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may authorize a lower
minimum. For the reports required by Section 71-33 [40 CFR 403.12(e)
and 403.12(h)], the industrial user is required to collect the number
of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(3)
Sec. 71-40 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-43
CHCT:836
Sec. 71-43. Certification statements.
Certification of permit applications, user reports and initial monitoring
waiver. The following certification statement is required to be signed
and submitted by users submitting permit applications in accordance
with Section 71-20; Users submitting baseline monitoring reports
under Section 71-30(b)(5); users submitting reports on compliance with
the categorical pretreatment standard deadlines under Section 71-32;
users submitting periodic compliance reports required by Section
71-33(a) through (d); and users submitting an initial request to forego
sampling of a pollutant on the basis of Section 71-33(b)(4). The
following certification statement must be signed by an authorized
representative as defined in Section 71-4. [Amended 10-5-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010.101]
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
(a)
Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, pursuant to Sections
71-4, definition of "significant industrial user," Subsection (3) and
71-20C must annually submit the following certification statement
signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in Section 71-4,
the definition of "authorized or duly authorized representative of the
user." This certification must accompany an alternative report required
by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee:
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR _______ [specify applicable National Pretreatment
Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and
belief that during the period from __________, _____ to __________, _____
[months, days, year]:
(a) The facility described as _____________________________ [facility
name] met the definition of a nonsignificant categorical industrial
user as described in Section 71-4, definition of "significant
industrial user," Subsection (3);
(b) The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
(b)
Sec. 71-43 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-43
CHCT:837
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
Certification of pollutants not present. Users that have an approved
monitoring waiver based on Section 71-33(b) must certify on each
report with the following statement that there has been no increase in
the pollutant in its waste stream due to activities of the user.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the pretreatment standard for 40 CFR
_______ [specify applicable national pretreatment standard part(s)], I
certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no
increase in the level of __________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters
due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report
under Section 71-33(a).
(c)
Sec. 71-43 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-43
CHCT:838
ARTICLE VII
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
Sec. 71-44. Right of entry; inspection and sampling.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee shall have the right to enter
the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with
all requirements of this chapter and any individual wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and
the performance of any additional duties.
Sec. 71-45. Search warrants.
If the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee has been refused access
to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the City of Biddeford, Maine,
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order
Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that,
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee shall be permitted to enter without delay for the
purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
(1)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee shall have the right to
set up on the user's property, or require installation of such devices
as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's
operations.
(2)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may require the user to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and
proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices
used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated
according to manufacturer's instructions or at least annually to ensure
their accuracy.
(3)
Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the user at the written or verbal request of the Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such
access shall be borne by the user.
(4)
Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee, access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this
chapter.
(5)
Sec. 71-44 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-45
CHCT:839
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the Maine District Court or the York
County Superior Court.
Sec. 71-45 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-45
CHCT:840
ARTICLE VIII
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Sec. 71-46. Availability of information to public; restrictions.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual wastewater discharge permits,
monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities shall
be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically
requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee, that the release of such information
would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request
must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data.
When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that
such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which
might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon
request to governmental agencies for uses related to the MEPDES program
or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics
and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302 shall not be recognized
as confidential information and shall be available to the public without
restriction.
Sec. 71-46 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-46
CHCT:841

ARTICLE IX
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
Sec. 71-47. Publication of users in significant noncompliance.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, shall publish annually, in
a newspaper of general circulation that provides public notice within the
jurisdictions served by the POTW, a list of the users which, at any time
during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant
noncompliance" shall be applicable to all significant industrial users [or any
other industrial user that violates Subsection (3), (4) or (8) of this section]
and shall mean:
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those
in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period exceed (by any
magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits as defined in Article II;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the
product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by Article II multiplied by the
applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for
all other pollutants except pH);
(2)
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by Article II (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public;
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Director of
Wastewater's exercise of his/her emergency authority to halt or prevent
such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge
permit or a general permit or enforcement order for starting
construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance
with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic selfmonitoring
reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Sec. 71-47 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-47
CHCT:843
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
(8)
Sec. 71-47 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-47
CHCT:844
ARTICLE X
ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Sec. 71-48. Notification of violation.
When the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee finds that a user has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within
five days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and
a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include
specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee. Submission of such a plan in no way
relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after
receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the
authority of the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
Sec. 71-49. Consent orders.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may enter into consent
orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing
an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such
documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders
issued pursuant to Sections 71-51 and 71-52 of this chapter and shall be
judicially enforceable.
Sec. 71-50. Show-cause hearing. [Amended 10-5-2010 by Ord. No.
2010.101]
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may order a user which has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user
specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement
action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least seven days prior to the hearing. Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user as defined in Section
71-4. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against or prerequisite for
taking any other action against the user.
Sec. 71-48 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-51
CHCT:845
Sec. 71-51. Compliance orders.
When the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge
directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the
user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service
may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance,
including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to
minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance
order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a
pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve
the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation.
Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite
for taking any other action against the user.
Sec. 71-52. Cease and desist orders.
When the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are
likely to recur, the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may issue
an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the user to:
Sec. 71-53. Administrative fines.
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed
to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a
cease and desist order shall not be a bar against or a prerequisite for
taking any other action against the user.
(2)
When the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee finds that a user
has violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an
individual wastewater discharge permit, or a general permit or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement,
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may fine such user
in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Such fines
shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the case of
monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be
assessed for each day during the period of violation. The user also shall
be responsible for the City's reasonable administrative costs, attorneys'
fees and court costs.
(a)
Sec. 71-51 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-53
CHCT:846
Sec. 71-54. Emergency suspensions.
Interest shall accrue on unpaid charges, fines, penalties, administrative
costs, attorney's fees and court costs, after 30 days, at a rate of 18% per
annum. The City may lien the user's property for any unpaid charges,
fines, penalties, administrative costs, attorneys' fees and court costs.
(b)
Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request with
the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee to reconsider the fine
along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being
notified of the fine. The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, at
his or her sole discretion, may convene a hearing on the matter. In the
event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee may add the costs of preparing
administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the
fine.
(c)
Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(d)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever
such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge,
which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may also immediately
suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond,
that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which
presents or may present an endangerment to the environment.
Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure
to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may take such steps
as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its
receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee, may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, that
the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination
proceedings in Section 71-55 of this chapter are initiated against
the user.
(1)
A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge
presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and
the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, prior to the date of any
(2)
(a)
Sec. 71-53 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-54
CHCT:847
Sec. 71-55. Termination of discharge.
show cause or termination hearing under Section 71-50 or 71-55 of
this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior
to any emergency suspension under this section.
(b)
In addition to the provisions in Section 71-27 of this chapter, any
user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge
termination:
(1) Violation of individual wastewater discharge permit conditions;
Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
(2)
Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
(3)
Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
(4)
(5) Violation of the pretreatment standards in Article II of this chapter.
(a)
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge
and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 71-50 of this
chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this
option by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee shall not be a
bar to or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
(b)
Sec. 71-54 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-55
CHCT:848
ARTICLE XI
JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
Sec. 71-56. Injunctive relief.
When the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee, may petition the Maine District Court or the York County
Superior Court for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction,
as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of
the individual wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement
imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The Director of Wastewater
or his/her designee may also seek such other action as is appropriate for
legal and/or equitable relief, including fines, penalties, administrative costs
and attorneys' fees pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, and a requirement
that the user conduct environmental remediation or pay the City's
remediation costs. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against
or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.
Sec. 71-57. Civil penalties.
A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this ordinance, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement
shall be liable to the City of Biddeford, Maine, or all maximum fines,
penalties, orders, administrative costs, attorney fees and remediation
costs allowable under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. In addition, the user shall
be responsible for all fines, penalties, damages and costs, including, but
not limited to, attorneys' fees and costs incurred by the municipality
for violation of federal and state environmental laws and regulations
caused by or related to the user's violation of this chapter. In the case
of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall
accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
(a)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may recover
reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring
expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City of
Biddeford, Maine.
(b)
In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the
extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of
the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation,
corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and
any other factor as justice requires.
(c)
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.
(d)
Sec. 71-56 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-58
CHCT:849
Sec. 71-58. Criminal prosecution.
Sec. 71-59. Remedies nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee may take any, all or any combination of
these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment
violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement
response plan. However, the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee
may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, is empowered to
take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this chapter,
an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, in addition to
civil penalties, be subject to criminal prosecution under state or federal
laws.
(a)
A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the
POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, in
addition to civil penalties, be subject to criminal prosecution under
state and federal laws. Criminal prosecution shall be in addition to any
other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available
under state law.
(b)
A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations,
or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this
chapter shall, in addition to civil penalties, be subject to criminal
prosecution under state and federal laws.
(c)
Sec. 71-58 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-59
CHCT:850
ARTICLE XII
SUPPLEMENT ENFORCEMENT ACTION
Sec. 71-60. Penalties for late reports.
A penalty of $100 shall be assessed to any user for each day that a report
required by this chapter, a permit or order issued hereunder is late,
beginning five days after the date the report is due. If reports are over 10
days late, a higher penalty will be assessed according to the enforcement
response plan. Actions taken by the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee to collect late reporting penalties shall not limit the Director of
Wastewater or his/her designee's authority to initiate other enforcement
actions that may include penalties for late reporting violations.
Sec. 71-61. Performance bonds.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may decline to issue or
reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has
failed to comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, payable to the City of Biddeford, Maine, in a sum not
to exceed a value determined by the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
Sec. 71-62. Liability insurance.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may decline to issue or
reissue an individual wastewater discharge to any user who has failed to
comply with any provision of this chapter, a previous individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has
obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the
POTW caused by its discharge.
Sec. 71-63. Payment of outstanding fees and penalties.
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may decline to issue or
reissue an individual wastewater discharge permit to any user who has
failed to pay any outstanding fees, fines, penalties or other amounts
incurred as a result of any provision of this chapter, a previous individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder.
Sec. 71-64. Water supply severance.
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this chapter, an individual wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water
service to the user may be severed. Service will recommence, at the user's
expense, only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to
comply.
Sec. 71-60 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-65
CHCT:851
Sec. 71-65. Public nuisances.
A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall
be corrected or abated as directed by the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject
to the provisions of City ordinances governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing the City of Biddeford, Maine, for any costs incurred in
removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
Sec. 71-66. (Reserved)
Sec. 71-67. Contractor listing.
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award
for the sale of goods or services to the City of Biddeford, Maine. Existing
contracts for the sale of goods or services to the City of Biddeford, Maine,
held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment
standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee.
Sec. 71-65 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-67
CHCT:852
ARTICLE XIII
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
Sec. 71-68. Upset.
For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
(a)
An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of Subsection (c), below, are met.
(b)
A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(1)
The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and
(2)
The user has submitted the following information to the Director
of Wastewater or his/her designee within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within five days:
A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
a.
The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue; and
b.
Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
c.
(3)
(c)
In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(d)
Users shall have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards.
(e)
Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary
to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility
(f)
Sec. 71-68 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-68
CHCT:853
Sec. 71-69. Prohibited discharge standards. [Amended 10-5-2010
by Ord. No. 2010.101]
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section 71-5(a)
of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in Section 71-5(b)(1) through
(18) of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to
know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass-through or interference and that either:
Sec. 71-70. Bypass.
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or
fails.
A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to and during the passthrough
or interference; or
(1)
No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in
nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City
of Biddeford, Maine, was regularly in compliance with its MEPDES
permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with
applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(2)
For the purposes of this section:
"Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from
any portion of a user's treatment facility.
(1)
"Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the
absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean
economic loss caused by delays in production.
(2)
(a)
A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of Subsections (c) and (d) of
this section.
(b)
Bypass notifications.
If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee at
least 10 days before the date of the bypass, if possible.
(1)
(c)
Sec. 71-68 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-70
CHCT:854
A user shall submit oral notice to the Director of Wastewater or his/
her designee of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes
aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided
within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass.
The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and
times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated
time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee, may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
(2)
Bypass.
Bypass is prohibited, and the Director of Wastewater or his/her
designee may take an enforcement action against a user for a
bypass, unless:
Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
a.
There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which
occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and
b.
The user submitted notices as required under Subsection (c) of
this section.
c.
(1)
The Director of Wastewater or his/her designee may approve an
anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the
Director of Wastewater or his/her designee determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in Subsection (d)(1) of this section.
(2)
(d)
Sec. 71-70 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-70
CHCT:855

ARTICLE XIV
WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES
Sec. 71-71. through Sec. 71-75. (Reserved)
Sec. 71-71 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-71
CHCT:857

ARTICLE XV
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 71-76. Pretreatment charges and fees.
The City of Biddeford, Maine may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement
of costs of establishing and operating the City's pretreatment program,
which may include:
Sec. 71-77. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 71-78. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect immediately following its
passage, approval and publication, as provided by law.
Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of
processing such applications;
(1)
Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing
monitoring reports and certification statements submitted by users;
(2)
Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction;
(3)
(4) Fees for filing appeals;
Fees to recover administrative and legal costs [not included in Section
71-76, Subsection (2)] associated with the enforcement activity taken
by the Director of Wastewater or his/her designee to address IU
noncompliance; and
(5)
Other fees as the City of Biddeford, Maine, may deem necessary to
carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely
to the matters covered by this chapter and are separate from all other
fees, fines, and penalties which may be assessed by the City of
Biddeford, Maine.
(6)
Sec. 71-76 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 71-78
CHCT:859
Chapter 74
WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 46.
Sec. 71-78 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 71-78
CHCT:860
ARTICLE I
IN GENERAL
Sec. 74-1. through Sec. 74-25. (Reserved)
Sec. 74-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-1
CHCT:861

ARTICLE II
HARBOR
DIVISION 1
GENERALLY
Sec. 74-26. Definitions. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-13; Ord. No.
2007.11, 3-6-2007]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AGROUND — To be touching or stuck on the bottom.
ALL-ROUND WHITE LIGHT — The combination of a masthead and stern
light into a single white light able to be seen by other vessels from any
direction (also called an anchor light).
ANCHOR — The device used to secure a boat to the bottom of a body of
water.
BACKFIRE — The explosion of prematurely ignited fueled or of unburned
exhaust gases in an internal combustion engine.
BAIL — To remove water by scooping it out with a bucket.
BEAM — The maximum width of a vessel.
BERTH — The place where a vessel lies when at anchor or at a wharf.
BILGE — The interior of the hull below the floorboards; lowest part of a
vessel's interior where the sides of the vessel cure in to form the bottom.
BOAT — Any type of vessel other than a personal watercraft.
BOW — The front of a vessel.
BOW LINE — A line (rope) used at the bow of a vessel.
BUNKS — The wooden supports on which the vessel rests while on the
trailer.
DOCK — The slip or waterway extending between two piers or projecting
wharves or cut into the land for the reception of vessels.
FLOAT — A platform that floats and is anchored at or near the shore and
which is used for landing or other purposes.
HARBOR — Shall include the tidal waters within the geographical limits of
the City.
HARBORMASTER — The individual described by division 2 of this article,
as well as any appointed assistant Harbormaster.
HEADWAY SPEED — The slowest speed at which it is still possible to
maintain steering. This definition also applies to the terms "idle speed," "no-
Sec. 74-26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-26
CHCT:863
wake speed" and "slow no-wake speed."[Amended 2-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.7]
HELIX MOORING ANCHOR — A mooring anchor suitable for use as a
mud-mooring only. The helix anchor is built with a helical disc welded to
a solid shaft and a top mooring termination to attach the ground tackle.
Installation requires screwing the mooring anchor into the mud with a
turning bar.[Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.86]
HOUSEBOAT — The use and occupancy of a raft, hull, barge or vessel,
designed primarily to be occupied as living quarters, and providing living,
sleeping, cooking and/or sanitary facilities, whether temporarily or
permanently. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.759]
LANDING — A place for landing or discharging persons or things from a
vessel.
MOORING — The means of securing a vessel to a particular location in the
City waters, other than temporarily by anchor for a period of no more than
48 hours. Dock, pier, wharf or float tie-ups are not moorings.
MUD-MOORING — A mooring that is out of water three hours before and
three hours after the high tide.60
OUTHAUL — A line attached to the shore and to a weight offshore to which
a dinghy is secured.
PIER — A breakwater or pole extending into navigable water for use as a
landing place, a promenade, or to protect or form a harbor; a structure built
out into the water with piles for use as a landing place.
PORT — Means and includes Saco Bay, the City wharves, and all known
landings and any other public landings or wharves that might be acquired
by the City.61
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — Any structure that is designated to remain
in the water for a period of no longer than seven months within a twelvemonth
period, including but not limited to walkways, gangways, floats and
docks.[Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
VESSEL — Any watercraft used or capable of being used for transportation.
WHARF — A structure of timber, masonry, cement, earth or other material
built on the shore of a harbor, river, canal or the like, especially one
extending parallel to the shoreline so that vessels may lie close alongside to
receive and discharge passengers and cargo.
59.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the definition of "idle speed" which
immediately followed. See now the definition of "headway speed."
60.Editor's Note: The definition of "no-wake speed," which immediately followed, was
repealed 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7. See now the definition of "headway speed."
61.Editor's Note: The definition of "slow-no-wake speed," which immediately followed, was
repealed 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7. See now the definition of "headway speed."
Sec. 74-26 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-27
CHCT:864
Sec. 74-27. Qualified mooring inspector. [Ord. of 4-20-1993,
§ 26-13; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
A "qualified mooring inspector" is a person, including a skin-diver, who
to the satisfaction of the Harbormaster, is qualified to inspect mooring
tackle as to condition and size. Qualifications of the individual selected shall
be reviewed and evaluated by previous experience in the installation and
inspection of moorings; familiarity with mooring tackle, including the size
and type of mooring tackle that is needed for the safe mooring of given
sizes of vessels; and familiarity with the mooring regulations established
by the Harbor Commission. To be considered for appointment as mooring
inspector, an applicant must furnish proof of liability insurance to the
satisfaction of the Harbor Commission, but shall be not less than
$1,000,000. Once appointed, a qualified mooring inspector must maintain
said liability insurance.
Sec. 74-28. Channels. [Code 1975, § 16-45; Ord. of 4-20-1993,
§ 26-13; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
Channels are areas of the harbor kept open for navigation or other purposes
by the action of the Harbormaster or by rules or regulations of the Harbor
Commission, the Department of the Army or other regulatory or legislative
bodies. In the outer harbor at Biddeford Pool, the channel shall be 100 feet
wide from can C7 to the entrance of the inner harbor, otherwise known as
the Gut. At the mouth of the Saco River, the channel shall be 100 feet wide
from can C5 to the red nun buoy off Jordan's Point; the remainder of the
channel in the Saco River shall be 75 feet wide.
Sec. 74-29. Abandoned vessels. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-13; Ord.
No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
A vessel is considered abandoned if the following circumstances exist for a
period of at least 14 continuous days:
Sec. 74-30. Derelict vessel. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-13; Ord. No.
2007.11, 3-6-2007]
A vessel is considered a derelict vessel if it:
The owner of the vessel fails or refuses to pay any applicable license
fee, excise tax, harbor usage fee, or any other fee or charge imposed by
the City or the Harbormaster.
(1)
The owner of the vessel fails or refuses to comply with any lawful order
issued by the Harbormaster.
(2)
The owner of the vessel fails or refuses to respond to any lawful request
for information submitted by the Harbormaster.
(3)
Lacks any license or registration, issued by any authority, the
possession of which is a prerequisite to the operation of such a vessel;
(1)
Sec. 74-27 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-30
CHCT:865
Sec. 74-31. No-wake zones, headway speed zones, idle speed zones,
no-wake speed zones, slow-no-wake zones. [Ord. of 4-20-1993,
§ 26-24; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
No-wake zones, headway speed zones, idle speed zones, no-wake speed
zones, slow-no-wake zones may be established by the Harbor Commission
by the posting of such zones in the designated areas.
Sec. 74-32. Obstructing public wharves, landings. [Ord. of
4-20-1993, § 26-26; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
No person shall obstruct by any means whatsoever the free use of piers,
docks and other common landing places. The City wharves shall be used
only for loading and unloading. Vessels shall not remain moored to the
wharf or float for a period longer than reasonably necessary for this
purpose, except by permission of the Harbormaster.
Sec. 74-33. Diving, swimming on or near public wharves, landings.
[Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-27; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
No person shall dive from or swim within 30 feet of public wharves and
landings.
Sec. 74-34. Fishing from City floats. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-28;
Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
No person shall fish from City floats.
Sec. 74-35. Construction of wharf, pier or landing regulated. [Ord.
of 4-20-1993, § 26-29; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007; amended
2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
No additions, alterations, new construction or changes to an existing wharf,
pier or landing shall be made without prior permission of the Harbormaster.
Permission for the construction of any new wharves or piers within the
jurisdictional limits of the City shall not be granted without approval of the
Harbormaster.
Sec. 74-36. Floats. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
Is submerged to a level substantially above its normal water line,
and remains so for a period of at least 48 consecutive hours without
reasonable attention; or
(2)
Is damaged to such an extent that it cannot be moved under its own
power.
(3)
Floats that are an integral part of a wharf, pier, or landing are permitted
and regulated in accordance with Section 74-35. Floats that are not
part of a wharf, pier or landing are not permitted without the
permission of the Harbormaster.
(a)
Sec. 74-30 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-36
CHCT:866
Sec. 74-37. Unseaworthy, dangerous or deteriorated vessels and
other objects. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
No vessel, watercraft or float which is unseaworthy or in badly deteriorated
condition or which is likely to injure persons or damage private or public
property, or which might become a hazard to navigation, shall be allowed
to moor within the jurisdictional limits of the City. The Harbormaster and
Harbor Commission may separately or jointly determine whether any
watercraft is unseaworthy, dangerous or in badly deteriorated condition and
take appropriate steps for its removal. This section does not apply to vessels
in immediate distress as a result of current emergencies.
Sec. 74-38. Aquaculture. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
All aquaculture venture(s) must receive written permission of the
Harbormaster.
Sec. 74-39. Houseboats. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
Houseboats are prohibited from mooring or anchoring within the
jurisdictional limits of the City except at marinas which provide the
following:
Sec. 74-40. through Sec. 74-45. (Reserved)
All floats and float sections must be identified with the property owner's
name, town map and lot identification number.
(b)
A permanent float, dock or slip from which the houseboat may be
directly boarded from land.
(1)
Connection to a public water supply by means of an individual antibackflow
valve.
(2)
(3) A sewer connection to a public sewage system.
(4) A year-round, all-weather supply of electricity.
Parking as required by the codes and ordinances where the marina is
located.
(5)
(6) Compliance with the applicable land use codes.
Sec. 74-36 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-40
CHCT:867

DIVISION 2
HARBORMASTER
Sec. 74-46. Position created. [Code 1975, § 16-16; Ord. of
4-20-1993, § 26-1; Ord. No. 2000.21, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11,
3-6-2007]
Sec. 74-47. Authority. [Code 1975, § 16-17; Ord. of 4-20-1993,
§ 26-2; Ord. No. 2000.21, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007;
amended 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
The appointed and qualified Harbormaster for the City may have the
authority of a law enforcement officer, if that person is certified as a law
enforcement officer by the Maine Criminal Justice Academy, and is approved
by the Chief of Police.
Sec. 74-48. Statutory authority; mooring disputes. [Code 1975,
§ 16-18; Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-3(b); Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
The authority granted to the Harbormaster under this article is in addition
to and not in limitation of his authority under state law, including, without
limitation, 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 1 through 6. The Harbormaster shall settle all
mooring disputes in the harbor.
Sec. 74-49. General duties. [Code 1975, § 16-18; Ord. of 4-20-1993,
§ 26-3(a); Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
The Harbormaster shall enforce the rules and regulations enacted by the
City Council or Harbor Commission for the keeping open of convenience
channels for the passage of vessels in the harbors located in the City, the
supervision of the boundary lines of such channels as established by the
Harbor Commission or Harbormaster, and the supervision of such portions
of the harbors as assigned for anchorage or mooring by the Harbor
Commission or Harbormaster (see Division 4 to this article).
Sec. 74-50. Compensation. [Code 1975, § 16-19; Ord. of 4-20-1993,
§ 26-4; Ord. No. 2000.21, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007;
amended 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
As compensation for performing the duties of Harbormaster, a yearly
stipend not to exceed $9,000, with a recommendation from the Harbor
Commission, shall be paid to the Harbormaster and each duly authorized
assistant. This stipend shall be paid quarterly and shall be drawn from
the revenue fund designated in accordance with the provisions of Section
74-77.
Pursuant to the authority granted by state law, the position of
Harbormaster is hereby created.
(a)
Sec. 74-46 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-51
CHCT:869
Sec. 74-51. Criteria. [Ord. of 2-17-1998(2); Ord. No. 2007.11,
3-6-2007]
The criteria for the Harbormaster is as follows:
Sec. 74-52. through Sec. 74-60. (Reserved)
(1) Must be a voting resident of five years;
Must have at least five years of marine experience with a minimum of
two years on the ocean; and
(2)
(3) Must attend annual Maine Harbormasters Association training seminar.
Sec. 74-51 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-52
CHCT:870
DIVISION 3
HARBOR COMMISSION
Sec. 74-61. Appointment; terms, qualifications of members. [Ord. of
4-20-1993, § 26-15(a); Ord. of 2-17-1998(2); Ord. No. 2007.11,
3-6-2007]
The Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the City Council, a
Harbor Commission.
Sec. 74-62. Duties generally. [Code 1975, § 16-47; Ord. of
4-20-1993, § 26-15(b), (c); Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
Sec. 74-63. Appeals. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-23; Ord. No. 2007.11,
3-6-2007]
A person who is aggrieved by a decision or action of the Harbormaster
relating to this article may appeal to the Harbor Commission within 30 days
of the date of such act or decision.
Sec. 74-64. through Sec. 74-75. (Reserved)
The Commission shall consist of five members serving staggered threeyear
terms.
(1)
The initial terms of Commissioners shall be two Commissioners for
three-year terms, two Commissioners for two-year terms, and one
Commissioner for a one-year term.
(2)
The Commission shall be comprised of two recreational boaters; two
from the commercial fishing field; and one at-large, with all appointees
having demonstrated experience of at least five years with the adjacent
waterways of the City.
(3)
The Harbor Commission shall meet to hear appeals of decisions made
by the Harbormaster and to act as an advisory vehicle for any
construction from the mean high water line down, and to perform the
other functions specified or implied by this article.
(a)
The Harbor Commission shall submit annually a budget for approval
by the City Council, such expenditures to be drawn from the revenues
designated by Section 74-77.
(b)
Sec. 74-61 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-64
CHCT:871

DIVISION 4
MOORING
Sec. 74-76. Permit required. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-16; Ord. No.
2007.11, 3-6-2007]
It is unlawful to moor a vessel within the harbor of the City without first
obtaining a permit from the Harbormaster.
Sec. 74-77. Permit application. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-21; Ord. of
2-17-1998(2); Ord. No. 2000.21, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11,
3-6-2007]
Applications for mooring permits must be filed with the City no later
than March 15 of the current year. Permits are valid for a one-year
period, from March 15 of the current year to March 14 of the following
year. Applications shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Harbormaster. Applications that are filed after the deadline shall be
subject to mooring allocations made to persons applying prior to the
deadline date. There shall be a late fee of $50 applied towards any
application for a mooring permit which is received after March 15 of
the requested year.
(a)
Mooring permits shall specify:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the mooring;
(2) The type of mooring (see Section 74-78);
(3) The kind of ground tackle or block used;
(4) Whether the mooring has been inspected, and when;
(5) The location of the mooring;
(6) The name, draft, size and kind of vessel to be moored; and
(7) The year the vessel was manufactured.
(b)
A permit for a mooring is valid for the period from March 15 of the
current year to March 14 of the following year and must be renewed
annually.
(c)
A mooring that is not used for any consecutive three-month period
between May 1 and September 30 shall be presumed to be abandoned,
and the Harbormaster may allocate that mooring location to any other
person in accordance with this article.
(d)
The Harbormaster shall maintain a waiting list for areas in which
no more vessels can be safely moored, showing the priority of each
applicant.
(e)
Under the direction of the Harbor Commission, the Harbormaster shall
maintain charts showing the location of all assigned moorings.
(f)
Sec. 74-76 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-77
CHCT:873
Sec. 74-78. Assignments. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-17; Ord. No.
2007.11, 3-6-2007]
The Harbor Commission may set the form of the mooring permit and
renewal applications.
(g)
The annual application fee for the waiting list for moorings shall be $10
which shall be applied against the mooring permit fee as a credit the
year the mooring is placed.
(h)
A granted mooring permit or renewal fee shall be $125. [Amended
9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.85]
(i)
All funds collected as a result of this section shall be considered
designated revenue for the sole purpose of the execution of this division
and the promotion of marine related facilities in the harbor.
(j)
No vessel is allowed to moor between December 1 and April 1 without
written permission of the Harbormaster.
(k)
Moorings in each area shall be assigned by the Harbormaster in a
manner to comply with the federal requirements that moorings falling
within the scope of federal navigation projects must be managed in the
general public interest and must be accessible and available to all on
equal terms.
(a)
The Harbormaster shall establish a management system for assignment
of moorings using the following standards:
The system shall make no arbitrary distinction or requirements of
any kind in allocating use of moorings except as may be consistent
with the purpose of which any federal navigation project
concerning or relating to moorings as constructed or undertaken.
(1)
The system shall not result in arbitrary fees or arbitrary variations
in fees among users. The cost of providing necessary management
and ancillary facilities and services with respect to moorings may
be offset through equitable user fees based on the actual costs
incurred.
(2)
(b)
Information pertaining to moorings shall be readily available to the
public at all times.
(c)
The Harbormaster shall designate an area in each harbor which shall
be for the mooring of commercial fishing vessels properly equipped
to lobster, gillnet, longline, and/or trawl. This designated area must
comply with the Army Corps of Engineers' mooring allocation
guidelines. This would be done by establishing a separate waiting list
for noncommercial and commercial fishing vessels.
(d)
The Harbormaster may at his discretion allow mooring of
noncommercial fishing vessels within the designated commercial
(e)
Sec. 74-77 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-78
CHCT:874
Sec. 74-79. Assignment of rights; grandfathering; large vessels.
[Ord. of 4-20-1993; § 26-18; Ord. No. 2000.55, 7-5-2000; Ord. No.
2007.11, 3-6-2007]
Sec. 74-80. Mooring tackle; identification; inspections. [Ord. of
4-20-1993, § 26-19; Ord. No. 2000.21, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11,
3-6-2007]
fishing vessel area provided it does not preclude a commercial fishing
vessel as listed in this section from being moored in that area.
Mooring transfers permitted by ordinance in accordance with State
Statutes M.R.S.A., Sec. 3-A, as amended, as follows:
Any mooring assignment used for commercial fishing purposes may be
transferred only at the request or death of the assignee, and only to
a member of the assignee's family and only if the mooring assignment
will continue to be used for commercial purposes as described in
Section 74-78, Assignments, Subsection (d), which reads: "The
Harbormaster shall designate an area in each harbor which shall be
for the mooring of commercial fishing vessels properly equipped to
lobster, gillnet, longline, and/or trawl."
For the purpose of this section, "member of the assignee's family,"
means an assignee's parent, child or sibling, by birth or adoption,
including a relation of the half blood.
(a)
Persons having moorings as of March 20, 1989, in a given location who
apply for a permit for their moorings by September 1, 1989, shall have
priority for that location as against other persons with the same or
lower priority under Section 74-78. This section shall not apply to rental
moorings unless, prior to March 20, 1989, a federal mooring permit
has been granted to that individual. Failure to have a federal permit
prior to March 20, 1989, shall terminate any rights that individual has
in a mooring or moorings and that individual must comply with the
provisions of Section 74-78.
(b)
Subject to the provisions of Subsection (a), persons awarded permits
shall have priority for that location as against other persons with the
same or lower priority under Section 74-78, provided that the mooring
is not abandoned and that the owner files timely applications every year
to renew the permit.
(c)
Moorings for vessels over 50 feet may, at the discretion of the
Harbormaster, be assigned only in noncongested areas.
(d)
In assigning moorings, the Harbormaster shall maintain channels and
access to piers, wharves and docks.
(e)
All moorings shall be of sufficient size and weight, with chain or rope
in sound condition, to properly secure the moored vessel, and the float
attached to the mooring line shall be of sufficient size and buoyancy to
(a)
Sec. 74-78 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-80
CHCT:875
remain afloat when not attached to the vessel. Each mooring float shall
be marked with the number of its assigned permit in permanent legible
numbers not less than three inches high.
All moorings shall be inspected by the Harbormaster or a qualified
mooring inspector not less than every other year by June 30.
(b)
The Harbormaster may, at his discretion, cause a mooring to be hauled
for inspection at any time at the owner's expense if the mooring has not
been inspected in accordance with this division or the Harbormaster
has reasonable cause to believe the mooring is unsafe.
(c)
All moorings are required to meet the following minimum standards.
These are minimum standards only. The Harbormaster may require
heavier tackle based on the mooring location. [Amended 2-19-2013
by Ord. No. 2013.7]
Boat Length
(feet)
Boat Weight
(pounds)
Block Weight
(pounds)
Chainlink Size*
(inches)
12 500 350 3/8
20 1,500 750 3/8
25 5,000 1,200 1/2
30 8,000 1,800 5/8
35 12,000 2,500 3/4
40 3,200 1
The length of the heavy chain (from the mooring block to the light
chain or rope) shall be equal to the depth of the surrounding water
at mean high water. *It is recommended that the chain be grade 30
or better.
(1)
The length of the light chain or rope (from the heavy chain to the
mooring ball) shall also be equal to the depth of the surrounding
water at mean high water.
(2)
The length of the pennant (line from mooring ball to bow chock or
cleat of the vessel) shall be equal to 1 1/3 the vertical distance from
the water to the box chock or cleat of the vessel.
(3)
(4) All mooring lines shall be nonfloating.
A mooring float shall meet U.S. Coast Guard regulations; a white
ball with a blue stripe.
(5)
A mushroom anchor or helix mooring anchor is permitted with
the approval of the Harbormaster. [Added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No.
2014.86]
(6)
A sealed tag shall be installed by the inspector identifying mooring
and date of inspection.
(7)
(d)
Sec. 74-80 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-81
CHCT:876
Sec. 74-81. Prohibited mooring areas. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-20;
Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
Moorings shall be prohibited in all channels of Biddeford Harbor.
Sec. 74-82. Unauthorized moorings; pumping out boats taking on
water. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-25(a), (b); Ord. No. 2000.21,
5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
Sec. 74-83. Lobster traps and fishing gear. [Ord. of 4-20-1993,
§ 26-25(c); Ord. No. 2000.21, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007;
amended 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
Sec. 74-84. Temporary structures. [Added 2-19-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.762]
All designated temporary structures are to be removed from the water for
the period of December 1 through April 1 unless prior written permission is
obtained from the Harbormaster.
The Harbormaster is authorized to remove, at the owner’s expense,
any unauthorized mooring or any mooring that has been determined to
be unsafe. Prior to removal, the Harbormaster is required to provide
notification to the owner of the mooring in accordance with Section
74-85. [Amended 2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.7]
(a)
The Harbormaster is authorized to hire a contractor to pump out any
boat found to be taking on water that is secured to a licensed mooring,
but no more than twice in a thirty-six-hour period. All those not paying
fees for such work within 60 days will lose their mooring privileges for
the remainder of the permit time and not be granted a new mooring
permit until the contractor is paid for the cost of pumping and/or
salvage. This applies only to boats for which the owner cannot be
located and/or has failed to take immediate action. Any contractor
authorized by the Harbormaster to pump or salvage a vessel shall seek
reimbursement only from the vessel owner or other liable parties but
shall not have an action against the City for such costs.
(b)
No lobster traps or fishing gear shall be set within 100 feet of a mooring
or in a channel.
(a)
Lobster traps and fishing gear shall be identified in accordance with
state statute. Fishing gear not covered by the statute shall be identified
with the owner’s name, address and phone number.
(b)
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Section 74-84, Mooring sticker
required, as amended.
Sec. 74-81 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-85
CHCT:877
Sec. 74-85. Enforcement; penalties. [Ord. of 4-20-1993, § 26-22;
Ord. No. 2000.21, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2007.11, 3-6-2007]
The Harbormaster is responsible for enforcement of the provisions of
Division 4 of this chapter.
Sec. 74-86. through Sec. 74-100. (Reserved)
On the first violation relating to any mooring, the Harbormaster shall
issue a written warning to the owner of the mooring, if the name and
address can be reasonably ascertained.
(a)
For a second or subsequent violation of this division or for failure by
the owner of a mooring to correct a violation within 15 days after being
issued a warning to correct a violation of this division the owner shall
be penalized by a minimum fine of $100 to a maximum fine of $2,500.
Penalties shall be assessed through a process in district court.
(b)
The Harbormaster may remove any mooring that is in any channel or
that otherwise obstructs navigation, or that remains in violation of this
division; provided, that a written notice of its removal shall first be sent
to the owner by mailing such notice by regular mail to the last known
name and address. Any such removal shall be at the expense of the
owner, and the Harbormaster may collect all expenses in connection
with such removal in district court. The Harbormaster shall have a lien
on any mooring and related tackle that is removed under the provisions
of this section in order to secure any claim for expenses.
(c)
The Harbormaster may remove any vessel, float, mooring, lobster trap,
or fishing gear at owner's expense if deemed a safety hazard.
(d)
Sec. 74-85 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-86
CHCT:878
DIVISION 5
SHELLFISH CONSERVATION ORDINANCE
Sec. 74-101. Authority. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 1, 4-4-2000; Ord. No.
2002.33, 4-2-2002]
This division is enacted in accordance with 12 M.R.S.A. § 6671.
Sec. 74-102. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 2, 4-4-2000; Ord. No.
2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended 4-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.11]
To establish a shellfish conservation program for the City that will insure the
protection and optimum utilization of shellfish resources within its limits.
These goals will be achieved by means that may include:
Sec. 74-103. Shellfish Conservation Committee. [Ord. No. 2000.20,
§ 3, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended 4-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.11]
The Shellfish Conservation Program for the City of Biddeford will be
administered by the Shellfish Conservation Committee consisting of seven
members to be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council for
terms of three years.
The Committee's responsibilities include:
Licensing and recommendation of any changes to licensing fees to the
City Council annually. [Amended 11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.75]
(a)
(b) Limiting the number of shellfish harvesters.
(c) Restricting the time and area where digging is permitted.
(d) Limiting the minimum size of clams taken.
(e) Limiting the amount of clams taken daily by a harvester.
Establishing annually in conjunction with the Department of Marine
Resources the number of shellfish digging licenses to be issued.
(a)
Reviewing annually the status of the resource using the results of
clam flat, harvester or dealer surveys and other sources of information
and preparing in conjunction with and subject to the approval of the
Department a plan for implementing conservation measures.
(b)
Submitting to the City Council proposals for the expenditures of funds
for the purpose of shellfish conservation.
(c)
Keeping this division under review and making recommendations for its
amendments.
(d)
Securing and maintaining records of shellfish harvest from the City's
managed shellfish areas and closed areas that are conditionally opened
by the Department of Marine Resources.
(e)
Sec. 74-101 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-103
CHCT:879
Sec. 74-104. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 4, 4-4-2000; Ord. No.
2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended 4-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.11]
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUEST — Any person invited to assist a recreational license holder in
harvesting a combined total that does not exceed one peck of shellfish per
license per any one day.
MUNICIPALITY — Refers to the City of Biddeford, Maine.
NONRESIDENT — Anyone not qualified as a resident under this division.
RESIDENT — Refers to a person who is domiciled in this municipality.
Proof of residency shall be by one of the following criteria:[Amended
11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.75]
SHELLFISH, CLAMS and INTERTIDAL SHELLFISH RESOURCES — In
the context of this division the words "shellfish," "clams," and "intertidal
shellfish resources" mean soft shell clams (Mya arenaria).
Sec. 74-105. Licensing. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 5, 4-4-2000; Ord. No.
2002.33, 4-2-2002; Ord. No. 2004.8, 3-2-2004; amended 4-7-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.11]
It is unlawful for any person to dig or take shellfish from the shores and
flats of this municipality without having a current license issued by this
municipality as provided by this division. A commercial digger must also
have a valid State of Maine Commercial Shellfish License issued by the
Department of Marine Resources.
Recommending conservation closures and openings to the City Council
in conjunction with the area biologists of the Department of Marine
Resources.
(f)
Submitting an annual report to the municipality and the Department of
Marine Resources covering the above topics and all other committee
activities.
(g)
A person who pays real estate property taxes to the City or can provide
a rent receipt within the jurisdiction of the City;
(1)
(2) A person who is a registered voter in the City;
A person who can provide a vehicle registration from the City of
Biddeford, Maine;
(3)
A person who can provide a valid motor vehicle license showing an
address within the jurisdiction of the City;
(4)
A person who can provide a valid school ID showing an address within
the jurisdiction of the City. Proof of eligibility will be the burden of the
applicant.
(5)
Sec. 74-103 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-105
CHCT:880
Designation, scope and qualifications:
Resident commercial shellfish license. The license is available to
residents of the municipality and entitles the holder to dig and
take any amount of shellfish from the shores and flats of this
municipality and reciprocating municipalities.
1.
Resident commercial over 62 shellfish license. The license is
available to residents of the municipality who can and do provide
age verification legally attaining the age of older than 62 years
of age at the time of purchase, and entitles the holder to dig
and take any amount of shellfish from the shores and flats of
this municipality and reciprocating municipalities. [Added
11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.7563]
2.
Nonresident commercial shellfish license. The license is available
to nonresidents of this municipality and entitles the holder to dig
and take any amount of shellfish from the shores and flats of this
municipality.
3.
Residential recreational shellfish license. The license is available
to residents and real estate taxpayers of this municipality and
entitles the holder and guest(s) to dig and take no more than one
peck of shellfish per any one day from the shores and flats of this
municipality.
4.
Nonresident recreational shellfish license. The license is available
to any person not a resident of this municipality and entitles the
holder and guest(s) to dig and take not more than one peck of
shellfish per any one day from the shores and flats of this
municipality.
5.
Resident/nonresident one-day recreational shellfish license. The
license is available to any resident or nonresident, and entitles the
holder to dig and take not more than one peck of shellfish during
the one and only day, or any part thereof, for which the license has
been purchased.
6.
Resident student commercial shellfish license. The student must be
at least 16 years of age or older and under 23 years of age, based
upon the May 1 of the year of application. A person issued a student
license is enrolled: [Added 11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.75]
A person must show proof of age and proof of school
attendance, except that students attending college must show
proof of 12 credit hours per semester by a state-recognized
accrediting agency or body.
a.
7.
(a)
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated of former Subsection (a)(2) through (5) as
Subsection (a)(3) through (6), respectively.
Sec. 74-105 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-105
CHCT:881
A person attending a public day school in accordance with the
attendance requirement of 20-A M.R.S.A. § 5001-A, Subsection
1.
b.
A person meeting the requirements of an alternative to
attendance at public day school in accordance with 20-A
M.R.S.A. § 5001-A, Subsection 3.
c.
A person under the age of 18 as of May 1 of the year of
application must have a parent or legal guardian signature on
the shellfish application.
d.
A person may not be considered to have ceased to be a student
during any interim between school years if the interim does
not exceed five months and if it is shown that the person
has a bona fide intention of continuing to pursue a full-time
course of study during the semester or other enrollment period
immediately following the interim period. For purposes of this
subsection, "full-time course of study" means at least 60% of
the usual course load for the program in which the person is
enrolled.
e.
The Shellfish Committee may revoke a student license if the
licensee fails to maintain required student status
f.
Nonresident student commercial shellfish license. The student
must be at least 16 years of age or older and under 23 years of age,
based upon the May 1 of the year of application. A person issued
a student license is enrolled: [Added 11-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015.7564]
A person must show proof of age and proof of school
attendance, except that students attending college must show
proof of 12 credit hours per semester by a state-recognized
accrediting agency or body.
a.
A person attending a public day school in accordance with the
attendance requirement of 20-A M.R.S.A. § 5001-A, Subsection
1.
b.
A person meeting the requirements of an alternative to
attendance at public day school in accordance with 20-A
M.R.S.A. § 5001-A, Subsection 3.
c.
A person under the age of 18 as of May 1 of the year of
application must have a parent or legal guardian signature on
the shellfish application.
d.
A person may not be considered to have ceased to be a student
during any interim between school years if the interim does
e.
8.
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection (a)(6) as Subsection
(a)(9).
Sec. 74-105 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-105
CHCT:882
not exceed five months and if it is shown that the person
has a bona fide intention of continuing to pursue a full-time
course of study during the semester or other enrollment period
immediately following the interim period. For purposes of this
subsection, "full-time course of study" means at least 60% of
the usual course load for the program in which the person is
enrolled.
The Shellfish Committee may revoke a student license if the
licensee fails to maintain required student status
f.
License must be signed. The licensee must sign the license to make
it valid.
9.
Application procedure. Any person may apply to the Clerk for the
licenses required by this division on forms provided by the municipality.
Contents of application. The application must be in the form of an
affidavit and must contain the applicant's name, current address,
birth date, height, weight, signature and whatever information the
municipality may require.
1.
Misrepresentation. Any person who gives false information on a
license application will cause said license to become invalid and
void.
2.
(b)
Fees. The fees for the licenses are as stated below and must accompany
in full the application for the respective license. The Clerk shall pay all
fees received to the Treasurer except for $3 of each license that will
be retained by the Clerk as payment for issuing the license. Shellfish
license fees and fines shall be used by the municipality for shellfish
management, conservation and enforcement. [Amended 11-17-2015
by Ord. No. 2015.75]
1. Resident commercial: determined annually.
2. Resident commercial over 62: determined annually.
3. Nonresident commercial: determined annually.
4. Resident student commercial: determined annually.
5. Nonresident student commercial: determined annually.
6. Resident recreational: determined annually.
7. Resident recreational 65 to 69 years old: determined annually.
8. Nonresident recreational: determined annually.
9. Nonresident recreational 65 to 69 years old: determined annually.
10. Resident recreational 70 years old or older: free.
11. Nonresident recreational 70 years old or older: free.
(c)
Sec. 74-105 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-105
CHCT:883
12. Resident/nonresident one day only license: determined annually.
Limitation of diggers. Clam resources vary in density and size
distribution from year to year and over the limited soft clam producing
area of the municipality. It is essential that the municipality carefully
husband its shellfish resources. If, following the annual review of the
municipality's clam resources, its size distribution, abundance and the
warden's reports, as required by Section 74-103, the Shellfish
Conservation Committee, in consultation with the DMR area biologist,
determines limiting commercial or recreational shellfish licenses is an
appropriate shellfish management option for the following year:
Prior to April 1, the Committee shall report its findings and
document recommendations for the allocation of commercial and
recreational licenses to be made available for the following license
year to the Commissioner of Marine Resources for concurrence.
1.
After receiving approval of proposed license allocations from the
Commissioner of Marine resources and prior to May 1, the Shellfish
Conservation Committee shall notify the Clerk in writing of the
number and allocation of shellfish licenses to be issued.
2.
Notice of the number of licenses to be issued and the procedure
for application shall be published in a trade or industry publication,
or in a newspaper or combination of newspapers with general
circulation, which the municipal officers consider effective in
reaching persons affected, not less than 10 days prior to the period
of issuance and shall be posted in the municipal offices until the
period concludes.
3.
The Clerk shall issue licenses to residents and nonresidents as
allocated starting June 1 to residents and nonresidents on a firstcome,
first-served basis. [Amended 11-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015.75]
4.
Licenses may be returned to the municipality voluntarily, and
reissued to another person at the current fee according to the
priorities established in this section. Any license returned is
nonrefundable.
5.
Members of the Shellfish Conservation Committee shall be entitled
to apply for a recreational shellfish license 30 days in advance of
general license sales.
6.
All clam diggers/harvesters must use hand implements only – no
assisted air harvesting (scuba diving). [Amended 11-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015.75]
7.
There shall be no night digging of shellfish. "Night" is defined
as 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise. [Added
11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.7565]
8.
(d)
Sec. 74-105 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-105
CHCT:884
All recreational clam diggers/harvesters shall not possess more
than one container while harvesting. The container must have a
maximum volume of not more than 10 quarts. NOTE: A ten-quart
pail filled to within one inch of the rim is approximately one peck of
clams.
9.
Open license sales. When the Shellfish Conservation Committee
determines limiting shellfish licenses is not an appropriate shellfish
management option for one or more license categories for the following
year:
Notice of the dates, places, times and the procedures for the
license sales shall be published in a trade or industry publication,
or in a newspaper or combination of newspapers with general
circulation, which the municipal officers consider effective in
reaching persons affected, not less than 10 days prior to the initial
sale date and shall be posted in the municipal offices. A copy of the
notice shall be provided to the Commissioner of Marine Resources.
1.
For each commercial license category, the Clerk shall issue one
license to nonresidents when six licenses are issued to residents
and one more to nonresidents when five more are issued to
residents; thereafter, one nonresident license will be issued for
every 10 additional resident licenses issued. [Amended
11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.75]
2.
(e)
License expiration date. Each license issued under authority of this
article expires at midnight on the last day of May next following the
date of issuance.
(f)
Fee waivers. Recreational shellfish license fees will be waived for
license holders 70 years or older. Individuals 12 years or younger do
not need a license to assist a recreational shellfish license holder in
harvesting not more than one peck of shellfish in total per any one day.
(g)
Suspension. Any shellfish licensee having three convictions for a
violation of this division shall have his shellfish license automatically
suspended for a period of 30 days.
A licensee whose shellfish license has been suspended pursuant to
this division may reapply for a license only after the suspension
period has expired.
1.
The suspension shall be effective from the date of mailing of a
notice of suspension by the Clerk to the licensee.
2.
Any licensee whose shellfish license has automatically been
suspended pursuant to this section shall be entitled to a hearing
before the Shellfish Conservation Committee upon the filing of a
3.
(h)
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection (d)(8) as Subsection
(d)(9).
Sec. 74-105 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-105
CHCT:885
Sec. 74-106. Opening and closing of flats. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 6,
4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended 4-7-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009.11]
written request for hearing with the Clerk within 30 days following
the effective date of suspension. The licensee may appeal the
decision of the Shellfish Conservation Committee before the
Council by filing a written request for appeal with the Clerk within
seven days of the decision of the Shellfish Conservation Committee.
Shellfish harvesting log. Commercial shellfish license holders shall be
required to keep a shellfish harvesting log which must be submitted
to the Shellfish Conservation Committee Secretary no later than the
15th of the following month. The log will include the date, location and
number of bushels harvested during each day; failure to maintain and
submit monthly shellfish harvesting logs shall cause the harvester to
lose automatic license retention. [Amended 11-17-2015 by Ord. No.
2015.75]
(i)
Conservation benefit. Biddeford commercial shellfish license holders
who have purchased their licenses during the period of issuance for the
previous license year and who have completed 12 hours of conservation
work under the supervision of the Shellfish Conservation Committee
shall be permitted to purchase a shellfish license the next year for
a reduced fee, to be set by the Shellfish Committee annually, and
purchased during the first week preceding the regular sale date. The
Shellfish Conservation Committee will preapprove all accepted
conservation projects by a majority vote. These records will be kept
by the Secretary. In the event all commercial license holders complete
their conservation obligation and it is deemed that licenses must be
reduced for the following year, licenses will be issued by seniority.
"Seniority" is defined as number of years a license has been held. If a
tie in seniority occurs, the City Clerk will conduct a lottery to break the
tie. [Amended 11-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.75]
(j)
The municipal officials, upon the approval of the Commissioner of
Marine Resources, may open and close areas for shellfish harvest.
Upon recommendations of the Shellfish Conservation Committee and
concurrence of the Department of Marine Resources area biologist that
the status of shellfish resources and other factors bearing on sound
management indicate that an area should be opened or closed, the
municipal officials may call a public hearing, and shall send a copy of
the notice to the Department of Marine Resources. The decision of the
municipal officials made after the hearing shall be based on findings of
fact.
(a)
It shall be unlawful for any person to harvest, take or possess shellfish
from any areas closed by the City of Biddeford in accordance with
the Department of Marine Resources (DMR) Regulation Chapter 7.
Harvesting shellfish in a closed area is a violation of this municipality'
(b)
Sec. 74-105 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-106
CHCT:886
Sec. 74-107. Minimum legal size of soft shell clams. [Ord. No.
2000.20, § 7, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended
4-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.11]
It is unlawful for any person to possess soft shell clams within the
municipality which are less than two inches in the longest diameter except
as provided by Subsection (b) of this section
Sec. 74-108. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 8, 4-4-2000; Ord. No.
2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended 4-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.11]
A person who violates this division shall be punished as provided by 12
M.R.S.A. § 6671(10).
Sec. 74-109. Effective date. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 9, 4-4-2000; Ord.
No. 2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended 4-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.11]
This division, which has been approved by the Commissioner of Marine
Resources, shall become effective after its adoption by the municipality,
provided that a certified copy of the ordinance from which this division is
derived is filed with the Commissioner within 20 days of its adoption.
s ordinance and is punishable under 12 M.R.S.A. § 6671. [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.75]
Boundaries of conservation closures are explicitly defined in the
conservation closure application submitted by the City of Biddeford to
DMR and are part of the resulting permit issued by DMR. These permits
are posted at the City Clerk' s Office and on the DMR website. [Added
9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.75]
(c)
Definitions:
Lot. The word "lot" as used in this division means the total number
of soft shell clams in any bulk pile. Where soft shell clams are in a
box, barrel, or other container, the contents of each box, barrel, or
other container constitutes a separate lot.
1.
Possess. For the purpose of this section, "possess" means dig, take,
harvest, ship, transport, hold, buy and sell retail and wholesale soft
shell clam shell stock.
2.
(a)
Tolerance. Any person may possess soft shell clams that are less than
two inches if they comprise less than 10% of any lot. The tolerance shall
be determined by count of not less than one peck nor more than four
pecks taken at random from various parts of the lot or by a count of the
entire lot if it contains less than one peck.
(b)
Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be punished
as provided by 12 M.R.S.A. § 6681.
(c)
Sec. 74-106 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. 74-110
CHCT:887
Sec. 74-110. Period of ordinance. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 10, 4-4-2000;
Ord. No. 2002.33, 4-2-2002; amended 4-7-2009 by Ord. No.
2009.11]
This article shall remain in effect until eliminated or amended.
Sec. 74-111. Separability. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 11, 4-4-2000; Ord.
No. 2002.33, 4-2-2002]
If any section, subsection, sentence or part of this division is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this division.
Sec. 74-112. Repeal. [Ord. No. 2000.20, § 12, 4-4-2000; Ord. No.
2002.33, 4-2-2002]
Any ordinance regulating the harvesting or conservation of shellfish in the
municipality and any provisions of any other municipal ordinance that is
inconsistent with this division is hereby repealed.
Sec. 74-110 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. 74-112
CHCT:888
APPENDIX A
RULES OF CITY COUNCIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
City Council — See Charter, Art. III. City Council — See Ch. 2, Art. II.
Sec. A-1. Rule 1: Duties and powers of Mayor or Presiding Officer.
[Ord. of 1-2-1979(15); Ord. No. 2001.119, 12-18-2001; Ord. No.
2002.136, 12-17-2002; Ord. No. 2003.12, 2-4-2003; Ord. No.
2003.123, 12-3-2003; Ord. No. 2006.11, 2-7-2006; 9-4-2012;
2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10; 6-3-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.42;
1-5-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.2]
The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting,
or as soon thereafter as is convenient, call the members to order, and
after the appearance of a quorum, cause the minutes of the preceding
meeting to be read. In the absence of the Mayor, the President of the
City Council shall be the presiding officer, but in case of the absence of
both the Mayor and the President at such time, the Clerk of the Council
shall preside until a President Pro Tempore for said meeting is chosen.
a.
The Mayor shall receive and submit to vote all motions and propositions
regularly moved, shall put the question, and shall declare all votes; but
if any Councilor doubts the vote, all those voting in the affirmative,
when called upon by the Mayor, shall raise their hand until they are
counted, and also those in the negative, in like manner, to make the vote
certain.
b.
The Mayor shall restrain the members when engaged in debate, within
the rules of order, and shall enforce, on all occasions, the observance of
order and decorum among the members.
c.
The Mayor shall decide all questions of order subject to an appeal to
the Council by motion properly seconded.
d.
e. The Mayor may speak to points of order in preference to the members.
When the Mayor desires to express his opinions on any subject, the
Mayor shall yield the chair to the President of the Council, if present,
or any other member.
f.
The Mayor shall appoint all standing and special committees of the
City Council and the Chairs thereof, except the Chair of the Finance
Committee, which shall be chaired by the Council President, and all
such mayoral appointments shall receive confirmation by the City
Council.
g.
Sec. 74-112 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. A-1
CHCT:889
Sec. A-2. Rule 2: Rights and duties of members. [Ord. of 11-6-1996;
Ord. No. 99.87, 9-21-1999; Ord. No. 2001.119, 12-18-2001]
Upon the Chair's inability to maintain order and in the event that
either a Councilor or a member(s) of the public fail to comply with
any of the rules or other rules as adopted by the Council regarding
decorum and order the Chair shall immediately recess the Council. If
upon resumption of the meeting order and decorum are unable to be
maintained, the Chair shall call for the immediate adjournment of the
meeting and conduct no further business.
h.
The Mayor shall call regular meetings of the City Council to order at
6:00 p.m. on the first and third Tuesdays of each month, and regular
meetings shall adjourn by 9:00 p.m. unless a majority of the Councilors
agree to extend the meeting. All regular and special meetings of the
Council, including but not limited to Council workshops and public
hearings, will be held in the Council chambers, unless a majority of
the Councilors agree to a different location. [Amended 9-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016.85]
i.
When, as required by law, the City Council must act as municipal
officers, they shall do so during a Council meeting. Towards the end of
each regular Council meeting there shall be a "public addressing the
Council," portion for 30 minutes, when the residents of Biddeford shall
be afforded an opportunity to address the City Council on any item of
City business which is not before the Council as an order of the day on
the Council agenda, over which the Council has direct control, not to
exceed five minutes per speaker. [Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.8; 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.130]
j.
At all meetings of the City Council, each member shall occupy the seat
assigned to him or her by the Mayor at the first meeting of said Council.
a.
Every member shall take notice of the day and hour to which the
Council stands adjourned and shall give his or her punctual attendance
accordingly; and shall attend all special meetings properly called.
[Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10]
b.
Every member, when about to speak, shall raise his or her hand and
upon recognition by the presiding officer shall respectfully address
the presiding officer, confine himself or herself to the question under
debate, and avoid personalities. No member will be allowed to speak
while out of his or her place. Debate must be confined to the merits
of the pending question. Members must maintain a courteous tone,
especially in reference to any divergence of opinion and shall avoid
injecting any personal note into the debate. Members must never attack
or make any allusion to the motives of members. [Amended 2-4-2014
by Ord. No. 2014.10]
c.
Members speaking shall not be interrupted by another, but by call to
order; if any member in speaking or otherwise shall transgress the
d.
Sec. A-1 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. A-2
CHCT:890
rules of the Council, the presiding officer shall, or any member may, call
him or her to order; in which case the member so called to order shall
immediately stop speaking unless permitted to explain; and the Council
if appealed to, shall decide whether the member is in fact transgressing
the rules or otherwise out of order, but without debate. If the decision
is in favor of the member so called to order, that member shall be at
liberty to proceed; if otherwise, he shall not speak again on the pending
item without approval of the Council. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014.10]
Each member has the right to speak twice on the same motion on the
same meeting, but cannot make a second speech on the same question
as long as any member who has not spoken on that question desires
the floor. No motion to move the question shall take place until each
member has had an opportunity to speak once. A member who has
spoken twice on a motion on the same meeting has exhausted his or her
right to debate that motion for that meeting unless he or she obtains
approval of the Council to speak on the same motion again. However,
questions generated by discussing Council business or motions may be
asked without limit. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10]
e.
Every member who shall be present when a question is put shall give
his or her vote, unless the Council shall excuse that member.
f.
No member shall be permitted to vote on any question in the City
Council, nor in committee, whose private right, distinct from public
interest, is immediately involved.
g.
When any member shall be guilty of a breach of any of the rules and
orders of the Council and the Council has determined that member
has so transgressed, that member shall not be allowed to vote or
speak, unless by way of explanation for the same, until that member
has recognized his or her transgression before the presiding officer
and the Council and immediately ceases the breach. Any member who
continues to breach any rule or order of the Council after the Council
has determined said breach shall be subject to censorship by vote of the
Council, and shall not be recognized in any further action. [Amended
2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10]
h.
i. (Reserved)66
No member shall be permitted to vote on any question in the City
Council, nor in committee, when that member is a member of any
organization or entity which has an interest separate and distinct from
the public interest and in opposition to the interest of the inhabitants
of the City of Biddeford. In any circumstance when a member refuses
to abstain from participating in any vote, when that member has a
private right or a right separate and distinct from the public interest,
j.
66.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection i, which prohibited any member from leaving a Council
meeting unless excused by the Chair, was repealed 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10.
Sec. A-2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. A-2
CHCT:891
Sec. A-3. Rule 3: Proceedings and debates. [Ord. of 7-21-1998(5);
Ord. of 1-5-1999; Ord. No. 2000.122, 10-17-2000; Ord. No. 2003.12,
2-4-2003; Ord. No. 2003.123, 12-3-2003]
the Council shall decide the qualification of that member to participate
on that issue.
The members of the Council shall refrain from interference with the
daily administration of City business.
k.
No member shall begin to discuss a matter when no motion is pending,
unless the chair authorizes a particular subject to be discussed while
no motion is pending.
l.
Any member may place an item(s) on a City Council agenda with the
concurrence of at least one other member, with said item(s) being
submitted in writing to the City Clerk. The submitted item(s) shall
be placed on a City Council agenda within 30 days. The final agenda
will be reviewed and approved by the Mayor and Council President.
[Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10; 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.8]
m.
The agenda for regular meetings of the City Council shall be prepared
and available in the City Clerk's office to members by 4:00 p.m. on
the Wednesday preceding the meeting. The City Clerk shall provide
for delivery of any agendas after noon on the Friday preceding the
meeting. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10]
n.
Each member, when sending an email correspondence from the City
email system, shall include the following disclaimer: [Added 5-3-2011
by Ord. No. 2011.31]
NOTICE: Under Maine's Freedom of Access (Right to Know) Law,
documents, including emails, in the possession of public officials about
City business are classified as public records. This means if anyone
asks to see them, we are required to provide them. There are very few
exceptions. We welcome citizens' comments and want to hear from our
constituents, but please keep in mind that what you write in an email
is not private and could show up in one of the local newspapers.
o.
Members are not permitted use any mobile device for making phone
calls, text messaging, emailing or other outside communication while
meetings are in progress, unless for emergency purposes. [Added
2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10]
p.
In all votes, when the City Council expresses anything by way of
command, the form of expression shall be "Ordered" and when it
expresses opinions, principles, facts or propositions, the form shall be
"Resolved."
a.
All memorials and other papers addressed to the Council shall be
presented by the presiding officer, who shall explain the subject thereof,
b.
Sec. A-2 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. A-3
CHCT:892
and they shall be taken up in the order in which they were presented,
unless the Council shall otherwise direct.
After a motion is stated or read by the presiding officer, it shall be
deemed to be in possession of the Council, and shall be disposed of
by vote of the Council unless the mover, with consent of the party
seconding, withdraws it before a decision or amendment.
c.
Every motion shall be reduced to writing if the presiding officer shall so
direct or any member request it.
d.
All questions shall be propounded in the order in which they are moved,
unless the subsequent motion be previous in its nature, except that in
naming sums and fixing times, the largest sum and the longest time
shall be first put.
e.
When a question is under debate no motion shall be received but:
First To adjourn
Second To lay on the table
Third For the previous question
Fourth To commit
Fifth To postpone to a day certain
Sixth To amend
Seventh To postpone indefinitely
Which several motions shall have precedence in the order in which
they are arranged.
f.
No motion to postpone or commit shall be allowed twice on the same
day in the same stage of the ordinance or proposition.
g.
The previous question shall be in this form: "Shall the main question
now be put." It shall only be admitted when demanded by a majority of
the Council; and until it is decided, shall preclude all amendments and
further debate of the main question.
h.
A motion for reconsideration of a vote shall be open to debate, and
only by a member voting with the majority; and only one motion for the
reconsideration of any vote shall be permitted.
i.
No motion or proposition on a subject different from that under
discussion shall be admitted under color of an amendment.
j.
The divisions of a question may be called for when the sense will admit
it.
k.
All orders, resolves and reports may be committed or recommitted at
the pleasure of the Council.
l.
Sec. A-3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. A-3
CHCT:893
When the reading of a paper is called for which has been before read to
the Council, and the same is objected to by any member, the question
of reading shall be determined by a vote of the Council.
m.
When two or more members happen to request to be recognized at the
same time, the presiding officer shall name the member who is to speak
first. [Amended 1-5-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.2]
n.
The yes and no votes shall be taken on any question, upon the request
of any member present. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.10]
o.
Any public comment on any Council order, resolve or ordinance, when
allowed by state law or the Council shall not exceed three minutes per
individual speaker. Such persons shall be permitted to speak only once
on an item and shall confine their remarks to the merits of the order,
resolve or ordinance before the Council. [Amended 2-4-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014.10]
p.
Procedure for addressing the Council on agenda items or during the
municipal officers meeting:
No public comment shall be permitted on the following agenda
items: personnel matters, informational reports or communications
from boards and commissions, staff or other organizations or
entities; appointments and administrative action implementing
prior action to the Council where that prior action had permitted
public comment.
(1)
On items other than those set forth in Subsection (1) above, public
comment shall be permitted only once prior to final Council action.
Except as specifically decided by the Council, such public comment
shall occur at the advertised public hearing or at the first reading
of such item. The public also may address the Council on proposed
amendments at either the first or second reading.
(2)
Persons wishing to address the Council on an item which appears
on the agenda, and upon which public comment is permitted under
Subsections (1) and (2) above, shall wait until the presiding officer
announces the consideration of such item, at which time they
may address the Council on that particular item. Any presentation
on an issue or introductory information regarding the issue shall
be presented prior to the public requesting or receiving an
opportunity to address the Council. Once the Council has begun its
deliberations on an item, no person shall be permitted to address
the Council on such item. This subsection does not pertain to City
staff or members of the public who may be called upon by the Chair
or a member to give clarification on an issue under consideration
by the Council.
(3)
Any person wishing to address the Council shall signify such desire
by raising his or her hand and, when recognized by the presiding
officer, such person shall thereupon request permission to address
(4)
q.
Sec. A-3 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. A-3
CHCT:894
Sec. A-4. Rule 4: Ordinances; resolutions; orders. [Ord. of 4-4-1995]
Sec. A-5. Rule 5: Committees. [Ord. of 1-2-1979(15); Ord. 1-4-1994;
Ord. of 4-4-1995; Ord. of 4-4-1995; Ord. of 2-2-1999; Ord. No.
99.112, 12-13-1999; Ord. No. 2000.112, 10-3-2000; Ord. No.
2003.130, 12-16-2003; 11-4-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.118; 2-4-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014.10; 8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.79; 1-5-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.2; 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.27; 10-2-2018 by Ord. No.
2018.120]
the Council giving his or her name and physical address and
designating the subject matter to the Chair.
Persons present at Council meetings or at a municipal officers
meeting shall not interrupt, nor applaud or otherwise express
approval or disapproval of any statements made or actions taken at
such meeting.
(5)
The presiding officer may limit or cut off any commentary that he or
she determines is not germane or that is discourteous, slanderous,
abusive, or not in accord with good order and decorum. This will be
prompted by a call to order by any member when appropriate.
(6)
No public comment shall be allowed on matters related to ongoing
or threatened litigation involving the City, its elected officials and/
or employees. A person who shall continue to violate these rules,
after warning by the presiding officer, shall be ejected. The Council
may, at its discretion, suspend or prohibit a person from addressing
the Council or the municipal officers.
(7)
All orders and resolutions imposing a penalty or authorizing the
expenditure of money shall have more than one reading before they
shall be finally passed by the Council.
a.
No ordinance, order or resolution imposing a penalty or authorizing the
expenditure of money shall have more than one reading on the same
day, except as allowed under Article III, Section 8, of the Charter of the
City of Biddeford.
b.
Every new ordinance or amendment to an ordinance shall be read and
voted on two separate days in accordance with Article III, Section 8, of
the Charter of the City of Biddeford. Article III, Section 8, shall govern
the passage of ordinances.
c.
The following shall be the standing committees of the City Council:
Personnel; Capital Projects/Operations; Policy; Finance; and Downtown
Committee.
a.
b. (Reserved)
The Capital Projects/Operations and Policy Committees shall consist
of a chairperson, two Council members and two citizens. The two
c.
Sec. A-3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. A-5
CHCT:895
citizen members shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Council. No citizen member may be a chairperson.
The Personnel Committee shall consist of a chairperson who shall be
a City Councilor and three Council members. There shall be no citizen
members on the Personnel Committee.
d.
The Downtown Committee shall consist of the Mayor, four Council
members, and a member of the Downtown Development Commission.
The Downtown Development Commission member shall serve as a
nonvoting member except in the absence of a full-time voting member.
A Chairperson shall be selected from the voting members.
e.
f. (Reserved)
The Council committees are subagents of the full Council which is
the sole governing body of the City of Biddeford. The committees are
delegated various functions by the full Council and are to provide
recommendations upon which the full Council will act except where
otherwise specified. The committees will examine the appropriate
subject matter before them, collect the facts pertaining thereto and
make a report which will recommend what action, if any, should be
taken by the full Council. Additionally, each committee may take
whatever action specifically authorized by the Charter, ordinance, or
state law.
g.
In general, the committees shall have the following subject matter
before them:
Finance Committee. The duties of the Finance Committee are set
forth in the City Charter.
(1)
Personnel Committee. The Personnel Committee will investigate
matters pertaining to employment matters with the City of
Biddeford. It shall review the salaries of department heads and the
City Manager. In the event of a termination hearing, for cause, it
shall serve as a fair hearing authority before whom an impartial
hearing shall take place involving the subject municipal employee.
(2)
Capital Projects/Operations Committee. The Capital Projects/
Operations Committee shall establish a five-year plan for
implementation of major capital improvements in the City. It shall
review matters involving the Public Works Director, Public Works
Department and public property issues. This committee shall
review the City's claims issues, insurance issues, making
appropriate recommendations to the full Council when necessary.
It shall coordinate with the Capital Projects Committee when
necessary if issues involve the use of capital improvements within
the City.
(3)
Policy Committee. The Policy Committee shall be responsible for
establishing and recommending ordinance language, Code
(4)
h.
Sec. A-5 BIDDEFORD CODE Sec. A-5
CHCT:896
Sec. A-6. Rule 6: Rules.
Chapter LDR
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission — See Ch. 2, Art.
IV, Div. 4.
Coastal Area Committee — See Ch. 2, Art. IV,
Div. 9.
Aviation — See Ch. 14.
Buildings and building regulations — See Ch.
18.
Environment — See Ch. 34.
Streets, sidewalks and other public
places — See Ch. 62.
Subdivisions — See Ch. 66.
Waterways — See Ch. 74.
Article I
revisions, (except for Chapter 42, Motor Vehicles and Traffic, and
all other matters and ordinances that relate to Public Safety) and
City policy to the full Council. The Policy Committee shall
coordinate with the City Planner and the Code Enforcement Officer
regarding the amendment, establishment and/or update of the
City's land use ordinances.
Downtown Committee. The Downtown Committee shall be
responsible for reviewing matters affecting the City of Biddeford's
downtown, including, but not limited to, downtown improvement
initiatives, collaborating with external agencies and businesses on
downtown improvement projects, and all minor garage design
feature decisions, and is delegated as the Parking Authority with
powers limited to those defined in Sec. 42-8.
(5)
Each committee meeting is a public proceeding as defined in 1 M.R.S.A.
§ 402(2). Each committee may hold executive sessions pursuant to the
conditions and limitations expressed in 1 M.R.S.A. § 405. Should a
committee vote, in public, to proceed into executive session, only those
members of the committee shall be present in the executive session.
i.
The rules or orders of the Council shall be observed in all cases unless
suspended by a vote of the members present, for specific purposes.
[Amended 12-7-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.81; 2-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014.10]
a.
No rules or orders of the Council shall be repealed or amended unless
the members of the Council concur therein. [Amended 12-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011.81]
b.
The above rules and orders are hereby adopted and all rules and orders
inconsistent with the above are hereby repealed.
c.
Sec. A-5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Sec. A-6
CHCT:897
PREAMBLE
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4351 et seq., as amended.
Section 2. Short title.
This ordinance and the accompanying Official Zoning Map shall be known
as and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance, City of Biddeford, Maine."
Section 3. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the residents of the City. Specifically this ordinance is intended
to promote and protect quality of life factors that could be threatened by
uncontrolled or unregulated growth or development. At the same time,
realizing that growth and development are both essential and unavoidable
for the well-being of the community and its economic future and vitality,
this ordinance provides specific guidance for reasonable development; to
encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the municipality;
to promote traffic safety; to provide safety from fire and other elements; to
provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of real estate; to
promote a wholesome home environment; to prevent housing development
in unsanitary areas; to provide an allotment of land area in new
developments sufficient for all the requirements of community life; to
conserve natural resources; and to provide for adequate public services, as
an integral part of a comprehensive plan for municipal development.
Section 4. Jurisdiction.
The provisions of this ordinance shall govern all land and all structures
within the boundaries of the City of Biddeford.
Section 5. Conflict with other laws.
This ordinance shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit, or
provision of the federal, state, or local government. Where this ordinance
imposes more restrictive standards than federal or state regulations, this
ordinance shall control.
Section 6. Validity and severability.
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts
to be invalid, such decision does not invalidate any other section or
provision of this ordinance.
Sec. A-6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 7
CHCT:898
Section 7. Repetitive petitions.
No proposed change in this ordinance which has been unfavorably acted
upon by the City Council shall be considered on its merits by the City
Council within two years after the date of such unfavorable action unless
adoption of the proposed change is recommended by unanimous vote of the
Planning Board.
Section 8. Effective date.
The effective date of this ordinance is December 20, 1990.
Article II
DEFINITIONS
Section 1. Construction of language.
In the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, all words other
than those specifically defined in the ordinance shall have the meaning
implied by their context in the ordinance or their ordinarily accepted
meaning. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between
the text of this ordinance and any map, illustration, or table, the text shall
control.
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership,
trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual or any other legal
entity.
The present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes
the plural, and the plural number includes the singular.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, the word "may" is permissive.
The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel."
The word "building" includes the word "structure."
The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be
construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used
or occupied."
The word "City" or "municipality" means the City of Biddeford, Maine.
The words "governing authority" or "municipal officers" mean the City
Council, City of Biddeford, Maine.
Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the plumbing,
fire prevention, building, or mechanical codes adopted by the City of
Biddeford, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.
Section 7 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 1
CHCT:899
Where terms are not defined through methods authorized by this section,
they shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context
implies.
Where words are construed to have differing meanings, the determination
of meaning shall be made by the Code Enforcement Officer, using his
judgment and definitions found in the official dictionary, entitled Webster's
New Collegiate Dictionary (copyrighted 1979), a copy of which is located in
the office of the Building Inspector.
Section 2. Definitions. [Ord. of 8-17-1991; Ord. of 5-21-1996; Ord.
of 2-4-1997(2); Ord. of 9-15-1998(3); Ord. of 10-6-1998; Ord. of
6-15-1999(2); Ord. of 11-16-1999(1); Ord. No. 2000.19, 4-4-2000;
Ord. No. 2000.70, 8-1-2000; Ord. No. 2000.71, 7-24-2000; Ord. No.
2000.68, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 2001.45, 5-16-2001; Ord. No. 2001.90,
§ 2, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 2001.107, 11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2002.3,
1-15-2002; Ord. No. 2003.4, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 2003.13, 2-4-2003;
Ord. No. 2003.58, 6-3-2003; Ord. No. 2003.66, 7-1-2003; Ord. No.
2003.67, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 2006.13, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 2006.39,
6-20-2006; Ord. No. 2006.108, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 2008.79,
10-21-2008]
In this ordinance the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ABUTTER — The owner of any property within 200 feet of the property
involved in an application or appeal and/or the owner of any property with
one or more common boundaries, or across the street or stream from, the
property involved in an application or appeal.
ACCEPTED ENGINEERING PRACTICE — That which complies to accepted
principles, tests or standards of nationally recognized technical or scientific
authorities.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU) — A self-contained housing unit
incorporated within a single-family dwelling, attached to a single-family
dwelling, or in a separate building on the same lot as a single-family
dwelling.[Added 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.16; amended 6-20-2017
by Ord. No. 2017.57]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or USE — A use or structure which is incidental
and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when
aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or
similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the
principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
ADDICTION TREATMENT FACILITY — Any building, structure, or space
whose principal or primary function is the outpatient treatment (i.e. no
residency or overnight treatment) of chemically dependent persons, and
by which the dispensing or sale of synthetic narcotics attempts to control,
suppress, and/or eliminate a person's mental or physical dependence on any
illegal or harmful substance. These facilities have no retail sales component
associated with the use. Typical uses include methadone clinics and other
Section 1 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:900
similar uses. Any use within any zone shall not be interpreted to include
addiction treatment facility unless addiction treatment facilities are also
permitted or conditional uses in that zone. Addiction treatment facilities
shall not be considered as accessory uses in any zone.
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building
or structure.
ADULT BUSINESS — Any business in any use category, a substantial or
significant portion of which consists of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting,
displaying or otherwise dealing in materials or devices of any kind which
appeal to prurient interests and which depict or describe the following
sexual activities:
a. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
b. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
c. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An owner of land whose property is directly or
indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under
this ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or
variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who
have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of
such permit or variance.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS PROCESSING AND STORAGE — The storage
of agricultural products in a warehouse or terminal where such materials
may be combined, broken down, or aggregated for shipment or storage, and
where such products are not chemically or physically changed.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease
of plants and/or animals, including but not limited to, forages and sod
crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry
and poultry products; livestock, fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and
greenhouse products. Agriculture does not include forest management or
timber harvesting activities, or the growing of medical marijuana by
medical marijuana dispensaries, caregivers or patients.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.87]
AIRCRAFT APPROACH ZONE — An area that begins 200 feet beyond the
ultimate end of a runway and ends 10,200 feet beyond the end of a runway.
The approach zone extends in a trapezoidal-shaped area 250 feet each side
of the extended center line of the runway 200 feet beyond the ultimate end
of the runway and flares to 1,000 feet each side of the projected center line
10,200 feet from the ultimate end of the runway.[Amended 8-18-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015.44]
AIRPORT — A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped
with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various
accommodations for passengers.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:901
AIR TRANSPORTATION DEPENDANT USE — Businesses engaged in
transportation by air, including airports and flying fields, as well as terminal
and other supporting services. Air transportation dependant uses located
on airport property are subject to Airport Commission approval, and where
applicable, Planning Board approval. Airport-related uses not located on
airport property are subject to, where applicable, the Covenants for the
Airport Industrial Park, Biddeford Economic Improvement Commission
(EIC) review, and Planning Board approval.
AIR TRANSPORTATION RELATED USE — A use that supports airport
operations, including, but not limited to, flight instruction (schools), aircraft
chartering, automobile renting, and restaurants. Airport-related uses
located on airport property are subject to Airport Commission approval, and
where applicable, Planning Board approval. Airport-related uses not located
on airport property are subject to, where applicable, the Covenants for
the Airport Industrial Park, Biddeford Economic Improvement Commission
(EIC) review, and Planning Board approval.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or structure, means change or
rearrangement in structural parts or in the means of egress; or an
enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height; or
the moving from one location or position to another.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Clock towers, bell steeples, light
poles and water towers, and similar alternative-design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any private, commercial premises which are
maintained or operated primarily for the amusement, patronage, or
recreation of the public, containing four or more table sports, pinball
machines, video games, or similar mechanical or electronic games, whether
activated by coins, tokens, or discs, or whether activated through remote
control by the management.
ANIMAL BREEDING OR CARE — The keeping or raising of animals,
including domestic animals and pets, for any commercial use, or
reimbursement, in money or kind, or other form of profit. This definition
also includes kennels.
ANTENNA — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio,
television, or similar communications through the sending and/or receiving
of electromagnetic waves.
APPROVED — Approved by the Code Official or other authority having
jurisdiction.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE — A device or structure attached to the
exterior or erected on the roof of a building designed to support service
equipment or used in connection therewith, or for advertising or display
purposes, or other similar uses.
AQUACULTURE — The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:902
AQUIFER — A water-bearing geologic formation capable of yielding a
usable amount of ground water to a well.
AREA, BUILDING — The area included within surrounding exterior walls
(or exterior walls and firewalls) exclusive of vent shafts and courts. Areas
of the building not provided with surrounding walls shall be included in the
building area if included within the horizontal projection of the roof or floor
above.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain having a
one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically
identified in the flood insurance studies conducted for the City of Biddeford.
ART GALLERY — Floor space devoted to the production, showing or sale of
art as defined as "art use." This definition does not include art museums.
(See "museum.") An art gallery can also accommodate art classes for no
more than 15 students per class.[Added 4-16-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.2467]
ART STUDIO — A facility for art use, as defined below, that is separate
from any residential uses. Art studio does not include a space used by the
occupant or occupants of a dwelling unit either within that dwelling unit or
within an accessory structure on the same property as their dwelling unit
for their personal art use.[Added 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
ART USE — The production of art or creative work, either written,
composed, created or executed, for a one-of-a-kind, limited production,
exclusive of any piece or performance created or executed for industryoriented
distribution or related production. Such use may include the fine
and applied arts, including painting or other like picture, traditional and
fine crafts, sculpture, writing, creating film, creating animation, the
composition of music, choreography and the performing arts.[Added
4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
AUTHORIZED AGENT — An individual or a firm having written
authorization to act on behalf of a property owner. The authorization shall
be signed by the property owner.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — A yard, field or other outdoor area used to
store three or more unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles as defined
in 29-A M.R.S.A § 101, Subsection 42, or parts of such vehicles. "Automobile
graveyard" includes an area used for automobile dismantling, salvage, and
recycling operations.[Added 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.3768]
67.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the definition of "artist residences with studio
space, galleries" which immediately followed.
68.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the definition of "automobile junkyard."
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:903
a. "Automobile graveyard" does not include:
1. An area used for temporary storage of vehicles or vehicle parts
by an establishment or place of business that is primarily engaged
in doing vehicle repair work to make repairs to render a motor
vehicle serviceable. In order for a vehicle's storage to be considered
temporary, it must be removed from the site within 180 calendar
days of its receipt:
2. An area used by an automobile hobbyist to store, organize, restore,
or display antique autos, antique motorcycles, classic vehicles,
horseless carriages, reconstructed vehicles, street rods or parts of
these vehicles as these vehicles are defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101
as long as the hobbyist's activities comply with all applicable federal
and state statutes and rules and municipal ordinances, other than
ordinances that are more restrictive than this subsection regarding
the storage of vehicles or vehicle parts that are collected by a
hobbyist. For the purposes of the subparagraph, an automobile
hobbyist is a person who is not primarily engaged in the business of
selling any of those vehicles or parts from those vehicles;
3. An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles, vehicle parts
or equipment intended for use by a municipality, quasi-municipality
entity or state or federal agency;
4. An area used for the storage of operational farm tractors and related
farm equipment, log skidders, logging tractors or other vehicles
exempted from registration under 29-A M.R.S.A., Chapter 5;
5. An area used for the parking or storage of vehicles or equipment
being offered for sale by a dealer, equipment dealer, trailer dealer or
vehicle auction business as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 851;
6. An area used for the storage of vehicles by an establishment or place
of business that is primarily engaged in business as a new vehicle
dealer as defined in 29-A, M.R.S.A., § 851;
7. An area used for temporary storage of vehicles by an establishment
or place of business that is primarily engaged in business as an
insurance salvage pool. In order for a vehicle's storage to be
considered temporary under this subparagraph, the vehicle must be
removed from the site within 180 calendar days of receipt of title by
the business; or
8. An area used for the parking or storage of operational commercial
motor vehicles special equipment or special mobile equipment as
defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 101 that is temporarily out of service but
is expected to be used by the vehicle or equipment owner or by an
operator designated by the owner. This subsection does not exempt
an area used for the parking or storage of equipment or vehicles that
are not operational while stored or parked in the area.
AUTOMOBILE RECYCLING BUSINESS — The business premises of a
dealer or a recycler licensed under 29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 851 to 1112 who
purchases or acquires salvage vehicles for the purpose of reselling the
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:904
vehicles for the purpose of resale or for selling the basic materials in
the salvage vehicles, as long as 80% of the business premises specified is
used for automobile recycling operations.[Added 6-21-2011 by Ord. No.
2011.37]
a. "Automobile recycling business" does not include:
1. Financial institutions as defined in 9-B M.R.S.A. § 131, Subsections 17
and 17-A;
2. Insurance companies licensed to do business in the state;
3. New vehicle dealers, as defined in 29-A M.R.S.A. § 851, licensed to do
business in the state; or
4. That portion of the business premises that is used for temporary
storage of vehicles by an establishment or place of business that
is primarily engaged in business as an insurance salvage pool. In
order for a vehicle's storage to be considered temporary under this
subparagraph, the vehicle must be removed from the site within 180
days of receipt of title by the business.
AUTOMOTIVE BODY SHOP — A business establishment engaged in
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, or body, frame or fender
straightening and repair, or painting and undercoating, but shall not mean
"automotive service/repair," nor the sale of gasoline, other motor fuels, or
motor oil.[Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.37]
AUTOMOTIVE SALES — See "vehicle sales."
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE/REPAIR GARAGE — A business establishment
engaged in general repair, engine rebuilding, and/or parts replacement.
Automotive repair shall not mean "automotive body shop," nor the sale of
gasoline, other motor fuels or motor oil.[Added 6-21-2011 by Ord. No.
2011.3769]
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of
six feet or more and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing
ground level.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A building where an owner or resident manager
provides transient lodging and a morning meal and where there are no
cooking provisions in any individual guestroom.[Amended 4-16-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013.24]
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any residential structure where lodging and/or meals
are provided for compensation for a period of at least one week, and where
a family residing in the building acts as proprietor or owner. There shall be
no provisions for cooking in any individual guestroom.
69.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the definition of "automotive repair."
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:905
BOAT BUILDING AND REPAIR — The use of any building, land area or
other premise for the general construction, repair, engine rebuilding, parts
replacement, and hull and body reconditioning of boats and other
watercraft.
BOATHOUSE — A nonresidential structure designed for the purpose of
protecting or storing boats for noncommercial purposes. There shall be no
plumbing in the boathouse.
BOAT-LAUNCHING FACILITY — A facility designed primarily for the
launching and landing of watercraft, and which may include an access
ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.[Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
BOAT LIVERY — The use of any building, land area or other premise for the
storage, care, and/or rental of boats for a fee.
BOAT SALES — Any business which involves a parking or display area for
the sale of new or used boats and/or other similar products and services
accessory to boat sales. This term shall not apply to private sales or the sale
of individual boat or similar products on property provided the seller is not
licensed as a dealer for such sales.
BOTTLE CLUB — An establishment or structure where no alcoholic
beverages are sold, but where members, guests or customers provide their
own alcoholic beverages, paying a fee or other consideration for admission
or membership to the bottle club and/or for setups.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy. For application of this code, each portion of a building
completely separated from other portions by firewalls complying with BOCA
standards shall be considered as a separate building.
BUILDING, ATTACHED — A building having any portion of one or more
walls in common or within five feet of an adjacent building.[Added
3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.16]
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building having five feet or more of open space
on all sides.[Added 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.16]
BUILDING, EXISTING — Any structure erected prior to the adoption of the
appropriate code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from grade to top of the highest
roof beams of a flat roof, or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a
hip roof.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — A person appointed by the municipal officers to
administer and enforce this ordinance. The Building Inspector of the City of
Biddeford is also referred to as the "Code Enforcement Officer."
BUILDING MATERIAL RETAIL SALES — The use of any building, land area,
or other premise for the display and sales of building materials for retail
and contractor use.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:906
BULK OIL TERMINAL — The storage of petroleum products in structures
for subsequent resale to distributors, retail dealers or other outlets.
BUSINESS SIGN — An attached or freestanding structure which directs
attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises. A "for sale"
or similar sign shall be deemed a "business sign."
CAMPGROUND — Any area or tract of land to accommodate two or more
parties in temporary living quarters for a fee, including, but not limited to
tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
CAR WASH — Any building or premises or portions thereof used for
washing of automobiles or similar vehicles.
CELLAR — See "basement."
CEMETERY — Property used for the interring of the dead.
CHANGE OF USE — An alteration by change in use in a building heretofore
existing to a new use group which imposes other special provisions of law
governing building construction, equipment or means of egress.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with definite beds and
banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
Channel flow is water flowing within the limits of the defined channel.
CHURCH — A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures,
designed, primarily intended and used for the conduct of religious services,
excluding school.
CIVIC CENTER — A building or complex of buildings that house municipal
offices and services, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic,
convention and entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a
governmental agency.
CLUB — Any voluntary association of persons organized for social, religious,
benevolent, literary, scientific, or political purposes; whose facilities,
especially a clubhouse, are open to members and guests only and not
the general public; and not engaged in activities customarily carried on
by a business or for pecuniary gain. Such term shall include fraternities,
sororities, and social clubs generally.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A development consisting of residential,
commercial or industrial units as permitted rezoning, controlled by one
developer on a tract of five acres or larger. Cluster developments permit
a reduction in dimensional requirements, provided there is not increase in
the overall density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted
to open space, passive recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive
areas, forest management or agriculture.
COASTAL AREA — That portion of the City of Biddeford which is bounded
and described as follows:
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:907
East: The waters of the Atlantic Ocean from the thread of the Saco River to
the City line with Kennebunkport;
South: Following the City line with Kennebunkport to a point 300 feet
westerly of the center line of State Route 9;
West: Following from the point 300 feet westerly of the center line of
State Route 9 at the City line with Kennebunkport, thence continuing as a
distance of 300 feet westerly, then northerly, of the center line of Route 9
to a point 1,800 feet southerly of the intersection of Newton Road and Pool
Road.
North: Following from a point 1,800 feet southerly of the intersection of
Newtown Road and Pool Road, thence continuing in an east-northeasterly
direction for a distance of 2,900 feet, more or less, to a point being
the southeasterly corner of a parcel of property identified on the City of
Biddeford Tax Assessor's Map as Map 9, Lot 1, thence continuing in a
northerly direction along the easterly line of Map 9, Lot 1 a distance of
900 feet, more or less, to the center line of the Hills Beach Road, thence
continuing in the same direction a distance of 1,100 feet, more or less, to
the thread of the Saco River.70
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — See "Building Inspector."
COLLEGE — An educational institution authorized by the state to award
postsecondary, baccalaureate or higher degrees.
CO-LOCATION — The location of more than one telecommunications facility
(use) on a tower or alternative tower structure.71
COMMERCIAL GARDENING — Any land area in which plants, vegetables,
flowers and similar materials are grown for sale. Commercial gardening
does not include the growing of medical marijuana by medical marijuana
dispensaries, caregivers, or patients.[Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
2016.87]
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — Any structure in which plants, vegetables,
flowers and similar materials are grown for sale. Commercial greenhouse
does not include the growing of medical marijuana by medical marijuana
dispensaries, caregivers, or patients.[Amended 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
2016.87]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — Any commercial enterprise which derives
a profit in return for the provision of some recreational activity including
but not limited to: campgrounds, racquet and tennis clubs, health facility,
amusement parks, golf courses, gymnasiums and swimming pools, etc.
70.Editor's Note: The definition of "Coastal Area Committee," which immediately followed,
was removed from the Code pursuant to Ord. No. 2011.38, adopted 9-20-2011. Said
ordinance disbanded the Coastal Area Committee. The former definition of "coastal
wetland," which also followed, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
71.Editor's Note: The former definition of "commercial activity," which immediately followed,
was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:908
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — An institution which is operated for profit, but is
not authorized by the state to award baccalaureate or high degrees, which
offers classes in various skills, trades, professions, or fields of knowledge.
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other
than a home occupation, defined below, the intent and result of which
activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods
and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling
units.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building which provides a meeting place for
local, nonprofit community organizations on a regular basis.
COMMUNITY LIVING USE — A state-approved, authorized, certified or
licensed group home, or intermediate care facility for mentally retarded
group home, for eight or fewer mentally handicapped or developmentally
disabled persons.72
COMMUNITY OUTREACH ACTIVITIES — Programs or activities of an
educational, community service, recreational, or social nature that are
conducted or hosted by a college or university that involve and primarily
benefit residents of Biddeford or the greater southern Maine community
or that are specifically designed to expose people to the facilities and
programs of the institution.
COMMUNITY SERVICES — Any service provided by the municipality, public
or semipublic entities: police, fire protection, schools, library, rescue, etc.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use listed as a conditional use in a particular zone,
that generally would be appropriate in the zoning district for which it is
proposed after review and with certain restrictions and controls to meet the
intentions and purposes of this ordinance. Conditional uses are permitted
only after review and approval by the Board of Appeals and/or Planning
Board.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — A permit authorized by the Planning Board
for a conditional use. A conditional use permit may be issued only after the
applicant has followed the procedures of this ordinance.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which are designed for common
ownership solely by the owners of those portions under a declaration, or
an amendment to a declaration, duly recorded pursuant to Maine law. Real
estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common
elements are vested in the unit owners. Any real estate development
consisting exclusively of clustered, detached, single-family residences is not
a condominium, unless so designated in the declaration.
CONFORMING — A building, structure, use of land, or portion thereof,
which complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
CONGREGATE HOUSING — Dwellings with communal dining facilities and
services, such as housekeeping, organized social and recreational activities,
72.Editor's Note: So in original.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:909
transportation services, and/or other support services appropriate for
elderly and/or assisted living residents, but not to include nursing home
care. Congregate and assisted living housing shall include only those
facilities which have been certified by the State of Maine as meeting all
certification standards and guidelines for such facilities as promulgated by
the Department of Health and Human Services pursuant to the provisions
of the Maine State Statutes.
CONSTRUCTED — Built, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or
any physical operations on the premises which are required for
construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a
part of construction.
CONTRACTOR'S STORAGE YARD — A lot or portion of a lot or parcel
used to store and maintain construction equipment and other materials and
facilities, owned or used by the occupant who is customarily a construction
contractor.[Added 3-18-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.16]
CONVENTION CENTER — A building or portion thereof, or buildings
designed to accommodate people in assembly, exhibits, auditoriums,
assembly halls, special events, etc., for commercial purposes.
CRAWL SPACE — The area underneath a structure which may or may not
be enclosed, which has walls which are typically part of the structure's
foundation and where the height between the ground or floor up to the joists
supporting the floor directly above is three feet or less.73
DAY-CARE CENTER, ADULT — A building in which a person or persons
receive some type of payment to maintain or otherwise carry out a regular
program of care for three or more adults who are 19 years of age or
older or are legally emancipated minors and are not blood relatives.[Added
4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.24]
DAY-CARE CENTER, CHILDREN'S — A building in which a person receives
some type of payment to maintain or otherwise carry out a regular program
of providing care for three or more children under 13 years of age. "Daycare
center" does not include any facility operated as a nursery school, a
“home day-care,” a summer camp established solely for recreational and
educational purposes, or a formal public or private school in the nature of
a kindergarten or elementary or secondary school.[Amended 4-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012.24]
DAY-CARE HOME, ADULT — A home in which a person or persons receive
some type of payment to maintain or otherwise carry out a regular program
of care for three or more adults who are 19 years of age or older or are
legally emancipated minors and are not blood relatives.[Added 4-3-2012
by Ord. No. 2012.24]
DAY-CARE HOME, CHILDREN’S — A home in which a person receives some
type of payment to maintain or otherwise carry out a regular program of
73.Editor’s Note: The definition of “day-care facility,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.24.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:910
providing care for three to 12 children under 13 years of age who are not
the provider's own children.[Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012.24]
DECK — A level structure attached or adjacent to a building elevated
above the surface of the ground which may have a railing, awning or other
covering.
DEGREE — A document of achievement at the associate level or higher
conferred by a postsecondary educational institution authorized to confer
that degree by the State of Maine. It includes educational, academic,
literary or professional degrees as well as associate, baccalaureate, masters
or doctoral degrees.
DEMOLITION DISPOSAL — Disposal of construction debris and stumps
resulting from the clearing of sites for construction.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling or structural units allowed on a given
parcel of land based on Tables B and C in Article V of this ordinance.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase or other persons having enforceable proprietary
interests in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — A change in land use involving alteration of the land,
water or vegetation, or the addition or alteration of structures or other
construction not naturally occurring.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
DISTRICT — A specified portion of the municipality, delineated on the
Official Zoning Map, within which certain regulations and requirements or
various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this ordinance.
DRUG/MEDICAL SUPPLY STORE — A retail store where the primary
business is the sales of medical prescriptions, drugs, medical devices,
medical supplies, and nonprescription medicines but where nonmedical
products may be sold as well provided they do not subordinate the principle
medical sales use.
DUPLEX HOUSING — A residential structure designed and built specifically
to contain two separate dwelling unit. (This definition comes from Article
VI, Section 24)
DWELLING — Any building or structure or portion thereof designed or used
for residential purposes. A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.[Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any structure containing only one
dwelling unit for occupation by not more than one family, except that a
structure may also contain an accessory dwelling unit where expressly
authorized pursuant to this ordinance. A detached accessory dwelling
unit shall not be considered a single-family dwelling unit for the
1.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:911
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property
owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or other person or
entity.
ENERGY-PRODUCING RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A facility,
whether publicly or privately owned, which is fueled in whole or in part by
municipal solid waste, including but not limited to domestic, commercial,
industrial or other types of wastes, and converts such fuel into usable
energy.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Gas, electrical or communication facilities;
steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines,
towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related
equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal
sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks.
Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and similar accessories. In a Shoreland Zone, essential services shall not
include service drops, buildings which are necessary for the furnishing
of essential services, telecommunications facilities, or small wind energy
purposes of this ordinance. [Amended 3-7-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.16]
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing only two dwelling
units, for occupation by not more than two families, neither of which
is an accessory dwelling unit. [Amended 3-7-2017 by Ord. No.
2017.16]
2.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS — A building containing three or more
dwelling units, not including accessory dwelling units, such buildings
being designed exclusively for residential use and occupancy by three
or more families living independently of one another, with the number
of families not exceeding the number of dwelling units. [Amended
3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.16]
3.
MIXED USE/COMMERCIAL — A mixed use building containing one or
more dwelling units as part of the use thereof but also containing one
or more commercial or business uses and/or professional offices. Such
term shall not include those rooms used by a night watchman, janitor,
or other custodial personnel for the direct benefit of the business
activity.
4.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living
quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping
and toilet facilities, and be designed for and used or held ready for
use as a permanent residence by one family. The term shall include
mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping and toilet
facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles
are not residential dwelling units. [Amended 1-3-2017 by Ord. No.
2016.114]
5.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:912
systems. Essential services shall be exempt from the dimensional
requirements in Article V, Section 6A and Article V, Section 7.[Amended
1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.3]
EXPANSION OF STRUCTURE — An increase in the floor area or volume of
a structure, including all extensions such as, but not limited to, attached:
decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
EXPANSION OF USE — For areas not within a Shoreland Zone, "expansion
of use" is an increase in the amount of area devoted to a particular use.
"Expansion of use" for areas within a Shoreland Zone is as defined in Article
XIV.[Amended 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH AND TESTING LABORATORY — A facility for
carrying on investigation in the natural, physical or social sciences, which
may include engineering and product development, usually associated with
wet labs or places with running water, gases, special ventilation devices,
chemicals, special heating and electrical or electronic equipment, or use of
animals or human subjects under controlled conditions.
EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIES — The excavation, processing or storage of
soil, topsoil, peat, loam, sand, gravel, rock or other mineral deposits, not
including:[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single
housekeeping unit.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FARM STANDS — A structure for the display and sale of farm produce
grown on the property where the structure is located.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission.
FILLING — Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or
water.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Savings and lending establishments,
including but not limited to banks, savings and loan institutions, and credit
unions.
FIRE/POLICE STATION — A building used as a municipal or municipal
volunteer fire or police facility.
The excavation of material incidental to the site of approved
construction of buildings, driveways or parking areas;
1.
The excavation of material incidental to the site of construction or
repair of streets; and
2.
The excavation, processing or storage of less than 100 cubic yards of
material on a lot within a one-year period.
3.
Filling and earthmoving with a Shoreland Zone which is governed by
the provisions contained in Article XIV.
4.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:913
FIREWOOD PROCESSING — The processing including but not limited to
the cutting, storage and delivery of wood and/or wood products for home or
other purposes.
FISHERIES PROCESSING/STORAGE — The processing including but not
limited to the raising, storage, packaging, and delivery of fish and/or
seafood products.
FISHERIES, SIGNIFICANT — Areas identified by a governmental agency
such as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, Atlantic
Salmon Authority, Maine Department of Marine Resources, or City of
Biddeford Comprehensive Plan as having significant value as fisheries.
FITNESS CENTER — A building or part of a building devoted to exercise
of the mind, body and spirit, including use of fitness equipment and
conducting fitness classes.
FLOOD — A temporary rise in stream flow or tidal surge that results
in water overflowing its banks and inundating adjacent areas.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure, such as porches and decks.74[Added 9-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FOOTPRINT — The total number of square feet of horizontal surface
covered by a building and/or structure, including steps, porches, and
decks.75[Added 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
FORESTRY — The operation of timber tracks, tree farms, forest nurseries,
the gathering of forest products, or the performance of forest services.76
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP — The official map on which FEMA
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk
premium zones applicable to the City of Biddeford.
1.
FLOODPLAIN — Any normally dry land area that is susceptible to being
inundated by water from any natural source. This area is usually low
land adjacent to a river, stream, watercourse, ocean or lake.
2.
REGIONAL FLOOD — The maximum known flood of a body of water;
either the one-hundred-year frequency flood, where calculated, or the
flood of record.
3.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the onehundred-
year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot in height.
4.
74.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "floor area, gross" and "floor area, net," which
immediately followed, were repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
75.Editor's Note: The former definition of "forest management," which immediately followed,
was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:914
FRONTAGE, ROAD —
FRONTAGE, SHORE — The length of a lot bordering on a water body
or wetland measured in a straight line between the intersections of the
lot lines with the "shoreline" (as defined in Article XIV). In the Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance this is the same as "shore frontage."[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Those uses that require,
for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require
direct access to, or location in, coastal and inland waters and which cannot
be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited
to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and
shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing
facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat-building
facilities, marinas, navigation aides, basins and channels, industrial uses
dependent upon waterborne transportation or requiring large volumes of
cooling or processing water and which cannot reasonably be located or
operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily provide general public
access to coastal or inland waters.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
FUNERAL PARLOR — A building used for the preparation of the deceased
for burial and the display of the deceased and ritual connected with burial
or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building, or part of a principal building,
including a carport, used primarily for the storage of motor vehicles, and/
or other private property. For the computation of parking spaces, garages
shall not be considered unless vehicles parked within may be moved without
necessitating the movement of other resident vehicles.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any building or premises used for equipping,
repairing, hiring, selling or storing motor vehicles, and at which motor
vehicle fuels, oils, tires and supplies may be sold.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Any place of business at which primarily
gasoline, other motor fuels or motor oil is sold to the public for use in a
motor vehicle, regardless of any other business on the premises.
The horizontal, straight-line distance between the intersections of the
side lot lines with the road right-of-way of a publicly or privately
maintained road which is a commonly traveled thoroughfare open to
the public but not including private driveways.
1.
Frontage, cul-de-sac: Frontage for lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall
be the straight line distance between the intersection of the side lot
lines with the right-of-way, measured from a point equal to the required
setback from the right-of-way and parallel to the right-of-way. In any
case, the minimum frontage at the right-of-way shall be at least 50 feet.
2.
76.Editor's Note: The former definition of "forestry, commercial," which immediately
followed, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:915
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land out for at least nine holes for playing the
game of golf and developed with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and other
golf associated items, which may include a clubhouse and shelter, but not
including miniature golf courses.
GOVERNMENTAL BUILDING — Any building held, used, or controlled
exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of government,
federal, state, county, or municipal, without reference to ownership of the
building or of the realty upon which it is situated.
GRAVEL PIT — An open land area where sand, gravel, and/or rock
fragments are mined, excavated, or processed.
GROUP HOME — A housing facility for eight or fewer mentally or physically
handicapped, or developmentally disabled persons which is approved,
authorized, certified or licensed by the state.
HALF STORY — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above
the top floor level, and in which space not more than one-half of the floor
area is finished off for use.
HARDSHIP — See "undue hardship."
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any gaseous, liquid or solid materials, either
in pure form or incorporated into other materials, according to current
guidelines of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or
substances designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and/or the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
HEIGHT OF TOWER — The overall height of the tower from the ground
level at the base of the tower to the highest point of the tower including,
but not limited to antennas, transmitters, satellite dishes or any other
structures affixed to or placed on the tower.77
HISTORIC OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Areas identified by a
governmental agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission
or by the City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan as having significant value
as a historic or archaeological resource.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession which is customarily
conducted on or in a residential structure or property and which is 1)
clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the property
and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two
persons other than family members residing in the home; and 3) which
complies with the performance standards outlined in Article VI, Section 38,
of this ordinance. An art gallery may be considered as a home occupation.
A business that requires leaving a vehicle for service and/or repair for over
24 hours either on the street or on the property is not considered a home
occupation. Auto repair garages, towing businesses, auto storage, or any
other use related to vehicle care is not considered a home occupation. Day-
77.Editor's Note: The former definition of "high-water line, normal," which immediately
followed, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:916
care home and day-care facilities are not considered a home occupation
but a business to be reviewed through the conditional use and site plan
standards as outlined in this Code.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98; 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
HOSPICE — An establishment or a program that provides for the physical
and emotional needs of terminally ill patients.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health
services, primarily for inpatients, and medical or surgical care for the sick
or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related
facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central
services facilities, and staff offices.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A commercial building or group of buildings built to
accommodate for a fee travelers and other transient guests who are staying
for a limited duration with sleeping rooms or other rooms, with or without
cooking facilities, each rental unit having its own private bathroom and
its own separate entrance leading either to the outdoors or to a common
corridor or hallway. A hotel may include restaurant facilities where food is
prepared and meals served to its guests and other customers.
HOUSEHOLD PET — A tame or domesticated small animal such as a cat or
dog living primarily within a dwelling unit and kept for the enjoyment of its
occupants.
INDOOR THEATER — A building or portion of a building devoted to showing
motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, mechanical or other live
performances.78 79
JUNKYARD — A yard, field, or other outside area used to store, dismantle or
otherwise handle:[Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.37]
KENNEL — An establishment in which more than three dogs or three cats,
owned singly or jointly, and living on a single premises, for any purpose.
This definition shall not apply to dogs or cats under the age of six months.
KENNEL, BOARDING — Any place, building, tract of land, abode, or vehicle
wherein or whereon privately owned dogs and other pets, or both, are kept
for their owners in return for a fee. This shall also include the temporary
keeping of animals purposes in return for a fee.80
Discarded, wornout or junked plumbing, heating supplies, electronic or
industrial equipment, household appliances and furniture;
1.
2. Discarded, scrap and junked lumber; and
Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber
debris, waste and all scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or
nonferrous material.
3.
78.Editor's Note: The former definition of "inland wetland," which immediately followed, was
repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
79.Editor's Note: The former definition of "inn/bed-and-breakfast," which immediately
followed, was repealed 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:917
LIBRARY — A public institution in which literary and artistic materials,
such as book, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, and prints, are kept for
reading or reference.
LOT — A portion or parcel of land considered as a unit.
a. CORNER LOT — A lot with two adjacent sides abutting upon streets or
other public spaces.
b. INTERIOR LOT — A lot which faces on one street or with opposite sides
on two streets.
LOT AREA — For areas not within a Shoreland Zone, "lot area" is the
total horizontal area within the lot lines. "Lot area" for areas within a
Shoreland Zone is as defined in Article XIV.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
LOT, COVERAGE — The percentage of a lot covered by all buildings and
impervious surfaces.
LOT LINES —
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the
dimensions of which are recorded on a document or map on file with the
county register of deeds. This lot must be legally existing as a separate lot
as of the date of adoption of this ordinance.
LOT, SHOREFRONT — Any lot abutting a body of water.
LOT, THROUGH — Any interior lot having frontages on two more or less
parallel streets or rights-of-way or between a street and a body of water,
or a right-of-way and a body of water, or between two bodies of water, as
distinguished from a corner lot. All sides of through lots adjacent to streets,
rights-of-way, and bodies of water shall be considered frontage, and front
yards shall be provided as required.
FRONT LOT LINE —
INTERIOR LOTS — The line separating the lot from a street or
right-of-way.
a.
CORNER LOT OR THROUGH LOT — The line separating the lot
from either street or right-of-way.
b.
1.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot
pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line between
the side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, not less than 10 feet long
lying farthest from the front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line
shall be opposite the front lot line of least dimension.
2.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot
line.
3.
80.Editor's Note: So in original.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:918
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side boundaries of the lot
measured at the front setback line.
MAJOR RIGHT-OF-WAY, PRIVATE — The private right-of-way which provides
access to a lot or parcel of land.
Where two or more private rights-of-way provide or have the potential of
providing access, the major right-of-way shall be the one on which the
greater number of vehicles generally travel or have the potential of
traveling. Where a public and a private right-of-way have the potential for
providing access, the major right-of-way shall be the public right-of-way.
MAJOR RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC — The public right-of-way which provides
direct access to a lot or parcel of land.
Where two or more public rights-of-way provide or have the potential of
providing access, the major right-of-way shall be the one on which the
greater number of vehicles generally travel. Where a public and private
right-of-way provide or have the potential for providing access, the major
right-of-way shall be the public right-of-way.
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — See Article VI, Section 45.
MANUFACTURING — The making of goods and articles by hand or
machinery including assembly, fabrication, finishing, packaging and
processing.
MARIJUANA — As defined in State Administrative Rules (10-144 CMR
Chapter 122), § 1.17, Marijuana.[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.87]
MARINA — A business establishment having frontage on navigable water
and, as its principal use, providing for hire off-shore moorings or docking
facilities for boats, and which may also provide accessory services such as
boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine
fuel service facilities.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
MARINE SERVICES — Services for marine activities such as boat storage,
boat launching, the sales of supplies and services for watercraft and/or their
equipment or accessories.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRY — A use engaged in the
manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such
products, but excluding basic industrial processing.
1.
HEAVY MANUFACTURING/INDUSTRY — A use engaged in basic
processing and manufacture of material or products predominately
from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or
manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or
storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous
or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
2.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:919
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana that is acquired, possessed, cultivated,
manufactured, used, delivered, transferred or transported to treat or
alleviate a qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms
associated with the qualifying patient's debilitating medical
condition.[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.87]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CAREGIVER — A person, licensed hospice provider
or licensed nursing facility that is designated by a qualifying patient to
assist the qualifying patient with the medical use of marijuana in
accordance with state law. A person who is a medical marijuana caregiver
must be at least 21 years of age and may not have been convicted of a
disqualifying drug offense.[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.87]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A not-for-profit entity registered
pursuant to state law that acquires, possesses, cultivates, manufactures,
delivers, transfers, transports, sells, supplies or dispenses marijuana,
paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials to qualifying
patients and the primary caregivers of those patients. Note that a
dispensary may be either a single facility, or it may be divided into two
separate but related facilities where growing is done at only one of the
facilities. This shall be considered a commercial land use.[Added
1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.87]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA GROWING FACILITY — A facility used for
cultivating, processing, and/or storing medical marijuana by one or more
medical marijuana caregiver(s) at a location which is not the medical
marijuana caregiver's primary year-round residence or his or her patient's
primary year-round residence. This shall be considered a commercial land
use.[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.87]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA HOME PRODUCTION — Cultivating, processing
and/or storing of medical marijuana by a qualifying patient at his or her own
residence or a medical marijuana caregiver at his or her own primary yearround
residence for use by a qualifying patient. This use shall be considered
an accessory land use.[Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.87]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA LAND USES — Any of three types of land uses,
defined herein, that cover the full range of options for lawful cultivating,
processing, storing and distributing medical marijuana.[Added 1-17-2017
by Ord. No. 2016.87]
MOBILE HOME — See "manufactured housing."
MOBILE HOME PARK — A plot of land laid out to accommodate at least
three mobile homes for commercial purposes, on a parcel of land with a
minimum of 25 acres.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MUNICIPAL RECREATION FACILITY — A recreation facility owned and
operated by the City of Biddeford and open to the general public.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:920
MUNICIPAL USE — A municipal entity funded in whole or in part by the
City of Biddeford including, by way of illustration and without limitation,
municipal buildings, public schools, public parks, public recreational
facilities and fire stations.
MUSEUM —
NATURAL AREAS AND NATURAL COMMUNITIES, UNIQUE NATURAL
AREAS AND NATURAL COMMUNITIES — Areas identified by a
governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Conservation
Natural Areas Program, or by the City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan, as
having significant value as a natural area.
NEIGHBORHOOD CONVENIENCE STORE/SERVICE — A store or service
business of less than 1,500 square feet of total area intended to service
the convenience of a residential neighborhood primarily with the sale of
merchandise, including, but not limited to, basic foods, prepared foods
to go, newspapers, emergency home repair articles, and other household
items and/or services, including, but not limited to, Laundromats, dry
cleaners, beauty salons, business and educational services, financial
services, and tailoring. Services such as building, electrical, plumbing,
and landscape contracting are not considered "neighborhood services."
Motor vehicle service and repair is not included and is defined
separately.[Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
NET RESIDENTIAL ACREAGE — The net acreage of a parcel or site that
is generally suitable for development in its natural state. Net residential
acreage shall be determined by subtracting unsuitable and marginal areas
from the gross area of the parcel, as set forth in Article VI, Section 44 of
this ordinance.
NET RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per net
residential acre.81
NONCONFORMING CONDITION — A nonconforming lot, structure or use
which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this
ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect:[Added 9-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A single lot of record which, at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, does not meet the area,
frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.[Added
9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
An institution for the acquisition, preservation, study, and exhibition of
works of artistic, historical, or scientific value.
1.
An institution devoted to the procurement, care, study and display of
objects of lasting interest or value. [Added 4-16-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.24]
2.
81.Editor's Note: The former definition of "nonconforming," which immediately followed, was
repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:921
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure which does not meet any
one or more of the following dimensional requirements; setback, height, or
lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence
at the time this ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.[Added
9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or
parts thereof which is not allowed in the district in which it is situated,
but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence
at the time this ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.[Added
9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
NURSING HOMES — A privately operated establishment licensed by the
State of Maine Department of Health and Human Services, where
maintenance and personal or nursing care are provided for persons who are
unable to care for themselves.
OFFICES, BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL — The place of business of
doctors, lawyers, accountants, financial advisors, architects, surveyors, real
estate and insurance businesses, psychiatrists, counselors, and the like
or in which a business conducts its administrative, financial or clerical
operations including banks and other financial services, but not retail sales
nor activities utilizing trucks as part of the business operation.
OLDER MOBILE HOMES, TRAILERS — "Older mobile homes" and "trailers"
are terms that may be used interchangeably, and mean any factory-built
home which fails to meet the definition of "manufactured housing" as
defined above and more specifically, it shall mean any mobile home
constructed prior to June 15, 1976.
OPEN SPACE — Any area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated
or reserved in a development for public or private use or enjoyment, or
for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or
neighboring such open space. Open space shall be used for recreation,
protection of natural resource areas, passive amenity, forest management
or agriculture; be accessible to all residents of the development, except
where used for agricultural or forest management purposes, or the
preservation of sensitive natural resources; and be accessible to the public,
if accepted by a public agency. Open space shall not be occupied by
nonrecreational buildings or parking, and shall not include required lot
areas of dwelling units.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN — An attached or freestanding structure
conveying some information, knowledge, or idea to the public.
PARKING GARAGE — A structure consisting of one to four levels, above
grade, for the temporary parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING LOT — A designated area for the temporary parking of motor
vehicles.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:922
PARKING SPACE — An unobstructed space or area on a lot and/or within
a building intended for the use of temporary parking of a motor vehicle.
This term shall include "parking stall." Typically a parking space shall
measure at least 9 by 18 feet. This area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles
or entrances, fully accessible for the storage or parking of vehicles.
PARKS AND RECREATION — Noncommercially operated recreation
facilities open to the general public including, but not limited to
playgrounds, parks, monuments, green strips, open space, miniparks,
athletic fields, boat launching ramps, piers and docks, picnic grounds,
swimming pools, and wildlife and nature preserves, along with any
necessary accessory facilities, restrooms, bathhouses, and the maintenance
of such land and facilities. The term shall not include campgrounds, or
commercial recreation and amusement centers.
PATIO — A level area adjacent to a dwelling unit constructed of stone,
cement or other material located at ground level, with no railing or other
structure above the level of the ground. The term shall not include
driveways or walkways.
PERFORMING ARTS/THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted
to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical or other live
performances.
PERMITTED USE — Uses which are listed as allowed uses in the various
districts set forth in this ordinance. The term shall not include conditional
uses or prohibited uses.
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARFS, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND
USES EXTENDING OVER OR BEYOND THE NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE
OR WITHIN A WETLAND — [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area of contiguous or
noncontiguous size, planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a
single entity and containing one or more structures to accommodate retail,
service, commercial, industrial, office, and residential uses or a combination
of such uses (i.e. mixed uses), and appurtenant common areas and
accessory uses, customary and incidental to the predominant uses.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Biddeford.
POND — Any inland body of water which has a surface area in excess of
10 acres, except where such body of water is man-made and in addition is
completely surrounded by land held by a single owner, and except those
privately owned ponds which are held primarily as waterfowl and fish
breeding areas, or for hunting and fishing.
PREEXISTING ACCESSORY USE TOWERS/ANTENNAS — Existing
communications towers/antennas and alternative tower structures, which
TEMPORARY — Structures which remain in or over the water for less
than seven months in any period of 12 consecutive months.
1.
PERMANENT — Structures which remain in or over the water for seven
months or more in any period of 12 consecutive months.
2.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:923
have been installed as an accessory use to a permitted use in the district in
which it is located as of the date of the first public hearing on this zoning
amendment. Enlargements of preexisting accessory use towers/antennas
beyond the threshold height of 125 feet shall be considered a
telecommunications facility and must conform to the regulations of this
section.
PRIMARY RESIDENCE — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located. For residential lots, such a building
would be a dwelling.[Added 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.16; amended
6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.57]
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A building other than one which is used for
purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another building or
use on the same premises.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
PRINCIPAL USE — A use other than one which is wholly incidental or
accessory to another use on the same premises.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
PRIVATE WAY — A privately owned and maintained right-of-way meeting
the City's road construction standards as specified in Article VI, Section
51, of the performance standards, or in Chapter 62 (Streets, Sidewalks and
Other Public Places) as required by the City Engineer.
PUBLIC BUILDING — See "governmental building."
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or
otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
PUBLISHING/PRINTING — The production, processing, and preparation for
sale of printed materials by means of inked type and a printing press or by
similar means.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle
designed to be towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living
quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pickup camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be
considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its
tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of Motor
Vehicles.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
materials that would otherwise be disposed of or processed as waste or
the mechanized separation of waste, other than through combustion, and
the creation and recovery of reusable materials other than as a fuel for
any purpose or as landfill. This term does not include the processing or
handling of construction and demolition debris for any purpose nor does it
include activities related to redemption centers.[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010.70; amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.37]
RECYCLING FACILITY — Land and buildings used for the recycling of
solid or liquid waste. "Recycling facility" does not include a redemption
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:924
center.[Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.70; amended 6-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 2011.37]
REDEMPTION CENTERS — Facilities used primarily for processing bottles,
cans, and other similar items returned for deposit.
REHABILITATION FACILITY — A facility used primarily for therapy and
education of disabled persons, as defined by the Maine Human Rights Act,
5 M.R.S.A. § 4551 et seq.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A facility, whether publicly or privately
owned, which is fueled in whole or in part by municipal solid waste,
including but not limited to domestic, commercial, industrial or other types
of wastes, and which converts such fuel into usable energy.
RESTAURANT — An establishment where meals are prepared and served to
the public for consumption.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment that offers quick food
service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already
prepared and held for service or prepared, fried or griddled quickly or
heated in a device such as a microwave. Orders are not generally taken at
the customer's table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers. Project must comply with architectural standards in Article VI if
it is in any of the MSRD Zones, and drive-thrus are not permitted in MSRD
Zones.
RETAIL BUSINESS — Any business engaged in sales and related services
to the ultimate consumer for direct consumption and/or use, and not for
resale. For purposes of this chapter, eating and drinking places, auto sales,
motor vehicle service and repair and gasoline sales are not considered as a
retail business and are defined separately.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — All land that includes public or private streets, state and
federal highways, private ways (now called public easements), or public
land reservations for the purpose of access, including utility rights-of-way.
RIVER — Any free-flowing body of water, including its associated floodplain
wetlands from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of
25 square miles to its mouth.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
ROAD — See "street," "right-of-way," or "private way" definitions.
ROOMING HOUSE — Same as "boarding home."
SAWMILL — A place of business where lumber is processed.
SCHOOLS, COMMERCIAL — A private institution or establishment that
functions primarily to teach or instruct, for a fee, special skills or subjects,
that do not necessarily result in state required educational requirements.
Examples of this would include a gymnastics school, driving school, etc.
SCHOOLS, PUBLIC AND PRIVATE — Primary and secondary schools, or
parochial schools, which teaches courses of study which are sufficient
to qualify attendance in compliance with state compulsory education
requirements.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:925
SELF-STORAGE FACILITIES — A structure containing separate, individual,
and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual
leases for varying periods of time.
SERVICE BUSINESS — A business that provides services to the public
for compensation, either on or off the premises. Uses include, but are
not limited to, beauty salons, building, electrical, plumbing and landscape
contracting, business and educational services, financial services, catering,
cleaning services, locksmith, photocopying, repair and restoration services,
bicycle repair shop, tailoring, typing and word processing. Motor vehicle
service and repair is not included and is defined separately.
SERVICE CORRIDORS — Rights-of-way, easements, or land in public or
private ownership, for the location of essential services.
SETBACK, BUILDING — The minimum horizontal distance from a lot line to
the nearest part of a building, including porches, steps, and railings.82
SHOPPING CENTER — Any concentration of two or more retail stores or
service establishments under one ownership or management on a single lot
or abutting/adjoining property.
SHORELAND ZONE — See Article XIV.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
SIGN — An object, device or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors
or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
BILLBOARD — A structure designed, intended or used for advertising a
product, property, business, entertainment, service, amusement or the
like, and not located where the matter advertised is available or occurs.
A billboard is deemed not to be a sign as otherwise defined herein.
1.
GROUND SIGN — A sign, or group of signs, supported by one or more
uprights or braces permanently affixed into the ground. Also referred
to as a "pole sign."
2.
PORTABLE SIGN — A sign not designed or intended to be permanently
affixed into the ground or to a structure. This type of sign is considered
to be used and considered as a temporary sign.
3.
4. ROOF SIGN — A sign located upon or over a roof of a building.
SUSPENDED SIGN — A sign suspended from a structure, generally
hanging over a right-of-way such as a sidewalk.
5.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign or advertising display designed and
intended to be displayed or displayed for a short period of time not
to exceed 45 days. A temporary sign may or may not include portable
6.
82.Editor's Note: The former definition of "setback from water," which immediately followed,
was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:926
SIGN AREA — The entire area within a continuous perimeter, enclosing
the extreme limits of a sign display, including any frame or border. The
calculation of sign area for a double-faced sign shall be the area of one face
only. Double-faced signs shall be constructed so that the perimeter of both
faces coincide and are parallel and not more than 24 inches apart.
SMALL WIND-ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES) — See Article V, Section
75.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
STORAGE OF BULK GASEOUS FUELS — The storage of gaseous fuels,
chemicals, or other materials of a similar nature in structures for
subsequent resale to distributors, retailer dealers, or other outlets.
STREET — An existing state, county, town or private right-of-way or a rightof-
way dedicated for public use and shown upon a plan duly approved by
the Planning Board, accepted by Council, and recorded in the York County
Registry of Deeds or a right-of-way dedicated for public use and shown
on a plan duly recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds prior to
the establishment of the Planning Board; or roads historically in use and
accepted by the City. The term "street" shall not include those ways which
have been discontinued or abandoned.
STRUCTURE — Anything built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, goods or property of any kind, together with anything
constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, including
decks, stacks, satellite dishes, and antennas, exclusive of fences, and poles,
wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated with service drops
signs, but does include banners. [Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.26]
WALL SIGN — A sign attached or painted, or molded permanently to a
wall or structure.
7.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any mobile or temporary sign or sign
structure, not securely attached to the ground or to any other structure.
8.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — An on-site nontemporary sign
that uses computer-generated messages or some other electronic
means of changing copy. EMCs include displays using incandescent
lamps, LEDs, LCDs, or a flipper matrix. [Added 4-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013.26]
9.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign in a window visible from a public way or
sidewalk and located either affixed to the window by any means or
located inside the building within three feet of a window pane that
includes any writing (letters, words, or numerals). [Added 4-16-2013
by Ord. No. 2013.26]
10.
BUS SHELTER SIGN — As specified in 23 M.R.S.A. § 1908-A, a bus
shelter sign is any outdoor sign visible to the traveling public from a
public way that is affixed to a publicly owned bus shelter where a public
transport bus stops for the purpose of allowing passengers to board
and/or leave the bus. [Added 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.26]
11.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:927
as well as guying and guy anchors, as well as sidewalks, driveways, parking
lots, and field or garden walls or embankment retaining walls.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair
is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored,
before the damage occurred. For purposes of this definition "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The
term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a structure
to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions or
for any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a state inventory of historical places.
SWIMMING POOL — An outdoor man-made receptacle or excavation
designed to hold water to a depth of at least 24 inches, primarily for
swimming or bathing, whether in the ground or above the ground.
TAKEOUT RESTAURANT — An establishment primarily devoted to the
following: a place where meals and food are prepared for immediate
consumption either on or off of the premises or a place where service is
provided to customers either in their motor vehicles or on foot outside of
the building.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any structure, antenna, tower, or
other device which provides radio/television transmission, commercial
mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone
services, specialized mobile radio communications (SMR), common carrier
wireless exchange access services, and personal communications service
(PCS) or pager services. Telecommunications facilities shall be considered
a principal use. Preexisting accessory use towers/antennas shall be exempt
from this definition.
TENTING GROUND — See "campground."
THOROUGHFARE — A place of passage from one location to another.
THRESHOLD HEIGHT — The height, as defined above, below which a
telecommunications facility does not need review and approval as a
conditional use, unless otherwise noted herein.
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of timber for the primary
purpose of selling or processing forest products.[Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
TOWER — Any structure, whether freestanding or in association with a
building or other permanent structure, that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purposes of supporting one or more antennas, including
self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:928
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures and similar structures
TRAILER — Any towed, nonmotorized vehicle used for the following
purposes:
TRAVEL TRAILER — Any towed vehicle used or so constructed as to permit
its being used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation
use. This term shall include but not be limited to camper, camper-trailer
and all other similar short-term shelter devices.
UTILITY TRAILER — A towed vehicle used or so constructed as to permit
its being used to carry/contain cargo. This type of vehicle shall not be used
for any dwelling purposes.
OFFICE TRAILER — A towed vehicle used or so constructed to permit
its being used as a temporary, mobile office used in conjunction with
construction of major projects such as roadways or large building projects.
These units shall not be used for dwelling purposes and shall be removed
from the site when the specific project is complete.
TRAILER PARK — See "campground" or "mobile home park."
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Firms or businesses associated with
furnishing passenger transport including bus terminals, taxi stations, water
taxis, passenger rail stations, passenger transportation charter service, and
other similar services.
TRUCKING OPERATIONS —
a. LIGHT TRUCKING — A business establishment engaged primarily in
the transportation of goods and services in vehicles having no more
than four wheels, and requiring a Maine driver's license of no greater
level than Category 3, and where the cargo bed or enclosure is an
integral part of the truck body.
b. HEAVY TRUCKING — Businesses involving the use of vehicles
requiring operators to have Maine drivers' licenses beyond category.
c. This definition shall not include bus operations.
TRUCKING DISTRIBUTION TERMINAL — An area or building where trucks
load and unload cargo and freight, and where cargo and freight may be
broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other
vehicles or modes of transportation.
TWO-FAMILY HOUSING — Existing structure with an added residential unit
or converted to contain two residential units. (This definition comes from
Article VI, Section 24)
UNDUE HARDSHIP — As used in this ordinance, the words "undue
hardship" shall mean all of the following:
That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted; and
1.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:929
UNIVERSITY/COLLEGE — A postsecondary educational institution that is
part of the University of Maine System or the Maine Technical College
System or that is authorized by the laws of the State of Maine to grant
degrees.
UNIVERSITY USES — Facilities, programs, services, or activities conducted
by or hosted by a college or university that:
USE — The manner in which land or a structure is arranged, designed or
intended, or is occupied.
USED MERCHANDISE SALES — The indoor or outdoor short-term sale of
used articles, conducted for more than five consecutive days or for more
than two weekends during the period May 1 through September 30. This
term shall include extended yard sales, but shall not include flea markets,
special event or organization auctions or shops for secondhand clothing or
secondhand books.
That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and
2.
That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
3.
That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner; and
4.
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public
good, or impair the purposes and intent of this ordinance.
A variance is not justified unless all elements are present in the case.
See also Article IX (Board of Appeals) of this ordinance.
5.
1. Are consistent with the institution's mission, and
Involve or support educational, extracurricular, research, service, or
community outreach activities, and
2.
If located in an institutional zone, are consistent with the most recent
institutional master plan approved by the Planning Board.
University uses includes ancillary and support services such as health
clinics, parking lots, bookstores, day care centers, snack stands, and
similar facilities that primarily serve university faculty, staff, and/or
students. University uses also include residential uses that provide
housing, dining, and related facilities for staff, faculty, students, and
participants in programs and activities conducted or hosted by the
institution but shall not involve providing accommodations to the
general public or for people who are not involved in university related
programs or activities nor any use that would be classified as a hotel or
motel under the provisions of this ordinance. University uses may be
provided or operated directly by the university or on a contract basis.
3.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:930
VARIANCE — A relaxation of the terms of this ordinance where such
relaxation will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property, and not the result of the actions of the
applicants, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in undue
hardship. Variances permissible under this ordinance are limited to height
of buildings, structures, lot size/density, yard and open spaces size, and
setbacks. No variance can be granted for the establishment of any use
otherwise prohibited, nor shall a variance be granted because of the
presence of nonconformities in the immediate or adjacent zones.
VEHICLE SALES — Any business which involves a parking or display area
for the sale of new or used cars, trucks, motorcycles, campers, recreational
vehicles, mobile homes, motorized or towed farm equipment such as
tractors and trailers, or other similar products and services accessory to
sales. This term shall not apply to private sales or the sale of individual
vehicles on private property provided the seller is not licensed as an auto
dealer for such sales.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A place where animals are given medical care
and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the
hospital use.
WAREHOUSING — The storage, deposit, or stocking of merchandise or
commodities in a structure or room.83
WATER-ORIENTED BUSINESS — See "functionally water-dependent uses."
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — The system for the collection, treatment,
storage, and distribution of potable water from the source of supply to the
consumer, including those buildings necessary to support the water supply
system.[Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.3]
WETLAND — A coastal and freshwater wetland, as defined in Article
XIV.84[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — A business establishment engaged in the bulk
sale of goods or materials, not manufactured or processed on the premises,
and not retail sales.
WILDLIFE HABITAT, SIGNIFICANT WILDLIFE HABITAT — Areas identified
by a governmental agency such as the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife, or City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan, as having
significant value as habitat for animals.
YACHT CLUB — A club or private group involved in boat launching, boat
services, and boating activities that may include eating and retail facilities
for owners, crews, and guests.
YARD — An unoccupied space, open to the sky, on the same lot with a
building or structure.
83.Editor's Note: The former definition of "water body," which immediately followed, was
repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
84.Editor's Note: The former definition of "wetland soils," which immediately followed, was
repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:931
YARD SALE — See "used merchandise sales."
Article III
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
Section 1. Official Zoning Map a part of Zoning Ordinance.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
Zones are located and bounded as shown on the Official Zoning Map which
together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The Shoreland Zone
boundaries are determined by the terms of Article XIV (Shoreland Zoning)
and the section creating that Zone.
Section 2. Certification of Zoning Map. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
The Official Zoning Map is certified by the signature of the Mayor attested
by the City Clerk under the following words: "This is the Official Zoning Map
referred to in Article V of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Biddeford,"
together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance.
The official copy shall be located in the office of the City Clerk. Regardless
of the existence of other copies of the Zoning Map which from time to
time may be made or published, the Official Zoning Map shall be the
final authority as to the current zoning status of the City, except where
Article XIV (Shoreland Zoning) requires field verification of Shoreland Zone
boundaries.
Section 3. Changes of the Official Zoning Map.
If changes are made in the zone boundaries or other matter portrayed on
the Official Zoning Map, except as to the Shoreland Zone, such changes
shall be made on the Official Zoning Map within 14 days after the
amendment has been adopted together with an entry on the Official Zoning
FRONT YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with
a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located
between the street line and the front line of the building projected to
the side lines of the lot.
1.
REAR YARD — An open space on the same lot with a principal building,
unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building, or use, extending
the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and
the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot.
2.
SIDE YARD — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
principal building, and any part thereof, located between the side of the
building, and side lines of the lot, and extending from the rear line of
the front yard to the front line of the rear yard.
3.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 3
CHCT:932
Map as follows: "On (insert date) by official action of the City Council,
the following change(s) was (were) made: (insert brief description of the
nature of change)." Immediately beneath the entry the Mayor shall place his
signature, attested by the City Clerk.
No amendment to this ordinance which involves matter portrayed on the
Official Zoning Map shall become effective until after such change and entry
has been made in accordance with the procedure set forth in this ordinance.
Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall
be considered a misdemeanor and punishable as provided by law.
Section 4. Replacement of Official Zoning Map.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost
or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and
additions, the City Council may by resolution adopt a new Official Zoning
Map. The new Official Zoning Map may correct drafting or other errors or
omissions in the prior Official Zoning Map, but no such corrections shall
have the effect of amending the Official Zoning Map.
Article IV
NONCONFORMANCE
Section 1. Purposes. [Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.57]
The intent of this Zoning Ordinance is to regulate nonconforming lots,
uses and structures. This ordinance intends to be realistic so that:
nonconforming vacant lots of record can be reasonably developed;
nonconforming existing structures can be properly maintained or repaired;
and nonconforming uses can continue to be changed to other less
nonconforming or to conforming uses; and nonconforming (as to use) singlefamily
residential dwelling units can create accessory dwelling units subject
to the performance standards in Article VI of this ordinance. When
nonconforming uses fall into disuse, the intent of these regulations is not
to allow them to be reestablished after a twelve-month period of dormancy.
These regulations are designed for the betterment of the community and for
the improvement of property values.
Section 2. General.
Continuance, enlargement, reconstruction. Any use of land, or any
building, structure, or parts thereof, legally existing at the time of
the adoption of this ordinance, or at any time a zone is changed by
amendment hereafter, which does not conform to the requirements
of this ordinance or its amendments, may continue, and may not be
extended, reconstructed, enlarged, or structurally altered except as
specified by this article.
A.
Section 3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:933
Section 3. Nonconforming use.
Transfer of ownership. Ownership of lots, structures and uses which
remain lawful but become nonconforming by the adoption or
amendment of this ordinance may be transferred, and the new owner
may continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the
nonconforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this
ordinance.
B.
Restoration or replacement.
This ordinance allows the normal upkeep and maintenance of
nonconforming uses and structures; repairs, renovations, or
modernizations which do not involve expansion of the
nonconforming use or structure; and such other changes in a
nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or local building
and safety codes may require.
1.
Any nonconforming use or structure which is hereafter damaged
or destroyed by fire or any cause other than the willful act of the
owner or his agent, may be restored or reconstructed within one
year of the date of said damage or destruction, provided that:
Any nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged except in
conformity with this ordinance and the Maine State Plumbing
Code, and is within the existing lines of nonconformity; and
(a)
(b) Any nonconforming use shall not be expanded in area.
2.
Multiple structures on a single parcel of land, including rental
cottages, shall not be converted, replaced, or reconstructed into
one or more multifamily structures, unless such change is
specifically approved by the several review bodies of the City of
Biddeford as required.
3.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the demolition of the remains
of any building so damaged or destroyed.
4.
C.
Resumption prohibited. A building or structure in which a
nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or
which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again be devoted to
a nonconforming use, even if the owner has not intended to abandon
the use. The burden of proof in this situation rests with the property
owner and must be proven to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A.
A structure nonconforming as to use. [Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017.57]
A building or structure, nonconforming as to use, shall not be
enlarged unless the nonconforming use is terminated, and
otherwise meets the provisions of this ordinance. This does not
apply to accessory dwelling units which may be created in
1.
B.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 3
CHCT:934
accordance with the performance standards in Article VI of this
ordinance.
A nonconforming use of part of a building or structure shall not be
extended throughout other parts of the building or structure unless
those parts of the building or structure were manifestly arranged
or designed for such use prior to the adoption of this ordinance, or
of any amendment making such use nonconforming. This shall not
apply accessory dwelling units which may be created in accordance
with the performance standards in Article VI of this ordinance.
2.
Accessory dwelling units on parcels containing a single
nonconforming (as to use) dwelling unit, which was in existence
as of January 1, 2017, that are created in accordance with the
performance standards in Article VI of this ordinance shall not be
considered the expansion or creation of a nonconforming use.
3.
Change of use.
An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided that:
The proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the district
than the existing nonconforming use; and
a.
The impact on adjacent properties is less adverse than the
impact of the former use, as determined by the appeals board.
The case shall be heard as an administrative appeal.
b.
1.
The determination of appropriateness shall include consideration
of the probable changes in traffic (volume and type), parking,
noise, potential for litter, wastes or by products, fumes, odors,
or other nuisances likely to result from such change of use. The
performance standards in Article VI of this ordinance shall apply to
such requests to establish new nonconforming uses.
2.
C.
Use of land.
A nonconforming use of land may not be extended into any part of
the remainder of a lot of land or onto any other lot.
A nonconforming use of land which is incidental to or accessory
to a nonconforming use of a building shall be discontinued at
the same time the nonconforming use of the principal building is
discontinued.
1.
In the case of earth removal operations, the removal of earth
may not be extended as a nonconforming use beyond the required
seventy-five-foot setback lines of the specific parcel upon which
such operations were in progress when such use became
nonconforming. Adjacent parcels in the same or different
ownership shall not be eligible for exemption under the
nonconforming use provisions unless earth removal operations
2.
D.
Section 3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 3
CHCT:935
Section 4. Nonconforming structures. [Ord. No. 2001.81,
10-2-2001]
(Pertaining to dimensional requirements. Applications regarding
nonconforming use shall be reviewed under the provisions above.)
were in progress on these parcels before these provisions were
enacted.
Enlargements controlled.
A nonconforming structure shall not be added to or enlarged unless
such addition or enlargement conforms to all the regulations of the
zone in which it is located, or a variance is obtained. In addition,
state laws must be adhered to.
1.
In any situation, the total of any, or all, enlargement(s) shall be
limited to no more than 25% of the total original floor area of the
original nonconforming structure; further, total lot coverage shall
be limited to within the setback standards specified in Table B in
Article V of this ordinance relating to lot setbacks.
The placing of a foundation below a lawfully existing
nonconforming structure shall not constitute the expansion of the
structure, provided that the first floor space of the structure is not
increased, and provided that the maximum height limit within the
zone is not exceeded.
Construction or expansion of a foundation under an existing
dwelling which expands habitable space shall be considered an
expansion.
2.
A.
Discontinuance. Discontinuance of the use of a legally existing
nonconforming structure shall not constitute abandonment of the
structure.
Conforming use of the structure may be revived at any time.
B.
Lack of required parking or loading space. A building or structure
which is nonconforming as to the requirements for off-street parking
and/or loading space shall not be enlarged, added to, or altered unless
off-street parking and/or loading space is provided. This parking and/
or loading space shall be in conformance with the requirements of
this ordinance for both the addition or alteration and for the original
building or structure, or unless a variance is obtained. Off-street
parking may be provided on another property upon documentation that
a deeded right has been obtained and recorded at the York County
Registry of deeds.
C.
Any nonconforming building or structure which existed on or before
January 1, 1985, may continue to be used and occupied, even though
its original construction may have violated the space and bulk
D.
Section 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 4
CHCT:936
Section 5. Nonconforming lots of record. [Ord. No. 2001.81,
10-2-2001]
requirements of the zoning ordinance in effect at the time of
construction, if it appears from the City's records that:
1. A building permit was issued for the building or structure; and
Since January 1, 1985, there have been no expansion or
enlargement of the building or structure or alteration of the
dimensions of the lot on which the building or structure is located
which increased the nonconformity beyond that existing on January
1, 1985.
2.
Vacant lots. A nonconforming vacant lot that existed prior to the
effective date of this ordinance may be built upon, provided that such
lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other vacant
lot in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this ordinance
except lot size and frontage can be met. Variance of setbacks or other
requirements not involving area or width shall be obtained only by
action of the Board of Appeals.
A.
Built lots. A nonconforming lot that was built upon prior to the date
of adoption of this ordinance is subject to the following restrictions.
The structure(s) may be repaired, maintained, or improved, and if it
is a conforming structure, it may be enlarged in conformity with all
dimensional requirements of this ordinance except lot area, and/or
lot frontage, provided that in single-family zones, single structures on
such nonconforming lot shall not be connected to form multifamily
structures. If the proposed enlargement of the structure(s) cannot meet
the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, the applicant shall
apply for a variance from the Board of Appeals.
B.
Contiguous built lots. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are
in single or joint ownership of record as of the date of adoption of
this ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance, and if a principal use exists on each
lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed separately or together,
providing the state minimum lot size law and plumbing code are
complied with.
If two or more principal uses existed on a single lot of record as of
the date of adoption of this ordinance, each may be sold on a separate
lot providing the state minimum lot size law and plumbing code are
complied with.
C.
Contiguous lots, vacant or partially built.
If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or
joint ownership of record as of the date of adoption of this
ordinance; or
1. a.
D.
Section 4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:937
Section 6. Vested rights.
Nonconforming use rights cannot arise by the mere filing of a notice of
intent to build, an application for building permits, or an application for
required state permits and approvals. Such rights usually arise when actual
construction has begun, or, in the case of pending applications, when the
review process on a complete application commences. Such construction
must be legal at the time it is commenced and the owner must be in
possession of and in compliance with all validly issued permits, both state
and local.
Section 7. Pending application for building permits.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size or designated use of any building, structure, or part
thereof, for which a building permit has been granted prior to the adoption
or amendment of this ordinance, provided construction shall start within 90
days after the granting of such permit.
Section 8. Conflicts with Shoreland Zoning (Article XIV). [Added
9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
Whenever a provision of this Article (Article IV) conflicts with or is
inconsistent with a provision of Article XIV (Shoreland Zoning), Section
12 (Nonconformance), the provisions of Article XIV (Shoreland Zoning),
Section 12 (Nonconformance) shall prevail.
Article V
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
Section 1. Classes of zones. [Ord. No. 2001.90, § 3, 10-16-2001;
Ord. No. 2003.4, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 2003.66, 7-1-2003; amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
For the purpose of this ordinance, the City is hereby divided into the
following classes of zones:
If either or both of these lots do not individually meet the
dimensional requirement of this ordinance or subsequent
amendments; or
b.
If one or more of the lots are vacant or contains a primary
structure, or an accessory structure the lots shall be combined
to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional standards.
c.
The preceding shall be true except where rights have vested or the
lots have frontage on parallel streets and state laws are complied
with.
2.
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 1
CHCT:938
Suburban Residential Zones to be known as SR Zones.
Coastal Residential Zones to be known as CR Zones.
Residential Zones to be known as R Zones.
Business Zones to be known as B Zones.
Industrial Zones to be known as I Zones.
Waterfront Zones to be known as W Zones.
Rural-Farm Zones to be known as R-F Zones.
Limited Rural-Farm Zones to be known as LR-F Zones.
Medical Zones to be known as M Zones.
Shoreland Zones to be known as RP-1, RP, LR, GD-1, GD-2, CFMA, and LC
Zones.
Contract Zones to be known as CZ Zones.
Institutional Zones to be known as IN Zones.
Office Residential Zones to be known as OR Zones.
Main Street Revitalization District zones to be known as MSRD Zones.
Aquifer Protection Overlay Zones to be known as APO Zones.
Section 2. General description of zones and allowed uses. [Ord. No.
2001.90, § 4, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 2003.4, 1-21-2003; Ord. No.
2003.66, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 2007.79, 9-4-2007]
The following section provides a brief general description and philosophy
for each specific zone or district.
Suburban Residential Zone (SR-1): This zone is generally limited to
single-family residential use, with provisions for professional offices in
the home under special circumstances. These areas are typically large
lot single-family homes on public sewer and water, or at least public
water.
a.
Coastal Residential Zone (CR): This zone was created to identify coastal
areas with significant environmental or visual significance. The area is
limited to single-family residential uses and some home offices under
special circumstances. The zone is characterized by varying lot sizes
dependent upon soils types.
b.
c. Residential Zones:
Section 1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:939
R-1-A: These areas are limited to single-family residential uses similar
to the SR-1 Zone. The lot size is smaller. These areas are served by
water and sewer. These districts are best characterized as in-town
single-family neighborhoods.
R-1-B: These areas are limited to single-family residential uses similar
to the R-1-A Zone. The lot size and setbacks are generally smaller.
These areas are served by water and sewer. These districts are best
characterized as in-town single-family neighborhoods. [Added
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.110]
R-2: These areas are higher-density multifamily neighborhoods which
allow for a mixture of residential uses. These areas are served by water
and sewer.
R-3: This zone is intended to provide maximum flexibility in terms of
residential use; it allows for a mixture of housing types on varying lot
sizes.
Business Zones:
B-1: This in the in-town commercial area. It allows for a mixture of
commercial and multifamily residential uses. The intent is to support
commercial activities to the maximum extent possible, while providing
space and opportunities to develop multifamily housing in vacant
factory structures and the upper stories of the existing and new
structures.
B-2: These are highway-oriented commercial areas. Residential
development is prohibited from this zone.
d.
Industrial Zones: [Amended 4-7-2015 by Ord. No. 2015.11]
I-1: This district allows for general commercial and industrial uses.
I-2: A more defined industrial zone that allows for selected industrial
uses. Requires review/recommendation by the Economic Improvement
Commission.
I-3: Is a gateway zone for a major entrance to the City, as such,
appearance of structures and properties is a major consideration in
the Planning Board's review process. Land use proposals in this area
must meet more stringent design and landscaping standards; facades
of new or rehabilitated structures shall be of brick or stone, other
materials may be considered on a case-by-case basis; residential styled
structures may be allowed on a case-by-case basis. The general zone
allows a mixture of commercial and industrial uses. Exterior storage
and display is prohibited except on those parcels of land that abut
Pomerleau Street but do not abut either Barra Road or Alfred street
(Route 111).
e.
f. Waterfront Zones:
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:940
W-1: Allows for a mixture of water-dependent or oriented commercial
uses, including residential uses.
W-2: Allows for commercial water-dependent uses.
W-3: The Biddeford Pool Village Waterfront Zone that allows both
water and non-water dependent or oriented commercial uses,
including residential uses.
Rural-Farm Zone (R-F): Allows for agricultural and residential uses, and
under special circumstances some commercial uses.
g.
Limited Rural-Farm Zone (LR-F): Area limited to nonresidential uses,
such as recycling, open space, some agricultural uses, extractive
operations.
h.
Medical Zone (M): Allows for hospitals and medical offices or other uses
associated with medical facilities or occupations.
i.
Shoreland Zones (RP-1, RP, LR, GDI, GDII, CFMA, and LC): See Article
XIV (Shoreland Zoning) for descriptions. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
j.
Contract/Conditional Use Zones (CZ #): Zones created by contract or
agreement between a developer and the City Council, after review by
the Planning Board. This zoning allows for uses not normally allowed
within a specific district, because they have unique benefits to the
general public or community. See Article V, Section 9. Existing contract
zones are listed as amendments to the Zoning Ordinance in Article XIII,
Section 3. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
k.
Institutional Zone (IN): The purpose of the Institutional Zone is to
accommodate college and university uses while minimizing the adverse
effects that such uses may have on the predominantly residentially
zoned neighborhoods surrounding the institutional zone. All university
uses or uses conducted by a college or university shall conform to an
institutional master plan approved by the Planning Board in accordance
with Article V, Section 11 of this Code. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
l.
Office Residential Zone (OR). It is the purpose of the OR Zone to provide
for the orderly transition of older residential areas along the major
traffic arteries to a mix of residential and low-intensity nonresidential
uses. It is the intent of the OR Zone to enable existing properties to
be converted to low-intensity office and service uses, provided that the
established architectural character of the area is maintained, exterior
display is limited, and that proposed conversions to nonresidential uses
are subject to site plan review. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
m.
Main Street Revitalization District Zones (MSRD): [Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
n.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:941
Section 3. Rules governing zone boundaries.
MSRD-1: The commercial core district where the intent is to preserve
the historic character of Biddeford while promoting the growth of
businesses and residences in the district.
MSRD-2: The residential conservation district where the intent is to
provide for areas of medium density while preserving the residential
and historical character of the existing buildings while still providing
opportunities for maintenance and remodeling of residences.
MSRD-3: The high-density and mixed-use district where the intent is
to preserve the historic character of buildings while facilitating the
redevelopment of vacant and underused mill buildings into a vibrant
residential and commercial community which contributes to the
revitalization of the City’s downtown.
Aquifer Protection Overlay Zone (APO): It is the purpose of the APO
Zone to protect the groundwater resources of the City of Biddeford
by restricting the uses and activities on land overlying aquifer and
aquifer recharge areas, to control the use and handling of hazardous
substances that could lead to the degradation of aquifers and aquifer
recharge areas, and to preserve and maintain the existing aquifer(s)
in the City of Biddeford as a water supply source for use by the City's
residents.
o.
The above zones or districts shall be clearly presented and displayed
on a map of the City of Biddeford. Said map shall be called the "Official
Zoning Map of the City of Biddeford."
A.
Changes to the Official Zoning Map shall be authorized by the City
Council, upon recommendation by the Planning Board. A statement
of such authorization, signed by the Mayor and City Clerk, and a
description and date of approval by the Council of the change shall be
affixed to the Official Zoning Map. The inking of line changes or other
changes shall be completed by the City Engineering Department and
approved by the City Planner and the Code Enforcement Officer.
B.
In addition to the Official Zoning Map, a narrative description, stating
meets and bounds, and other clear language descriptions of the zones
shall be maintained by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C.
The Code Enforcement Officer may transpose the information
concerning zoning lines from the Official Zoning Map to any other maps
that meet his needs. These maps shall not be considered as Official
Zoning Maps.
D.
Except regarding Shoreland Zone boundaries, where uncertainty exists
as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the Official Zoning Map
the following rules shall apply: [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
E.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 3
CHCT:942
Section 4. Zoning affects all structures and land. [Ord. of
6-1-1999(1)]
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, alleys, railroad rights-of-way, rivers, or streams
shall be construed to follow such center lines.
1.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
2.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall
be construed as following City limits.
3.
Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline
shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
4.
Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in Subsections E1 through 4 above shall be so construed.
Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the Map.
5.
Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or other
circumstances not covered by Subsections E1 through 5 above, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the zone boundaries.
6.
Where uncertainty exists regarding Shoreland Zone boundaries, the
terms set forth in Article XIV (Shoreland Zoning) shall apply. [Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
F.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be the final determiner of the exact
location of a particular zone boundary. Any appeal to his decision shall
be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals for an administrative decision.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
G.
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure, or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part
thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or altered
unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the
zone in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
A.
A new structure may be permitted to be built with the greater of the
following front yard setbacks:
The setback will be equal to the average front yard setback of the
existing houses on the immediately adjacent lots;
1.
2. The setback shall be at least 15 feet;
These provisions shall apply only along existing residential streets
which were developed prior to the enactment of the present front
yard setback requirements.
3.
B.
Section 3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:943
Section 5. Basic requirement.
Permitted uses and conditional uses in all districts shall conform to all
applicable specifications and requirements. A plumbing permit, building
permit, and/or certificate of occupancy shall be required for all buildings or
structures, uses of land and buildings, and sanitary facilities, according to
the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 6. District regulations/land use/lot size requirements. [Ord.
of 12-15-1992; Ord. of 1-19-1993, §§ 1-7; Ord. of 5-21-1996; Ord. of
2-4-1997(2); Ord. of 11-17-1997(5); Ord. of 6-2-1998(1); Ord. of
6-15-1999(2); Ord. of 11-16-1999(1); Ord. No. 2000.19, 4-4-2000;
Ord. No. 2000.35, 5-2-2000; Ord. No. 2000.36, 5-2-2000; Ord. No.
2000.67, 8-1-2000; Ord. No. 2001.3, 1-16-2001; Ord. No. 2001.10,
2-20-2001; Ord. No. 2001.45, 5-16-2001; Ord. No. 2001.46,
6-5-2001; Ord. No. 2001.90, § 5,10-16-2001; Ord. No. 2001.107,
11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2003.4, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 2003.14,
2-4-2003; Ord. No. 2003.31, 4-15-2003; Ord. No. 2003.66, 7-1-2003;
Ord. No. 2006.13, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 2006.39, 6-20-2006; Ord. No.
2006.108, 1-2-2007; Ord. No. 2007.79, 9-4-2007; Ord. No. 2008.79,
10-21-2008]
The minimum setback for an accessory structure shall be equal to the
front yard setback of the existing principal structure.
C.
Any residential structure in existence prior to December 20, 1990, may
be expanded or added to as long as they meet minimum setbacks (from
major access, 40 feet; from other streets, 25 feet; from side and rear
property lines, 10 feet).
D.
Land use permitted to each district, in conformance with the general
performance standards of this ordinance, are shown in the following
table, the table of land uses for MSRD Zones contained in this article,
Section 7 (Main Street Revitalization Districts), and in Article XIV
(Shoreland Zoning), Section 14, Table of Land Uses. [Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
A.
Multifamily and nonresidential uses shall be subject to the provisions of
site review (Article XI) of this ordinance.
B.
Conditional uses shall meet the tests outlined in Article VII, Section 6
of this ordinance.
C.
Uses proposed near the Biddeford Airport shall meet the performance
standards outlined in Article VI, Section 3 [4].
D.
E. (Reserved)85
85.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, which provided for uses proposed near wetland areas,
was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:944
Section 6A. Dimensional requirements. [Ord. of 4-2-1996; Ord. of
2-3-1998(1); Ord. of 2-16-1999(8); Ord. of 6-1-1999(1); Ord. No.
2001.45, 5-16-2001; Ord. No. 2001.90, § 6, 10-16-2001; Ord. No.
2003.4, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 2003.66, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 2003.67,
7-1-2003; Ord. No. 2005.3, 2-1-2005; Ord. No. 2006.13, 3-7-2006;
Ord. No. 2008.53, 8-5-2008; Ord. No. 2008.80, 10-7-2008]
Lots and buildings in all districts shall meet or exceed the following
requirements. Additional requirements may be imposed by other provisions
of this ordinance.88
Table C
Lot Size Requirements for Coastal Residential (CR) District
The minimum area in square feet required for single-family residential use
as permitted in this zone shall be according to the following4, 5:
Chart 9B1 Minimum Square Feet Lot Size2
Soil Condition
Soil Profile1 A B C
1 40,000 30,000 30,000
2 30,000 25,000 30,000
3 30,000 30,000 35,000
4 25,000 20,000 25,000
5 40,000 40,000 80,000
6 40,000 40,000 80,000
7 35,000 35,000 35,000
8 30,000 30,000 30,000
9 35,000 35,000 35,000
Uses proposed in the I-3 Zone shall be subject to the structural design
and landscape conditions in Article V, Section 2.
F.
G. (Reserved)86
All project proposals shall file a statement, following required research,
that: there are no underground fuel tanks on-site; no significant historic
or archaeological significance to the site.
H.
I. Key:87
86.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, which provided for uses proposed within areas
indicated as Shoreland Zoning, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
87.Editor's Note: Table A, Table of Land Uses, and its Key are included at the end of this
article.
88.Editor's Note: Table B, Dimensional Requirements, is included at the end of this article.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6A
CHCT:945
NOTES:
1 Soil condition and soil profile as indicated on the application for the
private wastewater disposal system (Form HE 200).
2 Source: Appendix E. Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
3 The above square foot requirements are established for lots created
within the Coastal Residential Zone requiring the use of private
subsurface sewage disposal systems and served by a municipal water
supply.
4 For lots not served by municipal water supply, the minimum lot size
within this zone shall be 80,000 square feet.
5 For lots served by municipal sewer, the minimum lot size within this
zone shall be 20,000 square feet.
The Code Enforcement Officer may grant administrative variances for
setbacks within the Coastal Residential (CR) Zone under the following
conditions:
1. Lots existed prior to June 8, 1988;
2. Are in separate ownership from abutting lots or parcels;
3. The setback variances shall result in a situation where the setback
shall be no less than:
Front yard: 40 feet;
Side and rear yard setbacks: 10 feet.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall document the reasons for his decision
and maintain on file with any other pertinent information pertaining to the
issue and property.
Section 7. (Reserved)89
Section 8. (Reserved)90
Section 9. Contract and conditional zoning.
Purpose.
In 1982, the Maine Legislature enacted legislation entitled "An
Act to Permit Municipalities to Adopt Contract Zoning" (LD 1809)
which essentially allows the rezoning of a particular piece of
property subject to conditions as long as the proposed use:
a. Is consistent with an enacted municipal comprehensive plan;
1.
A.
89.Editor's Note: Former Section 7, Main Street Revitalization Districts, was repealed
4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24. See now Art. V, Section 2n.
90.Editor's Note: Former Section 8, Historical preservation, as amended, was repealed
4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.25. See now Article XV, Historic Preservation Ordinance.
Section 6A BIDDEFORD CODE Section 9
CHCT:946
Is consistent with existing or permitted uses within the existing
original zone(s);
b.
Is the result of a contract with the municipality that includes
only conditions and restrictions which relate to the physical
development or operation of the property.
c.
The City of Biddeford finds that this legislation is a valuable tool
to promote the orderly growth of the municipality while protecting
the integrity of existing neighborhoods.
2.
Occasionally, competing and incompatible uses conflict; and
traditional zoning methods and procedures such as variances,
conditional use permits, and alterations to the zone boundaries
are inadequate to promote desirable growth. In these special
situations, more flexible and adaptable zoning methods are needed
to permit differing land uses in both developed and undeveloped
areas, and at the same time recognize the effects of change. In
consideration of a change in zoning classification for a particular
property or group of properties, it may be determined that public
necessity, convenience, or the general welfare require that
provisions be made to impose certain limitations or restrictions
on the use or development of the property. Such conditions are
deemed necessary to protect the best interests of the property
owner, the surrounding property owners and the neighborhood,
all other property owners and citizens of the City, and to secure
appropriate development consistent with the City's Comprehensive
Plan.
3.
The provisions of this section shall not exempt the use or
development of any property from other minimum standards or
requirements otherwise provided in this ordinance, or as otherwise
provided by the law.
4.
Enabling legislation. The enabling legislation for this section can be
found in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4352.
B.
Definitions.
Conditional zoning: A zoning process by which the municipal
legislative body may rezone a particular piece of property to permit
the use of that property subject to conditions not generally
applicable to other properties similarly zoned.
1.
Contract zoning: A zoning process by which the property owner,
in consideration of the rezoning of his property, agrees to the
imposition of certain conditions or restrictions not imposed on
similarly zoned properties.
2.
C.
Mandatory conditions. Any zone change adopted pursuant to this
section shall:
D.
Section 9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 9
CHCT:947
Be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of
Biddeford;
1.
Be consistent with the existing or permitted uses within the
original zone;
2.
Only include conditions and restrictions which relate to the
physical development or operation of the property;
3.
Be subject to an agreement executed by authorized representatives
of both the property owner and the City of Biddeford for the
implementation and enforcement of all terms and conditions
imposed and agreed to by the parties pursuant to this section. Said
agreement shall be recorded at the York County Registry of Deeds
and a copy placed on file in the municipal offices.
4.
Discretionary conditions. Any zone change adopted pursuant to this
section may include reasonable conditions or restrictions relating to
one or more of the following:
Limitations on the number and type of authorized uses of the
property;
1.
Limitations on the height and lot coverage of any structure or
structures built on the property;
2.
Increased setbacks and side yards for any structure or structures
built on the property;
3.
The installation, operation and maintenance of physical
improvements for the convenience of the general public, including
but not limited to, off-street parking lots, traffic control devices,
fencing, shrubbery, screening, and landscaping;
4.
The creation, operation and maintenance of open space areas or
buffer zones;
5.
The dedication or conveyance of property for public purposes,
including but not limited to, streets, scenic and conservation
easements, parks and utility systems;
6.
The maintenance and preservation of architecture and land
deemed by the Biddeford Planning Board to have historical,
environmental, or esthetic significance or value to the community.
7.
E.
Application for consideration under these provisions.
Persons requesting consideration under the provisions of this
section shall submit a letter of request to the City Council, through
the City Planner's office, outlining in adequate detail the proposed
project. The City Planner shall forward this letter with a
recommendation (City Planner shall consult with the Code
Enforcement Officer to determine if the proposed project meets the
1.
F.
Section 9 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 9
CHCT:948
conditions outlined in Subsection D above) to the Council for their
consideration at a regular City Council meeting under the heading
of "other business."
The Council shall consider the merits of the proposal and the
Planner's/Code Enforcement Officer's recommendation. After
consideration the Council shall provide the applicant a written
determination of whether or not to continue with the process.
2.
If the Council endorses the concept, the applicant shall coordinate
with the City Planner for scheduling meetings with the Planning
Board.
3.
The Planning Board shall review plans for the proposal under the
provisions of either subdivision or site review, whichever apply.
These provisions may be modified to the extent warranted by the
draft contract developed by the board and the developer.
4.
Findings of fact. When reviewing any proposal for contract zoning,
the Planning Board shall consider the following criteria in making its
written recommendation to the City Council. Before granting approval,
the City Council shall determine that the proposed contract zoning
meets these criteria as well as the mandatory conditions.
That the proposed zone change shall meet all the area, front yard,
side yard, rear yard, and height requirements of the proposed zone;
any of the discretionary conditions of this article as applied shall be
in addition to the district's minimum requirements.
1.
That the proposed use will not create unreasonable traffic
congestion on contiguous or adjacent streets. The proponent of the
zone change shall submit the following evidence:
The estimated peak-hour traffic to be generated by the
proposed zone change;
(a)
(b) Existing traffic counts on surrounding streets and roads;
Traffic accident data covering the most recent four-year
period. Such data shall be by date, and indicate both personal
and property damage by accident;
(c)
The capacity of surrounding roads and streets and any
improvements necessary to accommodate anticipated traffic
generation, including traffic signals, signs, and other
directional markers as well as geometric street/road changes.
(d)
2.
That the proposed zone change and use(s) authorized shall be
insured by providing and maintaining adequate and appropriate
utilities, sewage disposal, drainage, solid waste disposal, access,
parking and loading and other necessary site improvements. The
proponent shall submit materials, documents and plans which
employ standard engineering methods to the City Engineer for
3.
F.1.
Section 9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 9
CHCT:949
review not less than 15 workdays prior to the public hearing. The
City Engineer shall provide a written commentary on the adequacy
of same. Copies of the City Engineer's commentary shall be made
available to the applicant, Planning Board and City Council not less
than five working days prior to the public hearing.
That the proposed use(s) will conform to the general character
of the neighborhood. In making such determination the following
shall be considered:
Building and structures.
Do the color and materials match or complement those
used on nearby structures?
(1)
Is there similarity or successful transition in scale,
building form and proportion between the proposed
expansion and existing structures located within 400 feet
thereof?
(2)
Does the proposed structure/use propose to use plant
materials, fencing, and walkways which are compatible
with the character of the neighborhood in size, scale,
material and color?
(3)
(a)
Preservation of landscape. The landscape shall be preserved
in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the
general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
(b)
Setbacks and screening. The proposed use(s) shall be provided
with sufficient setbacks and/or screening to provide a visual
and sound barrier sufficient to minimize any adverse impact on
other land uses in the neighborhood.
Determination of the adequacy of visual screening shall be
based on line of sight observations from existing structures.
Upon request of the Planning Board the proponent of the
zone change shall present an accurate vertical and horizontal
control map depicting existing buildings and structures
adjacent to the proposed contract and zone base elevation and
proposed improvements in the proposed zone change area.
Determination of the adequacy of setbacks and screening for
noise shall be based on procedures and standards of
performance found in Chapter 34, Article III of the Biddeford
Revised Code of Ordinances, Noise Control.
(c)
Parking/loading. Off-street parking areas for more than three
vehicles and loading spaces as may be required shall be totally
screened from the view of the adjoining property by trees,
shrubs, fences and other landscaping material (such as a
stockade fence or a dense evergreen hedge six feet or more
(d)
4.
Section 9 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 9
CHCT:950
Section 10. Aquifer Protection Overlay District (APO). [Ord. No.
2000.71, 7-24-2000; Ord. No. 2005.13, 3-15-2005]
in height). Where a potential safety hazard to children would
be likely to arise, physical screening sufficient to deter small
children from entering the premises shall be provided.
The extent, uses, character and value of existing development
in the neighborhood. In making such a determination the
Planning Board and the City Council, at the expense of the
applicant, may engage the services of qualified professionals
such as architects and landscape architects to help them in
making their determination. The choice of professionals shall
be at the sole discretion of the Planning Board or City Council,
whichever is deciding the proposal.
(e)
That there would be no significant adverse effect resulting from
the proposed zone change and use(s) authorized upon the public
health, safety and general welfare of the neighborhood.
5.
Procedure.
All proposed amendments to this ordinance being considered under
this section shall be processed in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4352.
1.
Further, any contract adopted or approved by the City Council
under the terms of these provisions shall be considered an
amendment to this ordinance and shall be attached hereto and
indicated on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Biddeford.
2.
G.
Administration. Application for contract zoning requests shall be
presented to the Planning Department and shall be reviewed in
accordance with procedures outlined in either the Subdivision
Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance, provided:
1. The applicant accepts the Planning Board's conditions of approval.
2. A public hearing has been held.
3. The conditions of approval are accepted by the City Council.
H.
Fees. Any costs, including reasonable fees, incurred by the City, for
drafting and enforcing the contract provisions shall be paid by the
applicant whether or not the project/contract receives approval.
I.
Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this section is:
To protect the groundwater resources of the City of Biddeford
by restricting the uses and activities on land overlying aquifer
and aquifer recharge areas.
a.
A.
1.
Section 9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 10
CHCT:951
To control the use and handling of hazardous substances that
could lead to the degradation of aquifers and aquifer recharge
areas.
b.
To preserve and maintain the existing aquifer(s) in the City
of Biddeford as a water supply source for use by the City's
residents.
c.
The intent of this overlay district is to provide supplemental
development regulations in area(s) so designated in order to
permanently protect groundwater resources from the threat of
contamination originating from surface land use activities. This
overlay district seeks to limit the types and intensity of new
development within its boundaries, and to provide standards for
the regulation of existing development in order to ensure the
quality and quantity of the City's groundwater resources.
B.
Delineation.
The Aquifer Protection Overlay District shall be delineated as
shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Biddeford.
A.
If any portion of a parcel is located in the Aquifer Protection
Overlay District, then no building shall be erected, altered,
enlarged, rebuilt or used on any portion of that parcel, and no
portion of that parcel may be used prior to review under the
standards found in this section.
B.
2.
No building shall be erected, altered, enlarged, rebuilt or used, and
no premises shall be used except for the uses permitted in the Aquifer
Protection Overlay District, as follows:
a. Single-family dwelling.
b. Duplex/two-family dwelling.
c. Accessory structure.
d. Agriculture.
e. Animal breeding or care.
f. Cemetery.
g. Extractive industry.
h. Farm stands.
i. Forestry, timber harvesting.
j. Parks and recreation.
k. Firewood processing.
3.
Section 10 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 10
CHCT:952
The following uses are conditional uses and subject to Planning Board
review:
a. Home occupation.
b. Sawmill.
c. Radio, television, phone tower.
d. Church, synagogue.
e. Group home.
f. Campground.
g. Bed-and-breakfast.
4.
Dimensional requirements.
Minimum lot size: 120,000 square feet per residential unit; 80,000
square feet for all other uses.
a.
b. Minimum frontage: 300 feet.
c. Minimum setbacks: 50 feet front, 30 feet side, 30 feet rear.
d. Maximum height: 35 feet.
e. Lot coverage: maximum of 15% of any parcel.
5.
Performance standards.
The height limitation in this section shall not apply to water storage
and water distribution facilities in this district.
a.
Except as otherwise required by state law, no person shall use
herbicides or pesticides in this district except for herbicides and
pesticides in nonpersistent amounts (amounts representing a halflife
of less than 20 days in soil under aerobic conditions) normally
associated with individual households or agricultural operations.
b.
All application or disposal of manure and fertilizers shall conform
to the most recent edition of the Best Management Practices
Handbook published by the Maine Department of Agriculture.
c.
Erosion and sedimentation shall be minimized by adherence to
erosion control management practices contained in the most recent
edition of the Environmental Quality Handbook published by the
Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
d.
The use, storage or manufacture of hazardous material in amounts
in excess of those normally associated with individual households
or agricultural operations is prohibited.
e.
Except as otherwise required by state or federal law, below-ground
storage of petroleum products is prohibited.
f.
6.
Section 10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 10
CHCT:953
g. Salt and sand piles are prohibited.
The land application of sludge and the spray application of
industrial wastewater or sewage is prohibited.
h.
Cluster development is allowed only if serviced by a public sewer
system or subsurface wastewater treatment systems. If subsurface
wastewater treatment systems are proposed, the applicant shall
submit a groundwater analysis based on the methodology required
by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection (MDEP) for
Site Location of Development (38 M.R.S.A. §§ 481—490) as outlined
in Section 17. Wastewater disposal §§ A (On-site subsurface
wastewater disposal systems) and B (Nitrate-nitrogen impact
assessment) of the most recent version of the permit application.
The nitrate-nitrogen impact assessment shall determine the
appropriate type (conventional or advanced denitrification) of
subsurface wastewater treatment system that is required for each
proposed lot.
The following adjustments to the MDEP Site Location of
Development methodology apply to the required groundwater
analysis:
Under Section 17.A.6 of the MDEP methodology, the additional
information required for larger disposal systems shall be
required if sewage disposal is to be provided for any residential
use(s) on one lot that warrants a residential design flow(s)
greater than 360 gallons per day, with no exemptions.
1.
There shall be no exemptions from the nitrate-nitrogen impact
assessment.
2.
The concentration of nitrate-nitrogen in contaminant plumes
from the on-site disposal systems shall not exceed five mg/
L at the downgradient project boundary, or at any existing/
proposed water supply well located within the project
boundary.
3.
The nitrate-nitrogen impact assessment shall be based on a
four-bedroom (360 gallons per day) capacity as an assumed
minimum.
4.
i.
In cases where the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board
find that a land use poses a serious threat to groundwater quality,
an applicant shall be required to submit:
A complete list of all pesticides, fuels and/or other potentially
toxic or hazardous materials which are used or stored on the
premises in quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use, and a description of measures taken to
provide for the control of leaks or spills.
1.
j.
Section 10 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 10
CHCT:954
Section 11. Institutional master plan. [Ord. No. 2001.90, § 7,
10-16-2001]
A complete list of products proposed for application to the
land, quantities to be applied, schedule of application, and a
detailed description of the application program.
2.
Copies of all licenses or permits issued by local, state or federal
regulatory agencies for the handling or storage of all
pesticides, fuels, and/or other potentially toxic or hazardous
materials.
3.
Any person who wishes to contest the placement of their property in
the Aquifer Protection Overlay District may appeal by applying to the
City of Biddeford for rezoning of the property as provided by Article
XIII of this ordinance. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof
to demonstrate that the property should not be included within the
Aquifer Protection Overlay District.
7.
Applicability. Any university use or other use conducted by a college
or university in an institutional zone shall be consistent with an
institutional master plan approved by the Planning Board in accordance
with this section. Any site plan approval or other approval for such uses
shall be consistent with the approved institutional master plan.
A.
Transition provisions.
Following the adoption of this section, the City shall continue to
process any pending applications for site plan approval in the
institutional zone and shall issue the required permits for these
projects if approved and for any other approved but unbuilt
projects. This shall include only the following University of New
England projects:
a. Construction of two approved residence halls;
b. Expansion of the cafeteria;
c. Construction of a facilities management building;
d. Installation of lighting at the existing athletic fields.
1.
The Planning Board shall not approve site plans for any other new
or expanded buildings and structures, including parking lots, in the
institutional zone not addressed in 1. until an institutional master
plan has been approved for the college or university. Similarly,
the City shall not issue building, plumbing, electrical, or other
permits for any other new or expanded buildings or structures
in the institutional zone not addressed in 1. until an institutional
master plan is approved.
2.
B.
Coordination with site plan review. All projects in the institutional zone
that require site plan review in accordance with Article XI of this Code
C.
Section 10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 11
CHCT:955
shall continue to require site plan review and approval. In reviewing
site plans for university uses or other uses conducted by a college or
university in an institutional zone, the Planning Board shall consider the
conformance of the proposed activities with the approved institutional
master plan and shall approve the project only if it finds that the
activities are consistent with the institutional master plan as well as the
other standards of Article XI and the provisions of the institutional zone.
In its review of projects in the institutional zone, the Planning Board
shall be guided by the approved institutional master plan and shall not
impose conditions or requirements on an applicant that are in conflict
with the approved institutional master plan. In those areas where the
master plan addresses issues that are also covered by site plan review,
the Planning Board shall be guided by the overall direction provided
in the approved institutional master plan and shall limit the scope of
its review under the site plan provisions to how the projects contained
in the master plan are designed and constructed to conform to the
standards of Section B of Article XI. The following chart outlines the
respective areas of concern for the review of an institutional master
plan and the site plans for individual projects contained in the master
plan for those areas covered in both reviews:
Review Topic
Institutional Master
Plan Review Focus Site Plan Review Focus
Buildings,
athletic facilities,
and supporting
structures
The need for the
facilities is related to
program growth and
changes supported in
the master plan, and the
general sizes and
locations are
appropriate based upon
those needs
The buildings and/or
facilities generally
conform to the approved
master plan and meet the
specific zoning and site
plan review standards
Road network
and traffic
The primary road
network providing
access to the campus
and within the campus
will be adequate to
handle the anticipated
increase in traffic safely
and efficiently while
minimizing the impact
on other users as a
result of the identified
improvements
Any road or traffic
improvements that are
identified in the overall
traffic management
program in the master
plan that are needed to
support the specific
development project will
be built and will meet the
technical standards set
out in the ordinance
Section 11 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 11
CHCT:956
Review Topic
Institutional Master
Plan Review Focus Site Plan Review Focus
Parking The amount of parking
and general parking
locations will be
adequate to
accommodate the
anticipated increase in
parking demand
resulting from the
growth and changes
anticipated in the
master plan
Any parking
improvements that are
identified in the overall
parking program in the
master plan that are
needed to support the
specific development
project will be built and
will meet the technical
standards set out in the
ordinance
Water and sewer The water and sewer
systems will be
adequate to
accommodate the
anticipated increase in
demand resulting from
the growth and changes
anticipated in the
master plan
The location and design
of the water and sewer
facilities associated with
the specific development
proposal are consistent
with the master plan and
meet the technical
standards set out in the
ordinance
Landscaping,
lighting, signs,
noise, scenic
views
The master plan
establishes appropriate
standards for the design
of these elements and to
minimize the impact on
surrounding
neighborhoods
The location and design
of these elements are
consistent with the
standards set out in the
master plan and meet any
other applicable technical
standards set out in the
ordinance
Pedestrian and
bicycle facilities
The pedestrian and
bicycle facilities will be
adequate to
accommodate the
anticipated increase in
demand resulting from
the growth and changes
anticipated in the
master plan and
standards are
established for the
design of these elements
The location and design
of these elements are
consistent with the
master plan, meet the
standards set out in the
master plan, and any
other technical standards
set out in ordinance
Variances. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4 of Article IX of
this Code, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant variances with
respect to the dimensional standards of the institutional zone unless the
need for such variation is identified in an approved institutional master
D.
Section 11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 11
CHCT:957
plan and such variation is explicitly endorsed by the Planning Board in
its approval of the master plan.
Timing of the initial master plan submission. Any college or university
located within an institutional zone shall submit an institutional master
plan meeting the requirements of this section to the Planning Board for
review within two years of the adoption of this section.
E.
Amendment of an approved master plan. A college or university may
submit a request to amend the approved institutional master plan
at any time provided that no request for an amendment shall be
considered within three months of the date of the previous approval of
the institutional master plan. The process, procedures, and standards
for amending a master plan shall be the same as for the initial approval,
however, the applicant may submit an application containing only those
items that have been changed from the prior master plan.
F.
Submission and review procedures. The institutional master plan shall
contain the information and exhibits set forth in Subsection H. Upon
receipt of the initial submission of an institutional master plan or a
proposed amended master plan, the application shall be processed and
reviewed in accordance with the procedures for reviewing site plan
applications with the following additional provisions:
Upon receipt of an institutional master plan or an amendment to an
approved master plan, the City planning staff shall have 14 days to
review the plan for completeness. If the staff finds that the master
plan provides all of the information set forth in Subsection H, the
staff shall find the plan to be complete, shall notify the applicant,
in writing, of this determination, and shall place the master plan
on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled Planning Board
meeting. The applicant will forward 10 copies of the proposed
master plan for Planning Board review. If the staff finds the master
plan to be incomplete, it shall notify the applicant, in writing, of
this determination and shall indicate the additional information
required.
1.
Upon receipt of an institutional master plan, the planning
department shall notify all agencies and departments regularly
notified of site plan applications as well as the Biddeford
Conservation Commission and any neighborhood organization that
has requested to be notified of the submission of the master plan.
2.
Prior to the approval of an institutional master plan or an amended
institutional master plan, the Planning Board shall hold a public
hearing.
3.
The Planning Board shall review the institutional master plan at
a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. The Board shall have
30 days following its initial consideration of the plan to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the master plan.
4.
G.
Section 11 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 11
CHCT:958
A copy of any approved institutional master plan or an amendment
to a master plan shall be filed with the City Clerk and notice of the
approval shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation
in the City.
5.
Contents of the institutional master plan. An institutional master plan
shall provide the City and abutting neighborhoods with a clear outline
of the anticipated growth and changes of the institution over the next
five to 10 years and the potential impact of those changes on the
City and areas surrounding the institution. The master plan should,
therefore, contain a description of the current programs and facilities
of the college or university, a description of anticipated changes in
programs and facilities over the next five years, an analysis of the
potential impacts of the anticipated changes on the facilities and the
surrounding neighborhoods, an assessment of actions proposed to
mitigate any adverse impacts resulting from the anticipated changes,
and a conceptual plan showing the approximate size and location of
proposed facility improvements.
The institutional master plan shall contain at least the following
information and exhibits:
Mission statement and institutional objectives.
a. The institution's adopted mission statement.
A statement of any anticipated changes in the institution's
mission over the next five years.
b.
A statement of the institution's objectives with respect to
growth and change over the next five years.
c.
1.
Existing physical conditions.
A scaled plan at a scale of not more than one inch equals 200
feet showing the location of all existing buildings, structures,
athletic fields and facilities, parking, walkways, service areas,
and other impervious surfaces and the height of all buildings
and structures referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD).
a.
A scaled plan at the same scale as the existing conditions plan
showing the location of all existing utilities, sewer and water
systems, and stormwater drainage facilities.
b.
A natural resources inventory and analysis showing the
location of all significant natural resources within those areas
of the campus that are already developed or where
development activities including clearing or filling are
proposed or that will be potentially impacted by proposed
development activities. The analysis shall assess the
significance of these resources and the issues they raise with
c.
2.
H.
Section 11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 11
CHCT:959
respect to the master plan. This shall include a plan at the
same scale as the existing conditions plan showing the
locations of the significant resources.
An historic and archeological resources inventory and analysis
showing the location of any known historic or archeological
resources and any area with potential as an area of historic
or archeological significance within those areas of the campus
that are already developed or where development activities
including clearing or filling are proposed or that will be
potentially impacted by proposed development activities. This
shall include a plan at the same scale as the existing conditions
plan.
d.
e. Data on the existing lot coverage and lot coverage ratio.
Programs and activities.
A narrative providing at least the following information about
current programs and activities:
(1) The current educational programs and degree offerings.
Other regularly scheduled programs or activities offered
or hosted by the institution.
(2)
Current enrollment of full time and part time students
by head count based upon the most recent integrated
postsecondary data survey (IPDS) report.
(3)
Current employment by type of positions and full time/
part time status by head count based upon the most recent
IPDS report.
(4)
(5) The number of people living on campus.
a.
A narrative describing how the programs and activities and
the number of students, employees, campus residents, and
program participants are anticipated to change over the next
five years.
b.
3.
Educational, research, residential, support and athletic facilities.
A description and plan identifying what buildings and facilities
are currently used for these purposes.
a.
The current bed capacity of all residential buildings and the
anticipated change in the total bed capacity.
b.
A description of any significant changes in the type of use
made of existing buildings, significant expansions of existing
buildings, or new buildings and facilities that are anticipated
to be needed in the next five years.
c.
4.
Section 11 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 11
CHCT:960
A description of how the anticipated changes in facilities relate
to program changes and the institution's mission.
d.
Parking and traffic.
Information on current traffic volumes and conditions
including levels of service on the principal public streets and
intersections of public streets within the zone and on the
primary access routes to the campus.
a.
A description of anticipated changes in traffic volumes over the
next five years resulting from the changes in programs and
facilities included in the master plan.
b.
An analysis of the impact of these changes on traffic flow and
vehicular and pedestrian safety on public streets within the
zone and that provide access to the campus.
c.
A proposed program of improvements to address any
unacceptable impacts resulting from changes in traffic
volumes including activities that will be undertaken to mitigate
any adverse impacts on adjacent residential neighborhoods.
d.
Information on the number and location of existing parking
spaces.
e.
An analysis of the adequacy of the existing parking to meet
anticipated changes in programs and facilities over the next
five years.
f.
An assessment of pedestrian and bicycle movements and safety
related to the parking supply and locations.
g.
A proposed program of parking improvements to meet any
identified deficiencies.
h.
5.
Water and sewer service.
A description of current provisions for water supply and
sewage disposal including capacities, current utilization rates,
and conformance with any permit or other legal standards.
a.
An analysis of the change in demand for water supply and
sewage disposal resulting from anticipated changes in
programs and facilities over the next five years and the
adequacy of the existing systems to meet this demand.
b.
A proposed program of improvements to address any identified
deficiencies.
c.
A statement as to how water supply and sewer disposal
improvements are or will be coordinated with City programs
and the needs of neighboring residential areas.
d.
6.
Section 11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 11
CHCT:961
Municipal and community services.
A description of all municipal and community services (police,
fire, rescue, recreation, etc.) currently utilized by the
institution and data on the current level of usage.
a.
An analysis of the change in demand for municipal and
community services and the adequacy of the existing services
to meet this demand.
b.
A proposed program of improvements to meet the identified
deficiencies including proposed funding mechanisms.
c.
7.
Neighborhood impacts.
An assessment of how current campus activities impact
neighboring residential areas including, but not limited to,
traffic, noise, and visual intrusions. This assessment shall
consider conformity to current City and state standards with
respect to these items as well as documented evidence of any
community or neighborhood concerns relative to these issues.
a.
b. An evaluation of current efforts to mitigate these impacts.
An assessment of any changes in these impacts resulting from
the changes in programs or facilities included in the master
plan.
c.
A program for mitigating the adverse impacts of proposed
changes or improvements on surrounding residential
neighborhoods.
d.
8.
Community outreach.
a. A description of current community outreach activities.
An analysis of anticipated changes in outreach activities over
the next five years.
b.
9.
Conceptual development program.
A conceptual site plan at the same scale as the existing
conditions plan showing the approximate size and location
of proposed changes to buildings, structures, parking lots,
pedestrian facilities, bicycle facilities, athletic fields and
facilities, roads, and similar facilities proposed in the master
plan. This should show new facilities, modifications or
enlargements of existing facilities, and the planned removal of
facilities.
a.
An accompanying narrative or tables detailing the scale or
size of the proposed improvements including the approximate
height of buildings, the approximate peak elevation of
buildings and structures referenced to NGVD, approximate
b.
10.
Section 11 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 11
CHCT:962
floor area, approximate size of parking areas, or approximate
occupancy.
A description of all development and design standards or
provisions that will apply to the proposed improvements in
accordance with Subsection I.
c.
A schedule setting out when the improvements included in
the conceptual development program are anticipated to be
completed.
d.
Development and design standards. The institutional master plan shall
establish development and design standards that shall apply to all
development proposals and other improvements within the institutional
zone. These development and design standards will apply to individual
projects that are submitted for site plan review. These standards shall
foster the development of a visually and architecturally integrated
campus that is safe, environmentally sensitive, and that minimizes the
adverse impact of the campus on neighboring residential areas. At a
minimum, these development and design standards shall address the
following areas:
Landscaping. The standards shall establish a general pattern for all
campus landscaping including the typical size and type of plantings
and shall detail how landscaping will be used to enhance the visual
environment of the campus, shield and soften service and parking
areas, and minimize impacts on surrounding residential areas and
the users of public streets through the campus.
1.
Exterior lighting. The standards shall establish a general lighting
theme for the campus and shall identify the appropriate maximum,
average, or minimum illumination levels and uniformity ratios for
various areas and facilities, the typical type of lighting fixtures
and poles that will be used, and shall detail how night-time sky
glow and light intrusion on neighboring residential areas will be
minimized.
2.
Signage. The standards shall establish a consistent design theme
for all campus signs that enhances the visual environment of the
campus and shall identify the general design, sizes, and locations
for various types of campus signs.
3.
Pedestrian and bicycle facilities. The standards shall establish an
integrated program for accommodating pedestrians and bicyclists
safely while promoting a campus environment that is pedestrian
focused. The standards shall identify the types, general location,
and typical design of various pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
4.
Noise. The standards shall establish an overall program for
minimizing the impact of campus noise on adjacent residential
areas. The standards shall identify measures that will be employed
5.
I.
Section 11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 11
CHCT:963
to control noise at the source as well as to mitigate the impacts of
noise on adjacent property.
Architectural design and details. The standards shall establish an
integrated design theme for campus buildings that is harmonious
with existing buildings while promoting a high level of design for
new buildings. The standards shall address the scale and massing
of buildings, appropriate materials and colors, rooflines, locations
of building entrances, architectural detailing, and similar features
to create a visually attractive campus while minimizing impacts on
surrounding residential areas.
6.
Protection of identified scenic views. The standards shall establish
a standard approach for protecting scenic views within or from the
campus that have been formally identified and approved by the City
Council.
7.
Approval standards. In reviewing an institutional master plan, the
Planning Board shall approve the master plan if it finds that:
The activities and facilities proposed in the master plan are
consistent with the institution's mission statement.
1.
The facilities conform to the requirements of the institutional zone
and other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.
2.
There is a reasonable expectation that individual projects carried
out in accordance with the institutional master plan will be able to
be designed so that they comply with the site plan review standards
of Article XI.
3.
The activities and facilities will be designed in a manner that will
not unreasonably increase adverse impacts on adjacent residential
neighborhoods or the facilities or services of the City of Biddeford.
4.
The City Council and UNE shall establish a scholarship and
community grant program, within the first six months of the
acceptance of the university's master plan.
5.
J.
Appeals of Planning Board action. Appeals of the actions of the Planning
Board in reviewing and approving institutional master plans under this
section shall be to the City of Biddeford's Zoning Board of Appeals. The
applicant and any party to the review of the institutional master plan
may appeal any action of the Planning Board within 30 days of such
action by providing written notice to the Board of Appeals setting forth
the action being appealed and the specific basis for the appeal. Appeals
of Planning Board actions in the review of an institutional master plan
shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set out in Section
5 of Article IX of this ordinance.91
K.
91.Editor's Note: The provisions of former Section 12, Medical marijuana dispensary
moratorium, added 3-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.23, have expired and therefore are not
included in the Code.
Section 11 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 11
CHCT:964
Article VI
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section 1. Access to lots.
[See Private ways (Section 51).]
Section 2. Accessory buildings/structures. [Ord. of 2-4-1997(2)]
Section 2A. Adult businesses. [Ord. of 6-15-1999(2); Ord. of
11-16-1999(1)]
No garage or other accessory building shall be located within required
front yard/setbacks.
A.
Accessory structures such as parking lots may be allowed within the
required setbacks provided there is sufficient screening to obstruct
view from abutting properties; and, that drainage provisions are
developed to control off-site draining and preclude drainage onto
abutting property beyond predevelopment levels.
B.
C. (Reserved)92
Application and permitting procedures.
No adult business shall be located or commence operation within
the City of Biddeford without first being reviewed and approved
by the Planning Board pursuant to the procedures and standards
applicable to conditional uses under Article VII of the City of
Biddeford Zoning Ordinance.
a.
Planning board review under this ordinance shall be limited to the
impacts and effects of a proposed use as determined by applying
the conditional use standards.
b.
The Planning Board shall not deny approval for the proposed use
on the basis of the content of the material sold, rented, exhibited
or displayed, and shall not restrict or limit the content of such
materials.
c.
A.
No adult business shall be located:
In any zoning district other than the B-2 District, as defined by this
ordinance and the City of Biddeford Zoning Map. Adult businesses
shall be further restricted to that portion of the B-2 District
between Dartmouth Street and Landry Street;
a.
In any location where the premises in which or upon which the
adult business is established would be closer than 1,000 feet,
b.
B.
92.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Principal and accessory structures in shoreland areas,
was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2A
CHCT:965
Section 3. (Reserved)93
Section 4. Airport.
Section 5. Amusement centers.
Section 6. Architectural standards.94 [Ord. No. 2003.66, 7-1-2003]
measured in a straight line without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the nearest point on the boundary of any
property which is:
Occupied by a school, park, playground, children's day-care
facility, church, funeral parlor, cemetery, or public building;
(i)
(ii) Occupied by another adult business;
c. On any lot or parcel of land with road frontage on Elm Street.
Outside displays prohibited. No materials or devices displaying or
exhibiting sexual activities as defined in this ordinance shall be visible
from the exterior of the building in which an adult business is located.
C.
Approach zone height limit. No structure shall hereafter be erected or
vegetation be allowed to grow more than one foot in height for each 20
feet of horizontal distance from a point 200 feet from the ultimate end
of a runway to a point 10,200 feet from the ultimate end of a runway in
an approach zone.
A.
Limitation of land use. No use shall hereafter be made in such a manner
as to create excessive smoke or vapor sufficient to interfere with and
impair the visibility in landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft, or as
to create electrical interference with radio communication between the
airfield and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
airfield lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the
airfield, or otherwise endanger aircraft operation.
B.
In addition to the automobile parking spaces required by this
ordinance, all amusement centers shall provide facilities for the parking
of bicycles. Bicycle racks shall be located off the sidewalk or other
pedestrianway, and away from automobile traffic lanes. A minimum of
one bicycle space for every two amusement devices shall be provided.
A.
Rest room facilities for the patrons shall be provided on the premises,
of the type and number required by applicable local, state and federal
codes and regulations.
B.
C. Additional permits may be required from the municipal officers.
93.Editor's Note: Former Section 3, Agriculture, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
94.Editor's Note: Former Section 6, Archeological sites, adopted by Ord. of 11-20-1990, was
repealed by Ord. of 9-15-1998(4).
Section 2A BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:966
Building additions constructed within MSRD Districts. All additions
shall be visually related generally in terms of the following:
Mass. The height of principal building or structure, its bulk; the
nature of its roofline, and the proportions of the new construction
will be of the same scale and proportion as the existing significant
structures;
1.
The location, size and proportions of openings in the facade,
primarily windows and doors, of new construction will be
consistent in proportion and rhythm with openings in the facade of
existing significant structures;
2.
The massing and type of roof (flat, gabled, hip, gambrel, mansard)
of the new construction shall complement the massing and type of
roof of existing significant structures;
3.
Nature of building materials and texture shall exhibit the
characteristics of texture, composition and reflectivity of adjacent
significant structures and buildings; and
4.
Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on the roof,
ground or buildings will be screened from public view with
materials harmonious with the building, or they will be so located
not to be visible from public ways.
5.
Height. The height of proposed buildings shall be compatible with
adjacent buildings.
6.
Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings, structures and open spaces where it is
visually related.
7.
Proportion of openings within the facade. The relationship of the
width of the windows to the height of windows and doors in a
building shall be visually compatible with that of windows and
doors of buildings to which the building is visually related.
8.
Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of
solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the buildings to which it is visually related.
9.
Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with that prevailing in the area to which it is
visually related.
10.
Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection. The relationship of
entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of a building shall
be visually compatible with that of buildings to which it is visually
related.
11.
A.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6
CHCT:967
Relationship of materials and textures. The relationship of the
materials and textures of the facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the predominant materials used in the
buildings to which it is visually related.
12.
Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the buildings to which it is visually related.
13.
Scale of building. The size of the building, the building mass of a
building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings,
porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with those
characteristics of buildings and spaces to which it is visually
related.
14.
Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with the building, squares and places to which
it is visually related in its directional character, whether this shall
be vertical character, horizontal character or nondirectional
character.
15.
All additions along a right-of-way may not be set back from the
property line. This may be waived if at least 60% of the building's
front facade is on the property.
16.
New buildings constructed within the MSRD Districts.
Parking lots shall be prohibited in side and front yards, except
if the application involves the renovation of existing structures
where such a configuration currently exists. In cases where such
parking configurations exist, the parking area shall be screened
from the street with landscaping or fencing not to exceed three feet
in height. (Refer to Article VI Section 49, Off-street parking, for
further details).
1.
Site plans shall identify pedestrianways and connections from
parking areas to streets. Pedestrian paths to, from and across
parking lots to the street shall be required.
2.
All dumpsters and mechanical equipment shall be located 25 feet
away from a right-of-way and shall be screened from view of a
public street.
3.
Where a side setback exists it shall be at least 10 feet wide. Side
yards of more than 10 feet shall be landscaped and may be used
as driveways, pedestrian pathways and semipublic spaces, such as
restaurant patios.
4.
All new buildings along a right-of-way may not be set back from the
property line. This may be waived if at least 60% of the building's
front facade is on the property line.
5.
B.
Section 6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 7
CHCT:968
Section 7. Automotive service/repair garages and body shops;
automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses, and
junkyards.95 [Added 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011.37]
Automotive service/repair operations and body shops. All automotive
service/repair operations or body shops shall adhere to the following
standards:
No storage of repair parts or parts vehicles is permitted in the front
yard area.
1.
All outside storage shall be under cover or screened from view from
adjacent properties.
2.
A.
Automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses, and
junkyards.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that all new
automobile graveyards, recycling businesses, and junkyards
comply with the performance standards and limitations established
in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3751 to § 3760, as amended. This section is
adopted pursuant to Chapter 22 (Businesses), Section 22-23.
1.
New automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses, and
junkyards. No new automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business, or junkyard may commence operation without first being
reviewed and approved according to the procedures and standards
applicable to conditional uses under Article VII of the City of
Biddeford Zoning Ordinance. Further, no new automobile
graveyard, automobile recycling business, or junkyard may
commence operation without first obtaining a businesses permit
pursuant to Chapter 22 (Businesses), Section 22-23 of the City of
Biddeford Code of Ordinances.
2.
Performance standards. The Planning Board, in its review of new
automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses, and
junkyards, shall ensure that all standards for setbacks contained
in Chapter 22 (Businesses), Section 22-23(b)(7) are complied with.
All operating standards contained in 22 (Businesses), Section
22-23(b)(8)c and/or d shall be conditions of any approval granted
by the Planning Board under this section.
3.
Relationship to state stormwater requirements. The Planning
Board shall not approve any conditional use permit under this
section unless the applicant can demonstrate that:
A notice of intent has been filed with the Department of
Environmental Protection to comply with the general permit
provisions for stormwater discharges; or
1.
4.
B.
95.Editor's Note: Former Section 7, Automobile graveyards and junkyards, adopted by Ord. of
11-20-1990, was repealed by 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2002.131.
Section 7 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 7
CHCT:969
Section 8. Beach construction.
Beach construction on any great pond, river, stream, brook or coastal
wetland shall require a permit from the Department of Environmental
Protection.
Section 9. Bed-and-breakfast.
A bed-and-breakfast establishment must be owner-occupied in an existing
building as of the date of the ordinance.
Section 10. Boarding and rooming houses.
The Department of Environmental Protection has determined
that a storm water discharge permit is not required.
2.
Existing automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses,
and junkyards. Existing automobile graveyards, automobile
recycling businesses, and junkyards may to continue to operate
subject to the applicable standards contained in Chapter 22
(Businesses), Section 22-23 of the City of Biddeford Code of
Ordinances.
5.
There shall be at least one parking space for each rental room in
addition to the spaces required for the dwelling unit. There shall be no
filling of wetlands and/or paving of sand dunes.
A.
There shall be at least one bathroom provided for every three
bedrooms, in addition to the bathroom for the dwelling unit.
B.
Each rental room shall have not less than 10 feet by 12 feet horizontal
dimensions. There shall be no more than four rental rooms.
C.
D. Each rental room shall be equipped with an approved smoke detector.
Secondary building exits shall be provided for emergency use in
conformance with state and local fire and building codes.
E.
The building must either be connected to the City's sanitary sewers or
have a system that complies with the provisions of the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
F.
Boardinghouses shall meet the minimum lot size requirement for the
district in which it located, plus shall have an additional 1,000 square
feet for each rental bedroom or room rented.
A.
Boarding and rooming houses shall meet the following conditions:
1. Be owner-occupied;
2. Have smoke detectors in each sleeping room;
B.
Section 7 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 10
CHCT:970
Section 11. Boat, trailer storage.
Section 12. Buffers. [Ord. No. 2001.90, § 8, 10-16-2001; amended
1-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2016.113]
Provide on-site parking amounting to one space for each sleeping
room;
3.
Provide the Planning Board with documentary evidence in letter
form that the structure meets current fire codes. This letter must
be signed by the City Fire Marshal/Deputy Fire Chief.
4.
While the City realizes that its citizens have a right to own and store
personal property, the City also realizes that this right is limited in its
affect upon abutting property owners.
A.
Therefore, no vessel exceeding 24 feet in length or six feet in height as
measured from the ground shall be stored or parked on any residential
property unless the vessel is stored or parked so as not to violate the
minimum front and side setbacks for structures and is not less than 10
feet from the rear lot line.
B.
No structure shall be erected or any use permitted in nonresidential
districts, which abut residential districts, unless a buffer strip at least
30 feet wide is provided and maintained between any adjoining
residential district or use and the nonresidential structure or use. Such
buffer area shall be for the purpose of eliminating or minimizing any
adverse effects upon the environmental or esthetic qualities of abutting
properties or any type of nuisance affecting the health, safety, welfare
and property values of the residents of Biddeford. This requirement
may be waived by the Planning Board upon request of the applicant if it
can be demonstrated that the waiver is warranted or necessary due to
existing conditions and/or if other means of eliminating or minimizing
any adverse impacts on residential structures or uses can achieve the
same purpose, such as, but not limited to, the installation of stockade
fencing or noise barriers.
A.
No building, structure, or parking shall be erected, provided, or
enlarged or use permitted within the institutional zone which abuts
or is adjacent to a Suburban Residential (SR-1), Coastal Residential
(CR), or Rural-Farm (R-F) Zone unless a buffer at least 50 feet wide is
provided and maintained between the adjoining zone and the building,
structure, parking, or use in the institutional zone. Such buffer area
shall be for the purpose of eliminating or minimizing any adverse
effects upon the environmental or aesthetic qualities of abutting
properties or any type of nuisance affecting the health, safety, welfare
and property values of the residents of Biddeford, especially the
residents of the surrounding neighborhoods. The buffer standards
related to this subsection (Article VI, Section 12B) pertaining to the
institutional zone may not be waived.
B.
Section 10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 12
CHCT:971
Section 13. Campgrounds and tenting grounds. [Ord. of
9-15-1998(4)]
Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under
state licensing procedures and the following (in cases of possible conflict,
the stricter rules shall apply):
Required buffer areas shall not include parking or loading areas, and
shall consist of coniferous or deciduous trees.
C.
General.
A campground shall be constructed on at least 10 contiguous acres
of land, and all camping units or structures shall be located at least
200 feet from any residence (except residences belonging to the
campground owners).
1.
Campsites shall be laid out or screened in such a manner that
none are within view from public roads, navigable rivers, existing
residences or approved subdivision lots. Any combination of
evergreen planting, landscaped earthen berms, or solid fencing
may be used to achieve this screening standard, when campsites
would otherwise be visible from the locations described above.
2.
The campground management shall be responsible for operating
their premises in accordance with all City codes and ordinances
and all state laws and regulations. The maintenance of all open
space areas, roads, and utilities in a park shall be the responsibility
of the park management.
3.
No camper, tent, or other shelter shall remain in any camp
or tenting ground for a period longer than 120 days and one
having occupied a space or spaces in any single campground
for a consecutive period of 120 days shall not be permitted to
return to the campground for at least 30 days.
a.
Camping trailer and RV units left for storage in a campground
over the winter months shall be required to pay local
registration and excise and other taxes and fees as applicable.
The owner of the campground must maintain a file with
documents indicating that these fees have been paid for each
unit in storage.
b.
4.
No trailers other than recreational vehicles as defined herein shall
be permitted within any camper park, temporarily or otherwise. No
camping unit shall be stored or exhibited for sale for commercial
purposes within the park. That is to mean that no trailer in a
campground may be used for offices, or other commercial use.
5.
Tent sites and sites for recreational vehicles (RVs) shall be laid out
so that the density on each developed acre of land does not exceed
6.
A.
Section 12 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 13
CHCT:972
the standards below (in terms of sites per acre of land, excluding
circulation roads): [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.9896]
Non-Shoreland Shoreland Area
Tent sites 14 per acre See Article XIV
RV sites 11 per acre See Article XIV
Parking and circulation.
A minimum of 200 square feet of off-street parking plus
maneuvering space shall be provided for each recreational vehicle
or tent site. Recreational vehicles shall be so parked in spaces that:
(a) There shall be a minimum of 25 feet between vehicles; and
There shall be a minimum of 45 feet between all recreational
vehicles and tents, and all public rights-of-way located inside
the boundaries of the trailer park or campground.
(b)
1.
Vehicular access shall be provided onto a hard-surfaced road
adequate for the volume and type of traffic likely to be generated.
Grades and sight distances specified in the City's subdivision
regulations shall be observed in designing all intersections. Roads
shall be constructed of at least 12 inches of bank run gravel (no
stone larger than four inches), two inches of crushed gravel (onehalf-
inch chips) and two applications of liquid asphalt (one-half
gallon per square yard each application).
2.
The minimum width of roadways shall be 12 feet for one-way roads,
and 22 feet for two-way roads. There shall be no on-street parking
on such roadways.
3.
B.
Health and safety.
Each recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter site shall be provided
with a picnic table and trash receptacle. Within a maximum of
150 feet from each campsite, there shall be a container capable
of storing the amount of refuse that the camping area for which
it was designed could generate in one week. The campground
management shall dispose of refuse from said containers by
transporting the refuse in a closed truck or in enclosed containers
or bags to an approved disposal area at least once a week. Refuse
containers shall be of such a type as to keep animals and insects
out of the contents, either of metal or heavy gauge plastic, with
close-fitting cover.
1.
A campground shall provide water and sewage systems, sanitary
stations, and convenience facilities in accordance with the
2.
C.
96.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection A7, which provided for
minimum frontage and setback along any shoreline, and former Subsection A8, which
provided for minimum site area.
Section 13 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 13
CHCT:973
regulations of the state plumbing code and the State of Maine
department of business regulation. In no case shall less than one
toilet, lavatory and shower be provided for each sex for every 10
camping and tent sites.
Fire extinguishers capable of dealing with both electrical and wood
fires shall be kept in all service buildings. A suitable ingress and
egress shall be provided so that every campground may be readily
serviced in emergency situations. Twenty-four-hour emergency
communication service (e.g. telephones) shall be provided.
3.
Each campsite shall be provided with a masonry or metal fireplace,
approved in writing by the City Fire Marshal.
4.
Planning and review.
Roads, parking, campsites and required facilities shall be planned
in accordance with the basic principles outlined below, and shall be
shown on the proposed plan which shall be submitted for review
and approval by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
review plans for campgrounds in the same manner as subdivisions,
but shall abide by these standards as well as the guideline
standards established in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 404.
A logical sequence of entry and circulation should be created:
entrance, administration and storage, parking, campsites,
toilets and laundry, playing fields or shoreline.
(a)
Campsites should be clustered in groups according to intensity
of use (low density, medium density, etc.) and also related
to common support service areas (laundries, play areas, etc.)
serving a number of campsite clusters. The purpose is to
minimize road length, increase accessibility, and preserve open
space.
(b)
Footpaths and roads should follow desired lines of pedestrian
and vehicular movement between campsites and all jointly
used facilities. Parking areas may be grassed, reinforced with
open concrete blocks.
(c)
Access roads shall be laid out as loops to the greatest extent
that is practicable, although culs-de-sac or dead ends may be
allowed to serve up to 20 campsites.
(d)
1.
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan meeting the
standards of the York County Soil and Water Conservation District
and the Maine soil and Water Conservation Commission shall be
submitted. In addition to data on soils, slopes and drainage, a
vegetation map showing the following items may be required:
2.
D.
Section 13 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 13
CHCT:974
Section 14. Car wash operations.
Any car wash operation must meet the following minimum design
standards:
Section 14.1. Cemeteries. [Ord. No. 2000.36, 5-2-2000]
Any public or private cemetery shall adhere to the following standards:
The major types of vegetation should be identified and
described (as to age, height, openness or density, and pattern,
either natural or re-forested).
(a)
New planting should be selected to provide screening and
shelter, to tolerate existing and proposed site conditions, and
to blend compatibly with existing natural vegetation.
(b)
All vegetative clearing should avoid creating straight line
edges between open land and surviving stands.
(c)
Areas of activity and/or traffic should be sited to avoid wildlife
areas (such as thickets for birds and small mammals, or deer
yards and trails).
(d)
As a prior condition of the Board's final approval the owner or
applicant for a campground must have all have in hand all state
permits and approvals.
3.
E. (Reserved)97
a. Contain an integrated water cycling system as part of its basic design;
Contain an integrated separation system for oils to avoid runoff of
contaminated washwater;
b.
Provide curbing and/or catch basins to control runoff of surface water
onto abutting properties.
c.
No cemetery or burying ground may be established or enlarged so that
its limits are nearer than 100 feet from any dwelling house or improved
land used for recreational purposes, or nearer than 200 feet from any
well used for domestic purposes.
a.
Construction or excavation is not permitted within 25 feet of a known
human burial site or the boundaries of an established graveyard,
whether or not properly recorded in the deed to the property, except
for the lawful relocation of bodies and construction of public
improvements.
b.
97.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Individual private campsites, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 13 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 14.1
CHCT:975
Section 15. (Reserved)98
Section 16. Cluster developments. [Ord. No. 2000.70, 8-1-2000]
When proposed as a conditional use as defined in Article II of this
ordinance, a cemetery shall conform to requirements and standards set
forth in Article VII of this ordinance.
c.
Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to allow for new concepts
of residential, commercial and industrial development where
variations of design and dimensional requirements may be
allowed, provided that the new net density shall be no greater
than that normally permitted in the zoning district in which the
development is proposed;
(a)
These provisions may be used when considering affordable
housing projects; and shall be used when parcels of land
sustain significant wildlife habitats or other significant natural
features that would be destroyed if ordinary development
approaches were used.
(b)
Clustered development shall be encouraged as a means of
preserving open space and land of value due to the natural
resources found on it, limiting the costs and impacts of
development, lowering maintenance costs, and reducing
impervious surfaces.
(c)
1.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this and other ordinances
relating to dimensional requirements, the Planning Board, in
reviewing and approving proposed developments located in the
City, may modify said provisions related to dimensional
requirements to permit innovative approaches to site design in
order to achieve the stated purpose of this section, and in
accordance with the following standards.
2.
The use of this section shall not be construed as granting variances
to relieve hardship because of the nature of the land or other
conditions or situations.
3.
A.
Application procedure.
The Planning Board may allow subdivided development on reduced
lot sizes with reduced frontage and setback requirements in return
for open space where the Board determines that the cluster
approach will prevent the loss of natural features without
increasing the net density of the development.
1.
B.
98.Editor's Note: Former Section 15, Clearing of vegetation, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98.
Section 14.1 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:976
The developer shall submit a written application to the Board for
a cluster development which shall include all plans and materials
required for a conventional subdivision under Chapter 66 of the
Revised Code of the City of Biddeford.
2.
Two sketch plans shall be submitted: one layout as a standard
subdivision meeting the standards of the particular zone; the
second as a cluster development indicating open space and
significant natural features. Each lot in the standard subdivision
shall meet the minimum lot size and lot width requirements. The
number of lots in the cluster development shall in no case exceed
the number of lots in the standard subdivision.
3.
If the cluster option is elected for use by the applicant, the
applicant shall provide a written justification or statement. The
written statement shall describe the natural features which will be
preserved or enhanced by the cluster approach. Natural features
include, but are not limited to moderate-to-high value wildlife and
waterfowl habitats, moderate-to-high yield aquifers, important
natural or historic sites, and soils that are identified as being
of statewide significance, prime agricultural, or unique. The
statement shall also compare the impacts upon the City from each
plan. Examples of impacts are municipal cost for roads, school
busing, solid waste removal, utility efficiencies, recreational
opportunities, protection of floodwater storage areas, and
environmental impacts on sensitive lands.
4.
Requirements for cluster developments.
a. Cluster developments shall be a minimum of five acres in area.
The Planning Board shall determine whether to allow the
subdivision to be developed in accordance with the cluster
standards of this section based upon findings that:
The site contains natural features of the type described
in Subsection B4 above which are worthy of preservation;
and
(1)
The site includes critical natural resources identified in the
City of Biddeford 1999 Comprehensive Plan; and
(2)
Those natural features could not adequately be preserved
in a standard subdivision layout; and
(3)
A clustered development will permit more efficient
creation and utilization of infrastructure and provision of
municipal and quasimunicipal services than would a
standard subdivision layout; and
(4)
The clustered development achieves maximum
preservation of agricultural and forested land, in
(5)
b.
1.
C.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:977
particular those soils identified by the soils conservation
service as being of statewide significance, as prime
agricultural soils, and as unique soils. These soils are
identified on a map prepared by the Southern Maine
Regional Planning Commission based on Soil Conservation
Service data and available in the City Planner's office; and
The open space that is preserved as described herein shall
be considered for agriculture and natural resource-based
uses where appropriate.
(6)
Each building shall be an element of an overall plan for site
development. The site plan shall illustrate the placement of
buildings, open space, paths, roads, service areas, and parking
areas, and in so doing shall take into consideration all
requirements of this section and of other relevant sections of this
ordinance.
2.
The maximum net density allowable in cluster developments shall
be calculated on the basis of the net density calculations standards
found in Article VI of this ordinance. In order to determine the
maximum number of units permitted on a tract of land, the total net
acreage shall be divided by the minimum lot size required in the
district.
3.
A copy of that portion of the York County Soil Survey covering the
proposed development shall be submitted.
In addition, the Board shall require a high intensity soils survey
or a report by a registered soil scientist or a registered
professional engineer experienced in geotechnics, indicating
the suitability of soil conditions for those uses.
a.
If the proposed development is in an area featuring soils
identified by the natural resources conservation service as
being of statewide significance, as prime agricultural soils,
and as unique soils, the Planning Board shall require a highintensity
soils survey or a report by a registered soil scientist
or a registered professional engineer experienced in
geotechnics, indicating the suitability of soil conditions for
those uses.
b.
4.
Minimum lot area.
No lot serviced by a subsurface septic disposal system shall be
smaller in area than 20,000 square feet.
a.
If a cluster development will be serviced by public sewer, no
lot shall be smaller in area than 75% of the minimum lot size
requirements established in Article V of this ordinance, except
in the Rural Farm Zone where no lot shall be smaller than
20,000 square feet.
b.
5.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:978
If a cluster development will be serviced by public water, no
lot shall be smaller in area than 75% of the minimum lot size
requirements established in Article V of this ordinance, except
in the Rural Farm Zone where no lot shall be smaller than
20,000 square feet.
c.
If a cluster development will be serviced by both public sewer
service and public water, no lot shall be smaller in area than
75% of the minimum lot size requirements established in
Article V of this ordinance, except in the Rural Farm Zone
where no lot shall be smaller than 20,000 square feet.
d.
The total area of open space within the development shall equal or
exceed the sum of the areas by which any building lots are reduced
below the minimum lot area normally required in the district.
6.
The Planning Board shall consider the purpose of said open space,
and shall require the developer to provide access or to restrict
access based on the stated purpose of the open space land.
7.
8. Distance between buildings shall not be less than 30 feet.
No individual lots shall have frontage on an existing road at the
time of development. There shall be a setback of 40 feet from the
main public access road and 25 feet from interior roads that are
constructed as part of the clustered development.
9.
In no case shall shore frontage and setback be reduced below the
minimum shore frontage normally required in the district.
10.
Where a clustered development abuts a body of water, a usable
portion of the shoreline frontage shall be a part of the open space.
Said shoreline frontage shall be no less than 100 feet. Deeded
access to said frontage shall be conveyed to each lot owner in the
clustered development.
11.
When individual wells are to be utilized, a drilled well, with casing,
shall be provided on each lot by the developer/builder. The
applicant shall demonstrate the availability of water adequate for
domestic purposes as well as for fire safety. The Planning Board
may require the construction of storage ponds and dry hydrants.
12.
Utilities shall be installed underground wherever possible.
Transformer boxes, pumping stations, and meters shall be located
so as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public.
13.
Siting and buffering standards.
Buildings shall be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural
landscape features, topography, south-facing slopes (where
possible) and natural drainage areas, in accordance with an overall
plan for site development and landscaping. A site inspection shall
be conducted by the Planning Board prior to approval. Once
1.
D.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:979
approved, the plan shall not be altered without prior approval of
the Planning Board.
Residential buildings shall be designed and laid out to protect
bedroom windows from light invasions by vehicle headlights or
glare from existing outdoor lighting or illuminated signs where
allowed, insofar as practicable.
2.
Where parking spaces or storage areas are located in areas
abutting existing residential properties, a permanent wood or
masonry screen at least four feet high shall be erected along the
property line in addition to the green perimeter strip described
below.
3.
Other than in the resource protection district, a green perimeter
strip not less than 20 feet wide shall be maintained with grass,
bushes, flowers, or trees all alongside lot or rear lot lines of the
property as a whole, and (except for entrance and exit driveways)
along the entire front of such lot. Such green strip shall not be
built on or paved or used for parking or storage. There shall be
no removal of trees over four inches in diameter within this buffer.
The Planning Board may require a green strip of up to 50 feet in
width if, in the judgment of the Board, the preservation of natural
features or of the character of the area in which the clustered
development is proposed would be enhanced by a green strip
greater than 20 feet in width. In the resource protection district,
vegetation shall be retained in its natural state.
4.
Except for removal of dying or diseased trees, existing vegetation
shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion.
5.
Dedication and maintenance of open space and facilities.
In Planning Board review and approval of a clustered development,
the following requirements shall apply and shall supersede any
inconsistent or more restrictive provisions of this Zoning Ordinance
or Chapter 66 of the Revised Code of the City of Biddeford.
Open space set aside in a cluster development shall be
permanently preserved as required by this performance standard.
Land set aside as permanent open space may, but need not be, a
separate tax parcel. Such land may be included as a portion of one
or more large parcels on which dwellings are permitted, provided
that a conservation easement or a declaration of covenants and
restrictions is placed on such land pursuant to this section, and
provided that the Planning Board approves such configuration of
the open space.
1.
Open space uses. On all parcels, open space uses shall be
appropriate to the site. Open space shall include natural features
located on the parcel(s) such as, but not limited to, stream beds,
significant stands of trees, individual trees of significant size,
2.
E.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:980
agricultural land, soils as identified in Subsection C1b(5) above,
forested acreage, wildlife habitat, rock outcroppings and historic
features and sites. Open space shall be preserved and maintained
subject to the following, as applicable:
On parcels that contain significant portions of land suited to
agricultural production, open space shall be conserved for
agriculture or other consistent open space uses such as
forestry, recreation (active or passive), and resource
conservation.
a.
When the principal purposes of conserving portions of the open
space is the protection of natural resources such as wetlands,
aquifers, steep slopes, wildlife and plant habitats, and stream
corridors, open space uses in those portions may be limited to
those which are no more intensive than passive recreation.
b.
Open space areas shall be contiguous, where possible, to allow
linking of open space areas throughout the town.
c.
If the open space is to be devoted at least in part to a
productive land use such as agriculture or forestry, the
developer shall submit to the Planning Board a plan of how
such use is to be fostered in the future. Such plan may include,
for example, a long term timber management plan.
d.
The use of any open space may be limited by the Planning
Board at the time of final plan approval where the board deems
it necessary to protect adjacent properties or uses, or to
protect sensitive natural features or resources. A proposed
change in use of open space land, other than that specified at
the time of plan approval, shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board as an amendment to the approved plan.
e.
Further subdivision of open space or its use for other than
agriculture, forestry, recreation or conservation, except for
easements for underground utilities, shall be prohibited and
shall be so stated by deed restrictions. Structures and
buildings accessory to agriculture, recreation or conservation
uses may be erected on open space, subject to Planning Board
approval under the site plan review provisions of this Zoning
Ordinance and this performance standard.
f.
Notations on plan. Open space must be clearly labeled on the final
plan as to its use or uses with respect to the portions of the open
space to which such use or uses apply, ownership, management,
method of preservation, and the rights, if any, of the owners in
the subdivision to such land or portions thereof. The plan shall
clearly show that the open space land is permanently reserved for
open space purposes, and shall contain a notation indicating the
book and page of any conservation easements or deed restrictions
3.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:981
required to be recorded to implement such reservations or
restrictions.
Preservation in perpetuity. The owner of a parcel of land proposed
for cluster development shall designate all or a portion of the
parcel for open space use in perpetuity. All requirements of this
performance standard are subject to the following conditions:
A perpetual conservation easement, or declaration of
covenants and restrictions, restricting development of the
open space land shall be incorporated in the open space plan.
a.
The conservation easement may be granted to or the
declarations may be for the benefit of a private party, third
party or other entity; the City, with the approval of the City
Council; or to a qualified not-for-profit conservation
organization, such as a land trust, acceptable to the Planning
Board.
b.
Such conservation easement or declaration of covenants and
restrictions shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Board and be required as a condition of plan approval
hereunder.
c.
The Planning Board may require that such conservation
easement, or declaration of covenants and restrictions, be
enforceable by the City of Biddeford if the City is not the
holder of the conservation easement or beneficiary of the
declarations, or by a third party as specified and/or approved
by the Board.
d.
The conservation easement or declarations shall prohibit
residential, industrial, or commercial use of such open space
land (except in connection with agriculture, forestry, and
recreation), and shall not be amendable to permit such use.
e.
The conservation easement or declarations shall be recorded
in the York County Registry of Deeds prior to or simultaneously
with the filing of the final, approved plan in the York County
Registry of Deeds. If the final plan is not required to be
recorded, the conservation easement or declarations shall be
recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds prior to
development of the parcel approved for cluster development,
and/or prior to issuance of a building permit for any portion of
the cluster development. A copy of the conservation easement
or declarations shall be submitted to the planning office with a
copy of the receipt from the Registry of Deeds.
f.
4.
5. Ownership of open space land.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:982
Section 17. Commercial gardening/commercial greenhouses.
Section 18. Commercial recreation activities.
Open space land may be held in private ownership (which is to be
preferred) including an appropriate third party not the applicant;
or owned in common by a homeowner's association (HOA);
dedicated to the town, county or state governments or agencies;
transferred to a nonprofit organization such as a land trust
acceptable to the Planning Board; or held in such other form of
ownership as the Planning Board finds adequate to achieve the
purposes set forth in this section and the requirements of this
Zoning Ordinance.
The appropriate form of ownership shall be determined based
upon the purpose of the open space. Unless so determined, or
unless deeded to the City of Biddeford and accepted by the City
Council, open space shall be owned in common by the owners
of the lots or units in the development. Covenants for mandatory
membership in the association setting forth the owners' rights and
interest and privileges in the association and the common land,
shall be approved by the Planning Board and included in the deed
for each lot.
The developer or subdivider shall maintain control of and
responsibility for such open space(s) and be responsible for its/
their maintenance until development sufficient to support the
association has taken place. Such determination shall be made
by the Planning Board upon request of the neighborhood/tenants
association or the developer.
Commercial gardens and commercial greenhouses shall control the use
of chemicals so that there is no ground or air pollution. This shall
include the control of drainage runoff, dust and fumes, and the storage
of bulk manure or other fertilizers or other chemicals required for
normal operations.
A.
Plans and other documents relating to the spreading, use and storage
of chemicals shall be provided to the Planning Board for review.
B.
Storage of operational supplies shall be under cover to minimize the
potential of groundwater pollution.
C.
Storage facilities shall be located to the rear of the primary building
and screened from view from public roadways or abutting properties.
D.
Outdoor recreation activities may be established as a conditional use in
those zoning districts where they are permitted in accordance with the
provisions below.
There will be provided adequate off-street parking for the
anticipated maximum attendance at any event.
1.
A.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 18
CHCT:983
Section 19. Congregate housing/group homes. [Ord. of 3-5-1991(1);
Ord. of 5-7-1991; Ord. of 9-15-1998(5)]
Section 20. Corner lots.
The setbacks on a corner lot shall be 40 feet from the building to the major
street serving the lot or the development and 25 feet from other lesser
roads.
Section 21. Culs-de-sac, frontage.
Lots fronting on a cul-de-sac shall have a minimum frontage of 50 feet; but
the lot shall meet the required street frontage of the particular zone at the
required front setback line.
Section 22. Day-care facilities (center and home), children's and
adult. [Ord. No. 2000.19, 4-4-2000; amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No.
2012.24]
Adequate containers and facilities for rubbish collection and
removal will be provided.
2.
Adequate screening, buffer area, or landscape provisions will be
built, planted, or maintained, to protect adjacent residences from
adverse noise, light, dust, smoke, and visual impact (see "buffers").
3.
The proposed use will not create a traffic hazard. The Biddeford
Police Department shall review the location and site plans and
provide its comments to the Planning Board.
4.
5. All structures shall comply with setbacks and height requirements.
Congregate housing. All congregate housing facilities shall be serviced
by public sewer and water systems. There shall be a minimum of
40,000 square feet of land area for the congregate care facility plus an
additional 2,000 square feet for each private room or apartment.
A.
Group homes. The City's regulation of group homes shall be as outlined
in 30-A, M.R.S.A., § 4357-A, Community Living Arrangements.
B.
Day-care centers and homes, children's.
No children's day-care center or home day care may commence
operation within the City of Biddeford without first being reviewed
and approved by the Planning Board pursuant to the procedures
and standards applicable to conditional uses under Article VII of
the City of Biddeford Zoning Ordinance. An existing children's daycare
center or home day care will be exempt from this criteria,
provided that all state and City requirements are fulfilled.
1.
The applicant, for a children's day-care center or home day care for
children under 13 years of age:
2.
A.
Section 18 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 22
CHCT:984
Shall submit a copy of the completed application for a
certificate to operate required by the Maine Department of
Health and Human Services (DHHS) as part of the application
for a conditional use permit.
a.
Upon certification by the DHHS, the applicant shall submit a
copy of the certificate to the City Planner's office within 30
days of receipt.
b.
If a change in status of the DHHS certificate occurs, the
applicant shall submit a copy of the new certificate to the City
Planner's office within 30 days of receipt.
c.
Upon application for renewal of the DHHS certificate, the
applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the City
Planner's office within 30 days of submittal to the DHHS.
d.
Upon receipt of the renewed DHHS certificate, the applicant
shall submit a copy to the City Planner's office within 30 days.
Failure to submit copies of the preceding applications,
certificates or renewal applications in the prescribed period
of time shall be cause for the City Planner's office to schedule
the offending children's day-care center or home day care on
the next Planning Board agenda for review of the children's
day-care center or home day care's existing conditional use
permit.
e.
If a children's day-care center or home day care is proposed in
a residence constructed prior to 1978, the applicant shall submit
evidence that a lead inspection has been conducted in the building
or home proposed for the children's day-care center or home day
care, and that health threats that may be present due to existing
lead-contaminated dust, soil or water, or lead-based paint, have
been addressed to the satisfaction of either a State of Maine
licensed lead inspector or the Department of Health and Human
Services.
3.
Wastewater:
The applicant shall submit a copy of the City of Biddeford
building sewer application if the children’s day-care center
or home day care is serviced by public sewer and pay any
applicable impact fees for increased flows.
a.
The applicant shall submit an HHE-200 Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal System Application completed and sealed
by a State of Maine Licensed Soil Evaluator or a written memo
from the City of Biddeford Licensed Plumbing Inspector
verifying either that the existing septic system is adequate to
service the number of children proposed, or that the proposed
b.
4.
Section 22 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 22
CHCT:985
expansion or replacement of the system is adequate to service
the number of children proposed.
If the existing system is to be retained, an HHE-200
Application for a replacement system shall be recorded at
the York County Registry of Deeds. A copy of the recorded
HHE-200 Application and a copy of the receipt from recording
shall be submitted to the City Planner's office within 30 days of
approval by the Planning Board.
c.
All outside play equipment shall be located in side or rear yards
and shall meet the required side and rear setback requirements.
5.
The Board may require that outside play areas be buffered from
adjoining uses by fencing and plantings. The Planning Board shall
consider the unique circumstances of each application in
determining the type of buffering that may be required. If buffering
is required by the Board as a condition of approval, said buffering
shall be installed either prior to the children’s day-care center
or home day care opening for business, or at such time as is
acceptable to the Board.
6.
An off-street parking area shall be provided and utilized by vehicles
engaged in the picking up and discharge of children. No fewer than
two parking spaces shall be provided, exclusive of space used by
the day-care provider and/or staff. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall be responsible for ensuring that said off-street parking area is
utilized.
7.
Operation of the children’s day-care center or home day care and
maintenance of that portion of the building or residence dedicated
to the children’s day-care center or home day care shall be as set
forth in 10-148 CMR Chapter 32, Rules for the Licensing of Child
Care Facilities, of the Maine Department of Health and Human
Services.
8.
That portion of the building or residence dedicated to children’s
day-care center or home day care shall have provisions for the
secured storage of household chemicals, cleaning agents, and all
other potentially harmful substances. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall be responsible for ensuring that said secured storage
is adequate prior to the children’s day-care center or home day
care opening for business.
9.
Day-care centers and homes, adult.
No adult day-care center or home day care identified as a
conditional use ("C") in either Article V, § 7 or Article V, Table A
may commence operation within the City of Biddeford without first
being reviewed and approved by the Planning Board pursuant to
the procedures and standards applicable to conditional uses under
Article VII, and/or site plan review under Article XI of the City of
1.
B.
Section 22 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 22
CHCT:986
Biddeford Zoning Ordinance. An existing adult day-care center or
home day care will be exempt from this criteria, provided that all
state and City requirements are fulfilled.
The applicant, for an adult day care center or home day care:
Shall submit a copy of the completed application for a license
to operate required by the Maine Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS) as part of the application for a
conditional use permit.
a.
Upon licensing by the DHHS, the applicant shall submit a copy
of the license to the City Planner's office within 30 days of
receipt.
b.
If a change in status of the DHHS license occurs, the applicant
shall submit a copy of the new license to the City Planner's
office within 30 days of receipt.
c.
Upon application for renewal of the DHHS license, the
applicant shall submit a copy of the application to the City
Planner's office within 30 days of submittal to the DHHS.
d.
Upon receipt of the renewed DHHS license, the applicant shall
submit a copy to the City Planner's office within 30 days.
Failure to submit copies of the preceding applications,
licenses, or renewal applications in the prescribed period of
time shall be cause for the City Planner's office to schedule
the offending adult day-care center or home day care on the
next Planning Board agenda for review of the adult day-care
center's or home day care's existing conditional use permit.
e.
2.
If an adult day-care center or home day care is proposed in a
building or residence constructed prior to 1978, the applicant shall
submit evidence that a lead inspection has been conducted in the
building or residence proposed for the adult day-care center or
home day care, and that health threats that may be present due to
existing lead-contaminated dust, soil or water or lead-based paint
have been addressed to the satisfaction of either a State of Maine
licensed lead inspector or the Department of Health and Human
Services.
3.
Wastewater.
The applicant shall submit a copy of the City of Biddeford
building sewer application if the adult day-care center or home
day care is serviced by public sewer and pay any applicable
impact fees for increased flows.
a.
If the building is serviced by a septic system, the applicant
shall submit an HHE-200 Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
System Application completed and sealed by a State of Maine
b.
4.
Section 22 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 22
CHCT:987
Section 23. Demolition disposal.
Section 24. (Reserved)99
Section 25. Dust, fumes, vapors, and gases.
Emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases, which could damage
human health, animals, vegetation, or property, or which could soil or stain
persons or property, at any point beyond the lot line of the establishment
creating such emission, shall be prohibited. All such activities shall also
comply with applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
Section 26. Erosion control. [Ord. of 5-7-1996]
Erosion of soil and sedimentation of watercourses and water bodies shall
be minimized by employing the following best management practices as
specified by the Soil Conservation Service:
Licensed Soil Evaluator or a written memo from the City of
Biddeford Licensed Plumbing Inspector verifying either that
the existing septic system is adequate to service the adults
proposed, or that the proposed expansion or replacement of
the system is adequate to service the number of adults
proposed.
If the existing system is to be retained, an HHE-200
Application for a replacement system shall be recorded at
the York County Registry of Deeds. A copy of the recorded
HHE-200 Application and a copy of the receipt from recording
shall be submitted to the City Planner's office within 30 days of
approval by the Planning Board.
c.
An off-street parking area shall be provided for the picking up
and discharge of adults. Parking space requirements shall be as
addressed in Article VI, Section 49 of this ordinance.
5.
Operation of the adult day-care center or home day care and
maintenance of the day-care environment shall be as set forth in
Chapter 117, Regulations Governing the Licensing and Functioning
of Adult Day Services Programs, of the Maine Department of
Health and Human Services.
6.
Permits for demolition disposal shall be obtained from the Building
Inspector after approval from the Planning Board.
A.
Demolition disposal shall be limited to construction debris and stumps
resulting from the clearing of sites for construction.
B.
99.Editor’s Note: Former Section 24, Duplex housing/two-family housing, was repealed
3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.16.
Section 22 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 26
CHCT:988
Section 27. Essential services and water supply systems. [Ord. No.
2008.79, 10-21-2008; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98;
1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.3]
Stripping of vegetation, soil removal, and regrading or other
development shall be accomplished in such a way as to minimize
erosion.
A.
The duration of exposure of the disturbed area shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
B.
Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
areas during development.
C.
Permanent (final) vegetation and mechanical erosion control measures,
in accordance with the standards of the York County Soil and Water
Conservation District and the Maine Soil and Water Conservation
Commission, shall be installed as soon as possible after construction
ends.
D.
Until a disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in runoff water shall be
trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or other
acceptable methods as determined by the Planning Board or Building
Inspector, whichever has the authority to make such decisions on the
project. York County Soil Conservation Service may be consulted to
review plans and actual installation of sediment control devices.
E.
The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer
than 10 feet to an adjoining property, nor shall said cut or fill exceed
the three-to-one slope unless the Planning Board waives either or both
requirements upon the applicant's demonstration, certified by a Maine
licensed professional engineer (P.E.), that a steeper slope, whether or
not closer than 10 feet to the adjoining property, is stable, will not
result in excessive downstream erosion or sedimentation, nor cause any
additional adverse impact on the adjoining property.
F.
During grading operations, methods of dust control shall be employed
wherever practicable.
G.
On slopes greater than 25% there shall be no grading or filling within
100 feet of the saltwater wetland except to protect the shoreline and
prevent erosion.100
H.
Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to
existing public ways and existing service corridors.
A.
B. (Reserved)
C. (Reserved)
100. Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, Erosion and sedimentation control in shoreland areas,
which immediately followed, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 26 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 27
CHCT:989
Section 28. Explosive materials.
Section 29. Experimental research and testing laboratories.
Section 30. Extractive industry. [Ord. No. 99.64, 8-17-1999; Ord.
No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Essential services and water supply systems structures and facilities
shall be sited and developed in accordance with the provisions stated in
this ordinance.
D.
All conditional use permit applications for essential services and water
supply systems shall include an assessment of potential environmental
and health impacts to abutting properties as a result from noise,
vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, glare, hours of operation, or other causes
as applicable, unless a waiver is requested by the applicant and granted
by the Planning Board.
E.
No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored
in bulk above ground unless they are located at least 75 feet from
any lot line, or 40 feet for underground storage, and all materials
shall be stored in a manner and location which is in compliance with
appropriate rules and regulations of the Maine Department of Public
Safety and other appropriate federal, state, and local regulations.
A.
No explosive materials or substances shall be stored without the
express written approval of both the City of Biddeford Building
Inspector and Deputy Fire Chief/Fire Marshal.
B.
Proposals for the development of experimental research facilities and
testing laboratories shall be reviewed by the Planning Board.
Applications for such proposed developments shall provide clear
evidence that the proposal will not pose a hazard to the general health,
safety and welfare of the general community.
A.
Applicants shall provide to the board documents indicating approvals
from state and federal review agencies as needed, indicating the
proposed experimental research facility or testing laboratory meets
their specified standards.
B.
The Board shall conduct public hearings as needed to receive public
input.
C.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the removal, filling,
processing and storage of topsoil, rock, sand gravel and other similar
materials within the City of Biddeford. Collectively, such activities are
termed "excavation." These provisions are specifically intended to
protect the quality of groundwater and other natural resources,
minimize the adverse impact on abutting property owners and the
community, and ensure proper rehabilitation of all affected lands.
1.
2. Definitions.
Section 27 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 30
CHCT:990
Abutting property. Property sharing a common boundary with or
within 200 feet of the property proposed for excavation, whether or
not these properties are separated by a public or private way.
A.
Freshwater wetland. Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas that are:
Inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a
frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils;
and
a.
Not considered part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river,
stream or brook.
b.
B.
River, stream or brook. A channel between defined banks which is
created by the action of surface water and has two or more of the
following characteristics:
It is depicted as a solid or broken blue line on the most recent
edition of the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute series
topographic map or, if that is not available, a fifteen-minute
series topographic map.
a.
It contains or is known to contain flowing water continuously
for a period of at least three months of the year in most years.
b.
The channel bed is primarily composed of mineral materials
such as sand and gravel, parent material or bedrock that has
been deposited or scoured by water.
c.
The channel contains aquatic animals such as fish, aquatic
insects or mollusks in the water or, if no surface water is
present, within the stream bed.
d.
The channel contains aquatic vegetation and is essentially
devoid of upland vegetation.
River, stream or brook does not mean a ditch or other
drainageway constructed and maintained solely for the
purpose of draining stormwater, or a grassy swale.
e.
C.
Natural buffer strip. An area of undisturbed natural vegetation
intended to shield neighboring properties and public rights-of-way
from an excavation operation.
D.
Naturally internally drained. Areas of a site that, as a result of
predevelopment topography and interim and final topography
produced during development of the site, are and will remain at all
times over the course of the development graded so that neither
eroded materials or runoff either crosses the property boundary or
enters a river, brook, stream, great pond or freshwater or coastal
E.
Section 30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 30
CHCT:991
wetland or other protected area. Areas that rely on man-made
structures to maintain internal drainage are not considered
naturally internally drained.
Sight distance. The length of roadway visible in all directions at the
intersection of the access road with a public road. It is measured at
a point 10 feet back from the edge of the travel way to the center
line of the opposing land(s) assuming a height of eye of 3.5 feet and
a height of object of 4.25 feet.
F.
Subject property. The parcel, including any adjoining parcels in
the same ownership, upon which excavation and any associated
activities take place. For the purposes of this ordinance, associated
activities include, but are not limited to, processing, equipment
and vehicle storage, disposal of stumps and grubbings, storage of
overburden and topsoil and stockpiling of excavated materials.
G.
Exemptions.
Excavations whose sole purpose is to determine the nature or
extent of mineral resources if accomplished by hand sampling,
test boring or other methods that create minimal disturbance. Test
holes shall be filled in immediately after use.
A.
The removal, processing, filling or storage of 500 cubic yards of
material, or 100 cubic yards of topsoil, in any one year. This
limitation may be exceeded if the excavation is undertaken as part
of an approved on-site construction project, is part of normal farm
operations or is moved to a contiguous site in the same ownership.
In the event of the removal, processing, filling or storage of fewer
than 500 cubic yards of material, if in the judgment of the Code
Enforcement Officer there is the potential for an adverse impact
on neighboring properties, the community, groundwater or other
natural resources, then the party responsible for the removal,
processing, filling or storage of fewer than 500 cubic yards of
material shall be required to file an application for review by the
Planning Board.
B.
3.
Applicability. Unless exempted in Subsection 3, above, the following
excavations shall require an excavation permit. In the case of multiple
excavations on the same parcel of land, all such excavations shall be
deemed part of a single operation for the purposes of this ordinance.
A. Excavations proposed after the effective date of this ordinance.
Expansion of existing excavations which exceed the limits of
Subsection 3B.
B.
The City recognizes that a number of excavation operations exist
that do not conform with standards set forth in this section. It is
the intent of the City that the five-year temporary permit that had
C.
4.
Section 30 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 30
CHCT:992
been issued for an existing operation shall be reduced to a oneyear
permit. When said permit has run its course, previous to its
expiration the owner(s) of the existing operation shall submit an
application as described herein, which shall be reviewed according
to the standards herein.
Any operation in existence at the time of the effective date of this
section that has not received a five-year temporary permit shall
be considered to be illegal. The Code Enforcement and Planning
offices shall work with the City Attorney in order to cause the
temporary closure of said operation until review under this section
can be completed, or the permanent closure of said operation if
the owner or operator of said operation chooses not to participate
in the review process.
Procedure. An application for an excavation permit shall be filed with
the Planning Office. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete application,
the City Planner shall schedule said application on the agenda of a
regular meeting of the Planning Board.
5.
Application Requirements. An application for an excavation permit shall
consist of the following:
A. Name and address of the owner of the property.
Name and address of the operator of the excavation if different
than the owner.
B.
C. Right, title or interest in the property.
Names and addresses of all persons owning property abutting or
within 500 feet of the subject property.
D.
Site plan at a scale of not less than one inch = 100 feet. The plan:
a. Shall be shown on a sheet measuring 24 inches by 36 inches.
Shall be prepared by and shall include the stamp and signature
of either a Maine licensed land surveyor or a professional
engineer.
b.
Shall include the following information, as well as any
additional information deemed necessary by the board:
1. Boundaries of the subject property.
Existing wells, rivers, brooks, streams, freshwater wetland
and coastal wetland.
2.
Depth of groundwater as determined by test borings, wells
or pits.
3.
Topography of the property at a contour interval no
greater than five feet.
4.
c.
E.
6.
Section 30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 30
CHCT:993
Existing site features such as fields, wooded areas,
structures, roads and driveways.
5.
Residences and wells within 500 feet of the subject
property.
6.
Existing and proposed excavation areas including acreage,
phasing, depth of excavation and final grades.
7.
8. Location and size of product and topsoil stockpiles.
9. Areas to be used for processing of excavated materials.
10. Location of proposed buildings and structures.
Types and locations where equipment, materials or fuels
are to be stored.
11.
Locations of proposed access and any roads to be
constructed within the site.
12.
Sight distances of intersection of the access road with a
public road.
13.
14. Method and location of controlling access into the site.
Improvements for the control of drainage, sedimentation
and erosion.
15.
F. Proposed hours of operation.
Proposed rehabilitation plan including temporary and final seeding,
plantings and permanent drainage improvements.
G.
A spill prevention, control and countermeasures (SPCC) plan if
any fuels or hazardous materials are to be stored or equipment
refueling or oil changes are to take place on the subject property.
H.
A traffic study conducted by a traffic engineer registered in the
State of Maine which shall include:
An estimate of daily traffic to be generated, to include size and
capacity of trucks that will haul material, routes proposed for
hauling material, and current Maine DOT or City data on traffic
counts for all public and private ways upon which material will
be hauled;
a.
A description of existing or potential traffic hazards on roads
servicing the site and the applicant's proposal to address such
hazards. Said description shall consider the existence and
impact of existing extraction operations. The study shall
describe the ability of such roads to withstand the additional
traffic generated by the site.
b.
I.
Section 30 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 30
CHCT:994
If, in the opinion of the Planning Board a separate, independent
traffic study is warranted, or review of the submitted traffic
study by an independent traffic engineer or consultant, the
cost of such an independent study or review shall be borne by
the applicant.
c.
Plan for screening excavation from direct view from residences
and public road through the use of fencing or existing or proposed
vegetation. The applicant shall demonstrate that the screening plan
will:
Ensure adequate sight distance and visibility for vehicles
entering and exiting the site;
a.
Ensure adequate sight distance for vehicles traveling the
roadway from which the excavation is accessed;
b.
Ensure that the proposed fencing and/or vegetative screen is
adequate to shield neighboring properties and public rights-ofway
from the excavation operation;
c.
Be installed prior to the commencement of the extraction
operation. No hauling or processing of material shall occur
prior to the installation of screening.
d.
J.
K. Disposition of stumps and grubbings.
Estimate of the cost of rehabilitating the site in conformance with
requirements of Section 11.
L.
Estimate of types and amounts of material that will be excavated
from the site.
M.
Estimate of proposed life of excavation based on amount of
material on site.
N.
Aerial photo(s) of the proposed site so that the boundaries of the
site may be identified and that the extent of excavation, if any, at
the time of the Board's review may be clearly delineated.
O.
Waivers. The Planning Board may grant waivers from specific
submission requirements upon written request by the applicant if it
determines that such information is not necessary for proper review of
the application.
7.
Review criteria. The following criteria shall be applied in the review of
the proposed operation:
a. Will not unreasonably result in unsafe or unhealthful conditions;
b. Will not unreasonably result in erosion or sedimentation;
Will not unreasonably result in water pollution nor adversely affect
existing groundwater, springs, ponds, rivers, brooks or streams;
c.
8.
Section 30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 30
CHCT:995
Will conserve natural beauty in keeping with the rehabilitation
provisions of Subsection 11 of this section.
d.
e. Will not adversely affect public ways;
f. Will not adversely affect surrounding properties; and
g. Is in conformance with the following performance standards.
Performance standards.
Excavation shall not occur within five feet of the seasonal high
water table. If standing water already exists in the excavated area,
no further excavation that would result in an increased area of
standing water shall be allowed. The Planning Board may allow
excavation to extend to or below the water table and an area
of standing water may be increased through excavation if such
excavation is approved by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection (MDEP).
A.
At least one pit or monitoring well must be maintained on each
five acres of excavation. Said pit or well shall be available to public
officials or their agents should data on either water table elevation
or water quality be deemed necessary to adequately monitor the
operation's impact on groundwater.
B.
The following setbacks must be maintained between the excavation
and a water supply in existence prior to the excavation:
1. Dug well or point-driven well: 300 feet.
2. Well drilled into saturated bedrock: 150 feet.
3. Public water supply serving 500 or fewer persons: 500 feet.
4. Public water supply serving more than 500 persons: 1,000 feet.
C.
All fuels or hazardous materials must be stored within spill-proof
secondary containment with sufficient capacity to contain 110%
of the volume of the single largest container. Equipment refueling
and oil changes must take place over impervious surfaces. Routine
maintenance operations are allowed for fixed equipment such as
screens, crushers and wash facilities, provided that precautionary
measures such as portable drip pans or vacuum devices are used.
The applicant shall further detail what measures he/she is prepared
to take in the event of a fuel or hazardous materials spill.
D.
No part of any extraction operation shall be permitted within 100
feet of any property line or right-of-way. Natural buffer strips shall
be maintained between the excavation and adjacent natural and
man-made features. If vegetation within a natural buffer strip was
removed or disturbed by the excavation before it became subject
to this ordinance, the vegetation shall be reestablished in a manner
E.
9.
Section 30 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 30
CHCT:996
that conforms to the screening requirements of this section before
any additional excavation takes place.
Natural buffer strips shall be required as follows:
1. Great pond, river or coastal wetland: 250 feet.
2. Stream, brook or freshwater wetland: 250 feet.
3. Public road right-of-way: 100 feet.
4. Private road right-of-way: 50 feet.
5. Property boundary: 75 feet.
Except for access roads and grubbed areas, all reclaimed and
unreclaimed areas must be naturally internally drained unless the
applicant prepares a stormwater management plan that
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that surface
water discharges from areas that are not internally drained will not
be increased as a result of stormwater runoff from storms up to a
level of intensity of a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour storm.
F.
Topsoil stockpiles to be used for reclamation must be seeded,
mulched or stabilized, grubbed areas must be stabilized and all
disturbed portions of the subject parcel must be protected from
erosion and sedimentation by a plan approved by the Planning
Board and in conformance with the Maine Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook Best Management Practices, March, 1991, or as
amended.
G.
Sufficient sight distance shall be provided at the intersection of
the access road with a public or private road. At a minimum,
sight distance shall be 10 feet for every mile per hour of posted
speed limit on the public or private road. Points of access of the
excavation operation onto public or private roads must be located,
posted and constructed in accordance with the standards for
roadways adopted in Chapter 62, Streets, Sidewalks and Other
Public Places, of the City's Revised Code of Ordinances.
H.
Hours of operation shall not exceed 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday and 7:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. on Saturdays. No Sunday
operation is permitted. Hours of operation for blasting operations
shall be according to Chapter 34, Environment, Article V, Blasting.
The hours of operation may be further restricted by the Planning
Board if it is determined that the above-listed hours of operation
will unreasonably interfere with residential uses in existence at
the time an application for an excavation permit is determined to
be complete. In the event of an emergency request for sand or
gravel from public safety officials, the Code Enforcement Officer
may temporarily authorize alternative hours of operation. Use of
I.
Section 30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 30
CHCT:997
the property upon which the extraction operation occurs shall be
restricted to activity related to the extraction operation.
Noise levels generated by an extraction operation shall be
regulated by Chapter 34, Article III, Noise, of the City of Biddeford
Revised Code of Ordinances.
J.
The access road and internal roadways shall be treated to control
dust as necessary with water or calcium chloride. The access road
leading from the excavation site to a public road shall be paved for
a distance of no less than 100 feet from its intersection with the
public road.
K.
Loaded vehicles shall be in accordance with Maine Revised
Statutes Annotated.
L.
No blasting shall be done as part of any excavation operation
except in accordance with Chapter 34, Environment, Article V,
Blasting.
M.
Rehabilitation requirements.
Final side slopes shall be graded at a slope not to exceed 2.5 feet
vertical to one foot horizontal. The slope may be increased if it
is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
proposed slope will be stable.
A.
Rehabilitation of continuing operations shall be conducted in
phases so that the active excavation area, not including roads,
structures or stockpiles, does not exceed five acres. A vegetative
cover by seeding, planting and loaming must be established within
three months of completion of each phase and within six months of
completion of the final phase of excavation.
B.
Vegetative cover used for rehabilitation must consist of grasses,
legumes, herbaceous or woody plants, shrubs, trees or a mixture
of these. A vegetative cover by seeding, planting and loaming must
be established within nine months of completion of each phase of
excavation. Vegetative cover is acceptable if:
The planting of all materials results in a permanent 90%
ground cover; and
1.
The planting of trees and shrubs results in a permanent stand
or a stand capable of regeneration and succession, sufficient to
ensure 76% survival rate.
2.
C.
The stumps and grubbings from the site may be covered with
topsoil and used to stabilize the banks. Strippings may be
distributed over the excavation area, removed from the parcel,
burned or chipped.
D.
10.
Section 30 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 30
CHCT:998
The areas of pits with solid or broken ledge rock shall be trimmed
of loose rock and the bottom of the excavation graded to be
compatible with the surrounding land.
E.
The excavation shall be graded to maintain internal drainage,
prevent standing water and minimize erosion and sedimentation.
Sediment shall be prevented from entering streams or drainage
ways.
F.
Groundwater monitoring wells shall be filled and sealed upon
completion of the final phase of excavation.
G.
All structures shall be removed and all access roads, haul roads and
other support roads shall be rehabilitated once they are no longer
in use.
H.
Inspections. The Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, shall
conduct an annual compliance inspection prior to the anniversary date
of the original permit to determine whether the permit holder has
complied with the approved plan. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
maintain a file on each active extraction operation in order to retain a
record of complaints or actions generated by activity at each operation.
Reports shall be provided to the Planning Board within 14 days of
completion of annual inspections.
11.
Performance guarantee. The applicant must submit a performance
guarantee in an amount that the Planning Board determines to be
sufficient to cover the total cost of meeting the rehabilitation
requirements of Section 11. The City Engineer shall assist in
determining an amount sufficient for the performance guarantee. The
performance guarantee may consist of one of the following:
An escrow account consisting of a certified check, savings account
or certificate of deposit of which the City is named as sole owner.
Funds may be withdrawn by the City only when rehabilitation does
not conform with the approved land. The principal or residual
amount and any accrued interest shall be returned to the applicant
when the rehabilitation is complete.
A.
A performance bond, payable to the City, issued by an approved
surety company, with details of its conditions, and with methods of
release for the specific project clearly delineated.
B.
A letter of credit from a financial institution approved by the City.
This credit must be irrevocable, and be sufficient to cover
rehabilitation of the approved project, and from which the City may
draw if rehabilitation does not conform to the approved plan.
The performance guarantee shall remain in force until the
Planning Board certifies that the site has been rehabilitated in
conformance with the approved plan.
C.
12.
Section 30 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 30
CHCT:999
Section 31. Farmland preservation.
In an effort to promote harmony between agricultural activities and other
land use the State of Maine has passed special legislation concerning the
proximity and compatibility of land uses (7 M.R.S.A. § 41 through 49).
Permit term. A permit granted by the Planning Board under the
provisions of this ordinance shall be issued on a graduated basis, e.g.,
the initial permit for a period of one year, the second permit for a
period of two years and so on up to a maximum of five years so as
to encourage compliance with this section. The permit holder must
submit an application for permit renewal at least 30 days prior to
expiration of the permit. Such application shall consist of evidence that
the excavation has been conducted in conformance with the approved
plan.
In the event the application for permit renewal is not submitted at
least 30 days prior to expiration of the permit, or it is determined by
the Planning Board that the excavation is not in conformance with the
approved plan, the applicant shall apply for a new permit from the
Planning Board under these ordinance provisions. The Planning Board
shall request that the Code Enforcement Officer issue a stop work
order if and when it becomes evident that the owner/operator of an
excavation operation is in violation of these provisions.
13.
Severability. In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction rules
any provision of this ordinance to be invalid, the remaining provisions
shall continue in full force and effect. In the event that any provision
of this ordinance conflicts with state statute, the stricter provision shall
govern.
14.
Conflict with Other Ordinances. This ordinance shall not repeal, annul,
or in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any
other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit or provision of law. Where this
ordinance imposes a higher standard for the promotion and protection
of health, safety and welfare, the provisions of this ordinance shall
prevail.
15.
Enforcement. The Planning Board may order the owner or operator
of an excavation that is in noncompliance with the provisions of this
section to cease operations until such noncompliance is corrected.
16.
Fines and Penalties. The Planning Board may impose a fine not to
exceed $250 per day as a penalty to the owner or operator of an
excavation that is in noncompliance with the provisions of this section.
In the event of an owner or operator who has been ordered to cease
excavating and/or hauling at an excavation operation due to
noncompliance with this section, but has failed to cease as ordered,
the Planning Board may impose a fine not to exceed $500 per day,
beginning no sooner than five calendar days after a registered letter
has been mailed to the owner or operator from City Hall.
17.
Section 30 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 31
CHCT:1000
The City of Biddeford understands the importance of agricultural activities
to the local economy and the conflict that sometimes arising between
residential and other uses in close proximity to working agricultural
activities. Therefore the following standards are specified:
Section 32. Farm stands.
Farm stands shall be considered accessory uses to working farms provided
the produce sold in the stand is grown on the property where the stand is
located. Such stands shall provide:
Section 33. Firewood processing.
Structures designed and intended for use as dwelling units, schools and
playgrounds/athletic fields, establishments selling or dispensing food
such as, restaurants, campgrounds and public picnic areas shall be set
back 150 feet from the boundary of land registered with the State of
Maine as "farmland."
A.
Wherever possible structures as indicated in A above shall be set back
from farms not registered with the community or the state at least twice
the normal distance.
B.
a. For off-street parking and shall otherwise not cause a traffic hazard.
Further, stands shall not cause a nuisance for abutting properties in
terms of noise, odor, or hours of operation.
b.
The City of Biddeford recognizes the fact that the burning of wood is
an economic and popular means of home heating. At the same time the
processing of firewood can be a nuisance to abutting residents. The City
deems that the health and welfare of the general public requires review
and permitting of firewood processing operations.
A.
All firewood processing operations shall obtain a permit from the
Building Inspector; in cases where the operation processes more than
25 cords of wood annually, the Planning Board shall review the
application and provide the Building Inspector with a recommendation.
B.
Firewood processing operations shall be set back at least 300 feet from
the nearest residential structure, unless such residential structure is
owned and occupied by the operator.
C.
Firewood processing operations shall be set back at least 100 feet from
the main public roadway that services the property in question.
D.
Firewood processing operations shall limit their truck loading, cutting
of wood, or receiving of wood products to between the hours of 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on
Saturdays.
E.
Section 31 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 33
CHCT:1001
Section 34. Fisheries: processing and storage.
Section 35. Floodplain management.
Any construction of permanent dwelling units or commercial/industrial
structures within areas identified as flood hazard areas shall be constructed
in accordance with standards established by the Federal Emergency
Management Administration.
Section 36. Gasoline service stations.
The following provisions shall apply to gasoline service stations as well as
convenience stores which sell gasoline.
Section 37. Glare. [Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.26]
Lighting, including internal and external illumination, may be used which
serves security, safety and operational needs but which does not directly or
indirectly produce deleterious effects on abutting properties or which does
not impair the vision of a vehicle operator on adjacent roadways. Lighting
fixtures, not including illumination of electronic message centers (EMCs),
shall be shielded or hooded so that the lighting elements are not exposed to
normal view by motorists or pedestrians or from adjacent dwellings. EMC
illumination standards are outlined in Article VI (Performance Standards),
Section 59B16, of this ordinance. Direct or indirect illumination shall not
exceed 0.5 footcandle upon abutting residential properties.
Noise generated by a firewood processing operation shall at no time
exceed the noise standards established by ordinance for the City of
Biddeford.
F.
A. All operations shall be under cover to minimize odor and noise.
Operations shall be screened to minimize visual impact upon adjacent
properties, especially residential.
B.
Storage of all wastes shall be heavy-gauge metal or plastic containers
with tight-fitting covers. Wastes shall be removed as needed to prevent
odor and other unhealthful situations.
C.
The Planning Board shall review plans for operations under this
heading. The board may conduct public hearings.
D.
All structures, including underground storage tanks, shall be no less
than 50 feet from any property line.
A.
B. No gasoline, kerosene, or other fuel shall be permitted above ground.
Points of ingress and egress shall be located not less than 50 feet from
the nearest intersecting street center lines, measured along the street
center line.
C.
Section 33 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 38
CHCT:1002
Section 38. Home occupations. [Ord. of 2-4-1997(2); Ord. No.
2003.13, 2-4-2003]
The City of Biddeford recognizes that there are some commercial and
professional activities that can be conducted within a dwelling unit, which
will not cause adverse impact on the residential neighborhood. At the same
time these activities must be reviewed as a conditional use to ensure that
the quality of life and rights of abutting property owners, residents, and
other tenants within the same building are not impacted. The Planning
Board shall review applications to insure that:
Permitted home occupations may be carried out without: offending
custom or disturbing neighbors; altering the residential character of
the structure or neighborhood; or changing the character of the lot
from its principal use as a residence, shall be permitted if it complies
with all the requirements of this section.
A.
A home occupation shall be carried on by permanent residents of the
dwelling unit, with not more than two employees who are not residents
of the dwelling unit, not to exceed 25% of total floor area, or more than
400 square feet.
B.
The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal or
accessory structures. There shall be no outside storage or display of
materials or products or equipment or vehicles.
C.
D. The general performance standards of this ordinance shall apply.
One nonilluminated sign, no larger than two square feet, may be
erected on the premises.
E.
The sale of products shall be limited to those which are crafted,
assembled, or substantially altered on the premises: catalog/mail order
items delivered off the premises; and to items which are accessory and
incidental to a service which is provided on the premises.
F.
Home occupation approvals may be re-reviewed by the Board if
any of the above conditions are violated. Reports of violation or
complaints shall be conveyed to the board in writing by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Board shall notify the operator that the
Board is holding a public hearing to reconsider the home
occupation permit. Abutters shall be notified under the rules of
public hearings.
1.
If the Board finds that the conditions of approval have been violated
and cannot, or will not, be corrected within 14 days of the hearing/
Board's decision, the approval will be withdrawn, (and) the
operation will be in violation of these ordinances and shall be
considered a civil nuisance of the City ordinances and subject to
action and penalties stated in these ordinances.
2.
G.
Section 38 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 38
CHCT:1003
Section 39. Hospitals and nursing homes.
Section 40. (Reserved)101
Section 41. Industrial facilities and related uses.
(Including manufacturing, light trucking, research, experimental and
testing labs, assembly facilities, bulk oil terminals, etc.)
No vehicular traffic shall be generated by the home occupation in
greater volume than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
H.
Access shall be provided to a major access street. The point of access
shall be 100 feet from the nearest dwelling.
A.
A landscaped green strip, at least 20 feet wide, shall be maintained
along all property lines, except where driveways enter and exit.
B.
Certification from the Department of Health and Human Services as
needed.
C.
Environmental standards. These standards shall apply to light trucking
industries; research, experimental and testing laboratories; assembly;
light manufacturing; bulk oil terminals; other industrial uses; industries
dependent on air transportation or light trucking.
When submitting an application for a conditional use the applicant
shall submit the following information to the Building Inspector and to
the Planning Board:
A written description of the industrial operations proposed in
sufficient detail to indicate the effects of these operations in
producing traffic congestion, noise, toxic or noxious matter,
vibration, odor, heat, glare, air pollution, waste, and other
objectionable effects.
1.
Engineering and architectural plans for the treatment of and
disposal of sewage and industrial wastes and any on-site disposal
of wastes.
2.
Engineering and architectural plans for handling any traffic
congestion, noise, odor, heat, glare, air pollution, fire hazard, or
safety hazard.
3.
Designation of the fuel proposed to be used and any necessary
plans for controlling the emission of smoke or particulate matter.
4.
The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift.
5.
A.
101. Editor’s Note: Former Section 40, Hotels/motels and inns, was repealed 1-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 2016.114.
Section 38 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 41
CHCT:1004
Section 42. Kennels and veterinary hospitals.
A plan indicating trees to be retained, streams and other
topographical features on the site and within 100 feet from the
exterior boundaries of the property.
6.
A list of all chemicals and all hazardous materials to be hauled,
stored, used, generated or disposed of on the site. A list of required
state and federal permits, or a letter from state and federal officials
indicating that a permit is not required.
7.
General requirements.
All business, service, repair, manufacturing, storage, processing, or
display on property abutting or facing a residential use or property
shall be conducted wholly within an enclosed building unless
screened from the residential area.
1.
Doors, windows, loading docks, and other openings in structures
shall be prohibited on sides of the structure adjacent to or across a
street from a residential use or property.
2.
All other yards abutting or across a street from a residential use
or property shall be continuously maintained in lawn or other
landscaping unless screened from the residential use.
3.
Access points from a public road to industrial operations shall be
so located as to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid directing
traffic onto local access streets of a primarily residential character.
4.
All materials including wastes shall be stored, and all grounds
shall be maintained in a manner which will not attract or aid the
propagation of insects or rodents or create a health hazard.
5.
Prior to the issuance of building permits, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the Building Inspector that all provisions of this
ordinance have been met.
6.
Off-street parking requirements as stated in this ordinance shall be
met.
7.
The requirements for buffers contained in this ordinance shall be
met.
8.
Prior to any final approval by the Biddeford Planning Board all state
and federal permits must be received and reviewed by the City;
modification to plans required by the additional permits must be
indicated on the final plans.
9.
B.
Structures or pens for housing or containing the animals shall be
located not less than 100 feet from all property lines existing at the
time of permit. All buildings built for exclusive occupancy by animals
A.
Section 41 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 42
CHCT:1005
Section 43. Landscaping. [Ord. No. 2001.90, § 9, 10-16-2001]
and veterinary buildings shall be constructed of masonry to provide for
cleanliness, ease of maintenance, and noise control.
All pens, runs, or kennels and other facilities shall be designed,
constructed, and located on the site to minimize the adverse effects
upon the surrounding properties, and in no case less than 100 feet
from all property lines. Among the factors that shall be considered
are the relationship of the use to the topography, natural and planted
screening, the direction and intensity of the prevailing winds, the
relationship and location of residences and public facilities on nearby
properties, and other similar factors.
B.
The owner or operator of a kennel shall maintain the premises so that
no garbage, offal, feces, or other waste material shall be allowed to
accumulate on the premises. The premises shall be maintained in a
manner that they will not provide a breeding place for insects, vermin
or rodents.
C.
Temporary storage containers for any kennel or veterinary wastes
containing or including animal excrement shall be kept tightly covered
at all times, and emptied no less frequently than once every four days.
Such containers shall be made of steel or plastic to facilitate cleaning,
and shall be 100 feet from all property lines.
D.
If outdoor dog runs are created, they shall be completely fenced in, and
shall be paved with cement asphalt or a similar material to provide for
cleanliness and ease of maintenance.
E.
Any incineration device for burning excrement-soaked wastepapers
and/or animal organs or remains shall be located a minimum distance
of 250 feet from nearest residence other than the applicant's, and
shall have a chimney vent not less than 35 feet nor more than 50 feet
above the average ground elevation. The applicant shall also provide
evidence that he has obtained approval from the Maine Department
of Environmental Protection for the proposed incinerator, and that it
meets state standards for particulate emissions, flue gas temperature,
and duration of required flue temperatures.
F.
G. All other requirements of this ordinance shall also be observed.
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as
practical, by minimizing tree removal and grade changes in keeping
with the general appearance of neighboring areas. Landscaping shall
be designed to soften, screen, or enhance the physical design of
structures and parking areas to avoid the encroachment of the
proposed use on abutting land uses.
A.
Exclusive of the B-1 District, commercial and industrial uses shall
maintain the first 25 feet from the edge of the right-of-way (excluding
driveways) in front of all buildings, structures and impervious areas as
B.
Section 42 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 43
CHCT:1006
Section 44. Net density calculations. [Ord. No. 2000.68, 4-17-2001]
a green strip. The green strip shall consist of a maintained vegetated
area (e.g., lawn, garden, landscaped shrubbery), with a two-and-onehalf-
inch diameter or larger deciduous shade tree, spaced every 25 feet,
or a shrub, two to three feet in height, minimum, placed the equivalent
of one per 10 feet, along the green strip and parallel to the right-ofway.
In order to ensure proper visibility for entering and departing
vehicles, all driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual
obstructions higher than three feet above street level for a distance of
25 feet measured along the intersecting driveway and street lines.
All uses in the Institutional Zone shall maintain a landscaped green
strip in front of all buildings, structures, and parking lots adjacent to
any public street. The width of the green strip as measured from the
edge of the right-of-way shall be 40 feet for the Pool Road (Route 9)
and the new Hills Beach bypass road if such a road is constructed and
25 feet for all other public streets. This green strip shall be treated
and maintained as set forth in the approved institutional master plan
and may include pedestrian facilities and amenities such as walkways,
plazas, sitting areas, fountains, bus stops, passenger loading and
unloading areas, porticos information kiosks, and similar
improvements.
C.
The following factors shall be used for the purpose of determining the
net developable area of a parcel of land and the resulting number
of residential lots and/or units that can be created. Net density shall
be determined by subtracting unsuitable and marginal areas from the
gross area of the parcel. These factors shall apply to subdivisions of
land proposed within the City of Biddeford as follows:
Portions of the lot shown to be within the one-hundred-year
floodplain as identified by the Federal Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps or Federal Flood Insurance Rate Maps.
1.
Portions of the lot which are unsuitable for development in their
natural state due to topographical, drainage or subsoil conditions.
The following table shows the percentage of various soils which
shall be subtracted in calculating net residential density:
2.
A.
Section 43 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 44
CHCT:1007
Table 6-44
Lot Calculation Table
Excessively
Well-
Drained,
Well-
Drained,
and
Moderately
Well-
Drained
Somewhat
Poorly-
Drained*
Poorly
Drained,
and Very
Poorly
Drained*
Slopes
Greater
Than
33%**
Gravel Pits
(reclaimed)
With public
sewer (except
RF)
0% 0% 0% 50% 0%
No public
sewer
0% 50% 100% 50% 0%
NOTES:
* Soil classification by U.S. Soil Conservation Service. All
"poorly" and "very poorly" drained soils are unsuitable for onsite
sewage disposal under the Maine State Plumbing Code.
For determination of very poorly, poorly and somewhat poorly
drained soils, the following guidelines shall apply:
Soil determinations shall preferably be made using a highintensity
soils map prepared by a registered soils scientist
in accordance with the National Cooperative Soils Survey
Classification.
In cases where a high-intensity soils map is not required,
deductions for unsuitable soils shall be determined in the
following manner:
a. One hundred percent of land areas with a water table
within seven inches of the surface for three or more
months a year shall be deducted. In making this
determination, the Planning Board 1) may require the
applicant to submit a report from a registered soils
scientist or other person qualified to determine such data;
2) shall consult with the City Engineer; 3) shall consult
medium-intensity soils maps, perform a site visit and
review other available information.
b. If the applicant wishes to contest the Planning Board's
determination of unsuitable soils on the site using the
above method, the applicant may submit for the Board's
consideration a high-intensity soils map prepared by a
registered soils scientist in accordance with the National
Cooperative Soils Survey Classification.
Section 44 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 44
CHCT:1008
NOTES:
** Areas where this degree slope extends more than 200
continuous feet or covers an area totaling more than 20% of
the proposed lot area.
Portions of the lot subject to recorded rights-of-way, exclusive of
drainage or utility easements.
3.
Portions of the lot covered by surface waters, such as, but not
limited to ponds and wetlands as defined by Article XIV of this
ordinance. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
4.
Soils in the rural farm zone identified by the soils conservation
service as being of statewide significance, as prime agricultural
soils, and/or as unique soils. These soils are identified on a map
prepared by the Southern Maine Regional Planning Commission
based on soil conservation service data and available in the City
Planning Office, and are listed below:
Soil List
(Taken from map showing soils as developed by SMRPC from
OGIS and SCS Data)
Prime
agricultural
On, EmB BcB SkB MaB AlB
Prime if not
flooded
Po
Prime if
irrigated
CoB LnB CrB AdB
Prime if
drained
Ra BuB Ru
Primed if
drained and
irrigated
Na
Soils of
statewide
importance
BuC SeB AlC EmC
Soil Legend
The first letter, always a capital, is the initial letter of the soil
name. The second letter is usually a small letter but is a capital
letter if the unit is broadly defined. The third letter, A, B, C, D,
or E is the slope class. Most symbols without a letter for slope
class are for nearly level soils but four are for units containing
miscellaneous areas. The number 2 shows that the soil is eroded.
5.
Section 44 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 44
CHCT:1009
Symbol Name
AdB Adams Loamy sand, 0 to 8% slopes
AlB Allagash very fine sandy loam, 3 to 8% slopes
AlC Allagash very fine sandy loam, 8 to 15% slopes
BcB Becket fine sandy loam, 3 to 8% slopes
BuB Buxton silt loam, 3 to 8% slopes
BuC Buxton silt loam, 8 to 15% slopes
CoB Colton gravelly loamy coarse sand, 0 to 8%
slopes
CrB Croghan loamy sand, 0 to 8% slopes
EmB Elmwood fine sandy loam, 0 to 8% slopes
EmC Elmwood fine sandy loam, 8 to 15% slopes
LnB Lyman fine sandy loam, 3 to 8% slopes
MaB Madawaska fine sandy loam, 0 to 8% slopes
Na Naumburg sand
On Ondawa fine sandy loam
Po Podunk and Winooski soils
Ra Raynham silt loam
Ru Rumney loam
SeB Scio silt loam, 3 to 8% slopes
SkB Skerry fine sandy loam, 0 to 8% slopes
If this map indicates the presence of said soils on a parcel
proposed for development, or if in the opinion of the York County
Natural Resources Conservation Service such soils are likely to
be present, the Planning Board shall require a high-intensity soils
survey, or a report by a registered soils scientist or a registered
professional engineer experienced in geotechnics, in order to
determine the location and extent of said soils. To the greatest
extent possible, buildings shall not be sited on these soils.
6. Land within the Resource Protection Zone.
Land in the rural farm and coastal residential zones within the
prescribed setback within the Shoreland Zone as defined in Article
XIV of this ordinance. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
7.
8. Land consisting of unreclaimed extractive industry operations.
All lots created after subtracting the above areas shall comply with the
lot requirements established for the specific zone.
B.
Property owners in the Rural Farm Zone shall maintain the right to
convey house lots with a minimum lot size of one acre to blood relatives.
C.
Section 44 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 45
CHCT:1010
Section 45. Manufactured housing/mobile home parks. [Ord. No.
2004.45, 7-12-2004]
Manufactured Housing, General
Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all manufactured
housing to be located in the City of Biddeford or moved from one
part of the City to another.
A.
Permit requirements:
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall locate
a manufactured home in the City of Biddeford, or move a
manufactured home from one lot or parcel of and to another,
without a permit from the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector shall issue the permit within 10 days of receipt of
a written application and submission of proof that the
manufactured home meets the requirements of this ordinance.
1.
No person other than a dealer licensed by the State of Maine
with a sales tax certificate may construct or locate any new
manufactured housing within the City of Biddeford without
first providing a bill of sale indicating the name, address,
dealer license number and sales tax certificate number of the
person who sold or provided the manufactured housing to the
buyer locating the housing in Biddeford.
If no such bill of sale is presented, evidence of certification of
payment of the sales tax in accordance with Title 36 M.R.S.A.
§ 1760(40), and 36 M.R.S.A. § 1952-B must be provided.
2.
A mobile home shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes
unless it is properly placed on a permanent foundation and
connected to water, sewage/septic, and electrical utilities.
3.
B.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following
definitions shall be used. Any other terms shall be defined as
provided in Article II of the Zoning Ordinance:
Manufactured housing means a structural unit or units
designed for occupancy and constructed in a manufacturing
facility and transported, by use of its own chassis or an
independent chassis, to a building site. The term includes any
type of building which is constructed at a manufacturing
facility and transported to a building site where it is used
for housing and may be purchased or sold by a dealer in
the interim. For purposes of this section, two types of
manufactured housing are included. Those two types are:
Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly
called "newer mobile homes," which the manufacturer
certifies are constructed in compliance with the United
a.
1.
C.
Division
1.
Section 45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 45
CHCT:1011
States Department of Housing and Urban Development
standards, meaning structures transportable in one or
more sections, which in traveling mode are 14 body feet or
more in width and are 750 or more square feet, and which
are built on permanent chassis and designed to be used as
dwellings, with or without permanent foundations, when
connected to the required utilities including the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained in
the unit;
This term also includes any structure which meets all
the requirements of this subparagraph, except the size
requirements, and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary
of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established
under the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974, U.S. Code, title 42,
Section 5401 et seq.; and
b.
Those units commonly called "modular homes," ("state
certified manufactured homes") which the manufacturer
certifies are constructed in compliance with 10 M.R.S.A.
§ 9041 et seq., and rules adopted under that chapter,
meaning structures, transportable in one or more sections,
which may or may not be constructed on a permanent
chassis and are designed to be used as dwellings on
foundations when connected to required utilities,
including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning or
electrical systems contained in the unit.
c.
Mobile home park means a parcel of land under unified
ownership approved by the municipality under the City of
Biddeford Code, Chapter 66, Subdivisions, for the placement of
three or more manufactured homes.
Mobile home park lot means the area of land on which an
individual home is situated within a mobile home park and
which is reserved for the use by occupants of that home.
A municipality may require a lot to be designated on a
mobile home park plan.
a.
2.
Mobile home subdivision or development means a parcel of
land approved by the municipal reviewing authority under the
City of Biddeford Code, Chapter 66, Subdivisions, for the
placement of manufactured houses on individually owned lots.
3.
Permanent foundation means all the following:
For "newer mobile homes," as defined by the previous
Subsection C1a, a foundation that conforms to the
A.
4.
Section 45 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 45
CHCT:1012
installation standards established by the Manufactured
Housing Board.
For "modular homes," as defined by the previous
Subsection C1c, a foundation that conforms to the City of
Biddeford Building Code.
B.
Pitched, shingled roof means a roof with a pitch of two or more
vertical units for every 12 horizontal units of measurement
and which is covered with asphalt or fiberglass composition
shingles or other materials, but specifically excludes
corrugated metal roofing material.
5.
Prohibitions. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity shall
locate, or move from one lot or parcel of land to another, an older
mobile home, trailer, or manufactured home, built prior to June 15,
1976, which fails to meet the requirements of Subsection F below
unless legally located within Biddeford prior to August 4, 1988.
D.
Nonconforming structures. Mobile homes and trailers, and
manufactured homes which fail to meet the standards set forth
in Subsection F of this section, which were lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this section, shall be considered
nonconforming structures and may continue and may be
maintained, repaired, improved, and expanded in accordance with
the provisions of this ordinance related to nonconforming
structures.
E.
Manufactured housing standards.
All manufactured housing proposed to be located within the
City of Biddeford or relocated from one lot to another within
the City, and built prior to June 15, 1976, shall meet the
following safety standards:
a. City of Biddeford Building Code;
All electrical utilities shall comply with the National
Electric Codes.
b.
1.
All manufactured housing proposed to be located within the
City of Biddeford after August 4, 1988, shall meet the following
design requirements:
a. The minimum width shall be 14 feet.
All units shall contain a minimum living area of 750 square
feet.
b.
All units shall be on a permanent foundation as defined in
Subsection C4 above.
c.
2.
F.
Section 45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 45
CHCT:1013
All mobile homes shall be equipped with adequate skirting
to enclose the underside of the mobile home.
d.
All units shall have a pitched, shingled roof of not less
than two vertical units for every 12 horizontal units of
measurement.
e.
Exterior siding shall conform to any requirements for
exterior siding of site-built housing in the City of
Biddeford.
f.
Mobile Home Parks.
Applicability. Except as stipulated below, mobile home parks shall
meet all the requirements for a residential subdivision contained in
Chapter 66 of the Code, and shall conform to all applicable state
laws and local ordinances or regulations. Where the provisions of
this section conflict with specific provisions of the City of Biddeford
Ordinances the provisions of this section shall prevail.
A.
Permitted housing units. Mobile home parks, as defined, shall be
limited to the siting of manufactured housing meeting the
definition standards specified in Division 1C1(a) and (b) as such
refers to "mobile homes."
B.
Approval; inspections.
Mobile home parks shall be permitted after review and
approval by the Planning Board in those districts designated on
the Official Zoning Map of the City of Biddeford. The Planning
Board shall determine the adequacy of the design with respect
to lot layout, traffic circulation, water supply and sewage
disposal, and other features specified in this ordinance and in
the Subdivision Ordinance to assure conditions which preserve
the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants, the
surrounding neighborhood and the City generally. All mobile
home parks shall meet the minimum standards of the
manufactured Housing Board as well as the provisions of this
ordinance, effective at the date of application.
1.
Park owners shall be held responsible for the notification of the
Building Inspector to inspect new or replacement units being
placed in the park. Failure to notify the Building Inspector's
office for inspection, or the failure to receive a certificate
of occupancy (CO) shall be a violation of Chapter 18 of the
Code. Such violation shall be punishable under the terms of the
applicable chapter. In cases where the two chapters apply, the
stricter of the two shall apply.
2.
Owners of mobile home parks shall apply for a permit to
operate a mobile home park. This application shall be
submitted to the City Clerk's office. The application shall be
3.
C.
Division
2.
Section 45 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 45
CHCT:1014
submitted to the Building Inspector, the Fire Chief, and the
Health Officer for their investigation and recommendation.
This application shall be reviewed for approval by the
municipal officers based on the recommendation of the several
public officers. The municipal officers shall act upon the
application. Licenses granted by the municipal officers shall
be valid for two years, but in no case shall a license be
transferred. Failure to have a license renewed shall result in no
more certificates of occupancy being issued until such license
is renewed.
Permit: method of application and requirements. Applications shall
be submitted by the applicant or his/her agent as specified in the
Subdivision Ordinance. The applicant shall file with the application
proof of ownership of the premises or of a lease or written
permission from the owner thereof together with a complete set of
plans drawn to scale, by a professional engineer, or land surveyor,
registered with the State of Maine, showing the location of the
proposed park, and which includes:
1. Dimensions of park boundary lines.
2. Name of park, North arrow, date, and scale of plan.
Name and address of owner of record, and the name and
address of proposed park operator.
3.
Names of abutting owners of properties and the nature of
present use of abutting properties.
4.
Locations, names and widths of adjacent street and rights-ofway.
5.
Locations and dimensions of all roadways, walkways, public
areas, and reserved strips.
6.
Location and description of all existing or proposed buildings
or other permanent structures.
7.
Locations and dimensions of all proposed mobile home or
trailer spaces.
8.
Existing and proposed utilities, installations, service
connections from adjacent streets or properties and the
method of sewage disposal.
9.
10. Drainage plan.
11. Traffic impact analysis.
12. Open space management plan.
Park management plan. Each application for a mobile home
park shall have a park management plan. This plan shall state
13.
D.
Section 45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 45
CHCT:1015
in detail, besides the name, address and telephone number
of park owner and arrangements for daily contact of park
manager/operator, the rules of the park, schedule for park
maintenance, trash removal, road maintenance, security of the
park, etc.
Landscaping plan that includes details for buffer areas, open
space areas and entryways.
14.
Any other reasonable information required by the Biddeford
Subdivision Ordinance.
15.
Design requirements. Mobile home parks shall conform to the
following minimum requirements. These requirements shall be
shown on the park plan.
Lot area and lot width requirements. Notwithstanding the
dimensional requirements table located in Article VI, Section
6A of this section, lots in a mobile home park shall meet the
following lot area and lot width requirements.
Lots served by public sewer:
Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet
Minimum lot width: 50 feet
a.
Lots served by individual subsurface wastewater disposal
systems.
Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet
Minimum lot width: 100 feet
b.
Lots served by a central subsurface wastewater disposal
system approved by the Maine Department of Health and
Human Services.
Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet
Minimum lot width: 75 feet
c.
The overall density of any park served by any subsurface
wastewater disposal system shall not exceed one dwelling
unit per 20,000 square feet of total park area.
d.
Lots located within any shoreland zoning district shall
meet the lot area, lot width and shore frontage
requirements for that district.
e.
1.
Unit setback requirements.
On lots 10,000 square feet in area or larger, structures
shall not be located less than 15 feet from any boundary
lines of an individual lot. On lots less than 10,000 square
a.
2.
E.
Section 45 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 45
CHCT:1016
feet in area, structures shall not be located less than 10
feet from any boundary lines of an individual lot.
On lots which are located within a shoreland zoning
district, structures shall comply with all sections of Article
XIV, Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
b.
Buffering. If a park is proposed with a residential density at
least twice the density of adjacent development in existence,
or at least twice the density permitted in the zoning district
in which the park is located if the neighboring land is
undeveloped, the park shall be designed with a continuous
landscaped area not less than 50 feet in width which shall
contain no structures, driveways, utilities or streets. The first
25 feet of the buffer strip, as measured from the exterior
boundaries of the park shall contain evergreen shrubs, trees,
fences, walls or any combination which forms an effective
visual barrier to be located on all exterior lot lines of the park,
except that driveways shall be kept open to provide visibility
for vehicles entering and leaving the park.
3.
Open space reservation. An area no less than 10% of the total
area of those lots with a lot area of 10,000 square feet or less
shall be reserved as open space. The area reserved as open
space shall be suitable to be used for recreational purposes
or use by the residents of the park for storage. Generally, the
reserved open space shall have slopes less than 5% shall not
be located on poorly or very poorly drained soils, and shall be
accessible directly from roads within the park. The Planning
Board may waive the requirement for open space when the
park is located within 1/2 mile of a publicly owned recreation
area.
4.
Road design, circulation, and traffic impacts. Streets within a
park shall be designed by a professional engineer, registered
in the State of Maine.
Streets which the applicant proposes to be dedicated as
public ways shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for streets in the Biddeford
City Code, Chapter 62.
a.
Streets which the applicant proposes to remain private
ways shall meet the following minimum geometric design
standards.
i. Minimum right-of-way width: 23 feet.
ii. Minimum width of traveled way: 20 feet.
b.
Dead-end streets shall provide a suitable turnaround at the
closed end. In addition the following shall apply:
c.
5.
Section 45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 45
CHCT:1017
Any mobile home park expected to generate average
daily traffic of 200 trips per day or more shall have
at least two street connections with existing public
streets. Any street within a park with an average daily
traffic of 200 trips per day or more, shall have at
least two street connections leading to existing public
streets, other streets within the park, or other streets
shown on an approved subdivision plan. Trip
generation numbers will be determined by the latest
version of the publication "Recommended Guidelines
for Subdivision Streets" by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other acceptable
ITE manuals.
i.
A dead-end street shall not exceed in length a distance
of 1,500 feet, as measured along the proposed street
center line, from the end of the dead end road to
the outside edge of the traveled way of the nearest
intersecting through road.
ii.
Exceptions to the maximum dead-end lengths:
If an applicant can demonstrate (through a master
plan) that the street will be connected to create
a through street in future development, the
Planning Board may allow dead-end lengths to
temporarily exceed 1,500 feet.
a.
If a road loops back on to itself (i.e. lollipop or
p-shaped), it may exceed the standards above,
provided that the point at which the road loops
back onto itself as measured from the beginning
of the dead-end road is not more than 1,500 feet.
b.
iii.
No individual lot within a park shall have direct vehicular
access onto an existing public street.
d.
The intersection of any street within a park and an existing
public street shall meet the following standards.
Angle of intersection. The desired angle of
intersection shall be 90°. The minimum angle of
intersection shall be 75°.
i.
Maximum grade within 75 feet of intersection. The
maximum permissible grade within 75 feet of the
intersection shall be 2%.
ii.
Minimum sight distance. A minimum sight distance of
10 feet for every mile per hour of posted speed limit
on the existing road shall be provided. Sight distances
shall be measured from the driver's seat of a vehicle
iii.
e.
Section 45 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 45
CHCT:1018
that is 10 feet behind the curb or edge of shoulder
line with the height of the eye 3 1/2 feet above the
pavement and the height of object 4 1/4 feet.
Distance from other intersections. The center line of
any street within a park intersecting an existing public
street shall be no less than 125 feet from the center
line of any other street intersecting that public street.
iv.
The application shall contain an estimate of the average
daily traffic projected to be generated by all units within
the park units completed in an earlier phase of the mobile
home park development. Estimates of traffic generation
shall be based on the latest Trip Generation Manual,
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. If
the park is projected to generate more than 400 vehicle
trip ends per day, the application shall also include a traffic
impact analysis, by a registered professional engineer with
experience in transportation engineering.
f.
Groundwater impacts.
Assessment submitted. Accompanying the application for
approval of any mobile home park which is not served by
public sewer shall be an analysis of the impacts of the
proposed mobile home park on ground water quality. The
hydrogeologic assessment shall be prepared by a certified
geologist or registered professional engineer, experienced
in hydrogeology and shall contain at least the following
information.
i. A map showing the basic soils types.
The depth to the water table at representative points
throughout the mobile home park.
ii.
Drainage conditions throughout the mobile home
park.
iii.
Data on the existing ground water quality, either from
test wells in the mobile home park or from existing
wells on neighboring properties.
iv.
An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the mobile
home park on ground water resources. The evaluation
shall, at a minimum, include a projection of postdevelopment
nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any
wells within the mobile home park, at the mobile home
park boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from
potential contamination sources, whichever is a
shorter distance. For mobile home parks within the
watershed of a lake, projections of the development's
v.
a.
6.
Section 45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 45
CHCT:1019
impact on groundwater phosphate concentrations
shall also be provided.
A map showing the location of any subsurface
wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells
within the mobile home park and within 200 feet of the
mobile home park boundaries.
vi.
Standards for acceptable groundwater impacts.
Projections of groundwater quality shall be based on
the assumption of drought conditions (assuming 60%
of annual average precipitation).
i.
No mobile home park shall increase any contaminant
concentration in the groundwater to more than 1/2
of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. No mobile
home park shall increase any contaminant
concentration in the groundwater to more than the
Secondary Drinking Water Standards.
ii.
If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the
primary standards, and the mobile home park is to be
served by on-site groundwater supplies, the applicant
shall demonstrate how water quality will be improved
or treated.
iii.
If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the
secondary standards, the mobile home park shall not
cause the concentration of the parameters in question
to exceed 150% of the ambient concentration.
iv.
b.
Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking
water wells shall be constructed as shown on the map
submitted with the assessment. If construction standards
for drinking water wells are recommended in the
assessment, those standards shall be included as a note on
the plan.
c.
Conversion without approval. No development or subdivision
which is approved under this section as a mobile home park
may be converted to another use without the approval of the
Planning Board, and meeting the appropriate lot size, lot
width, setback and other requirements. The plan to be
recorded at the Registry of Deeds and filed with the
municipality shall include the following restrictions as well as
any other notes or conditions of approval.
The land within the park shall remain in a unified
ownership and the fee to lots or portions of lots shall not
be transferred.
a.
7.
Section 45 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 45
CHCT:1020
No dwelling unit other than a manufactured housing unit
shall be located within the park.
b.
Mobile Home Subdivisions and Developments Other Than Mobile
Home Parks.
Mobile home subdivisions and developments other than mobile
home parks shall meet the standards established under the Zoning
Ordinance and the Subdivision Ordinance. If provisions conflict,
the stricter standard shall prevail.
A.
Division
3.
Section 45 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 45
CHCT:1021
Section 46. Mausoleums and other burial structures.
SAMPLE MOBILE HOME PARK
(Not to Scale)
Sample Mobile Home Park
Buffer area would maintain the natural vegetation and be
landscaped as needed.
This section shall apply to the construction of mausoleums,
aboveground tombs, and other structures for burying, entombing, or
interment of the dead. This section shall not apply to single tombstones,
monuments, or grave markers.
A.
Section 45 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 46
CHCT:1022
Section 47. Multifamily developments. [Ord. No. 2006.13, 3-7-2006]
The Planning Board shall review developments under the standards of the
site review provisions of these ordinances, unless it is determined by the
Board that the standards of subdivision review should be utilized.
The Planning Board shall review plans for structures identified above.
The Board shall ensure that such structures meet any and all rules and
regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide
documentation clearly indicating that all provisions and regulations
have been complied with.
B.
The Board shall, upon review of documents and plans provided, and
determination that all regulations have been complied with, sign a plat
or statement certifying that it has reviewed plans and documents and
finds that to the best of its knowledge the proposed structure meets all
regulations and requirements.
C.
Applications.
Applications for approval shall include: a map of the area;
dimensions, boundaries and principal elevations of the land for
which approval is sought; the names of all property owners of
record within 200 feet of the proposed site and/or immediate
abutters and property owners across the street or stream; building
layout and general construction plans; a site plan of all driveways
and parking areas proposed to be constructed; and, other
information which addresses all appropriate performance
standards and design requirements and all appropriate factors to
be considered in evaluating proposals. All proposed multifamily
construction consisting of three or more units shall be submitted to
the Planning Board for review as a subdivision.
1.
A.
Design requirements.
General.
All multifamily dwellings shall be connected to a public water
supply and distribution system, at no expense to the City.
The applicant shall demonstrate by a signed letter from an
authorized representative of the Biddeford-Saco Water
Company that an adequate water supply can be provided to the
development at an adequate pressure for firefighting purposes.
(a)
Fire hydrants shall be located so that they are not more than
500 feet from any building, as hose is laid on the street.
(b)
All buildings shall be constructed according to all appropriate
state and City building standards.
(c)
1.
B.
Section 46 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 47
CHCT:1023
All dwelling units shall be provided or have an approved fire
alarm system installed pursuant to appropriate state and City
standards.
(d)
All residential buildings shall be connected to a public sewer
system. The applicant shall submit to the board a letter from
the Director of Public Works, Sewer Division, indicating that
service is available and the sewage from the development can
be adequately treated.
(e)
In developments of six or more dwelling units it shall be the
responsibility of the owner to provide for rubbish disposal,
snow removal, and site maintenance.
(f)
A group or common mailbox system shall be located on-site in
a convenient location so that it is accessible to all tenants or
residents. Such mailbox system and location shall be approved
by the local postmaster or his assigned representative.
(g)
Stormwater and drainage.
Stormwater and drainage shall be as per Article VI, Section 61,
Article XI (Site Plan Review) and Chapter 66 (Subdivisions).
1.
C.
Access, circulation, and parking.
The proposed development shall provide for safety access to and
from public or private roads. Safe access shall be assured by
providing an adequate number and location of access points, with
respect to sight distances, intersections, schools, and other traffic
generators. All corner lots shall be kept clear from visual
obstructions higher than three feet above ground level, for a
distance of 25 feet, measured along the intersecting street lines.
1.
The proposed development shall not have an unreasonable adverse
impact on the public road system as determined by existing level
of road service and post-development level of service (a detailed
traffic study may be required for this determination), and shall
assure safe interior circulation within its site, by separating
pedestrian and vehicular traffic and by providing adequate parking
and turnaround areas as set forth in the parking provisions of this
ordinance. Internal access ways be designed and constructed to the
minimum standards for a five-to-ten-lot private way (see Article VI,
Section 51), except that shoulders are not required where curbing
is installed. Accessways, however, do not need to be within a fiftyfoot
deeded right-of-way.
2.
All developments containing 15 or more dwelling units may be
required by the Board to have more than one street access (for
emergency and safety purposes). No more than two accesses shall
be allowed on any single street or roadway.
3.
D.
Section 47 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 47.1
CHCT:1024
Section 47.1. Municipal uses. [Ord. No. 2000.35, 5-2-2000]
Section 48. Noise.
Loud, uncontrolled noise, or other sounds is not conducive to a quality way
of life. All reasonable and technologically acceptable steps shall be taken
to reduce sounds to the lowest levels possible at the edge of the subject
property lines. Further:
All proposed municipal uses shall comply with dimensional
requirements of the underlying zone.
A.
All proposed municipal uses shall be subject to review under Article VII,
Conditional Uses, Article XI, Site Review, and all other sections of this
Zoning Ordinance as applicable.
B.
Excessive noise at unreasonable hours (between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.) shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence,
beat frequency, shrillness, or volume.
A.
The maximum permissible sound pressure level of any continuing,
regular or frequent source of sound produced by any activity regulated
by this ordinance shall be as established by the time period and type of
land use district listed below. Sound pressure levels shall be measured
at the lot lines at a height of at least four feet above the ground.
Table 6-48
Allowable Noise Levels
Sound pressure level limits measured in dB(A)s:
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m. 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
db(A) db(C) db(A) db(C)
Industrial
Districts
70 82 60 72
Business Districts 60 72 50 62
Other districts 55 67 45 57
Noise levels shall be further regulated by conditions and standards
outlined in Chapter 34, Article III, of the Biddeford Code of
Ordinances, as periodically amended.
B.
The levels specified may be exceeded by 10 dB(A) for a single fifteenminute
period per day. Noise shall be measured by a meter set on
the A-weighted response scale, slow response. The meter shall meet
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1961) American
Standard Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters.
C.
No person shall engage in construction activities on a site abutting any
residential use between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which
D.
Section 47.1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 48
CHCT:1025
Section 49. Off-street parking and loading. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4);
Ord. No. 2003.66, 7-1-2003; Ord. No. 2003.75, 7-15-2003; Ord. No.
2004.43, 7-12-2004; Ord. No. 2005.46, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 2008.53,
8-5-2008]
exceed those limits established for residential districts. Otherwise the
following activities shall be exempt from these regulations:
Noises created by construction and maintenance activities between
7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
1.
The noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency
pressure relief valves and any other emergency activity.
2.
3. Traffic noise on existing public roads, and railways.
Violation of this section shall be subject to the conditions and actions of
Chapter 34, Article III, of the Biddeford Code of Ordinances.
E.
General.
A permitted use in any district shall not be extended, and no
structure shall be constructed or enlarged, unless off-street
automobile parking space is provided in accordance with the
following schedule.
1.
Parking areas with more than two parking spaces shall be so
arranged that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into the street.
2.
No off-street parking area shall have more than two openings onto
the same street, each opening not to exceed 26 feet in width.
3.
Required off-street parking for all land uses shall be located on
the same lot as the principal building or facility or within 400
feet measured along lines of access. Such parking areas shall be
held under the same ownership or lease, as the uses served, and
evidence of such control or lease shall be required, provided that
all leases shall be for a minimum of three years.
4.
Off-street parking and loading spaces for nonresidential uses,
where not enclosed within a building, shall be effectively screened
from view by a continuous landscaped area not less than nine feet
in height along exterior lot lines adjacent to residential properties
and all public roads, except that driveways shall be kept open to
provide visibility for entering and leaving. No off-street parking and
loading shall be permitted within the front setback or any setback
adjoining a public street, except as specifically authorized in this
ordinance.
5.
Exterior lighting shall not create glare into any residential use or
street.
6.
A.
Section 48 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 49
CHCT:1026
The Board may approve the joint use of a parking facility by two or
more principal buildings or uses where it is clearly demonstrated
that said parking facility would substantially meet the intent of
the requirements by reasons of variation in the probable time of
maximum use by patrons or employees of such establishments.
7.
Parking garages, where permitted, shall be subject to the
dimensional requirements for structures in the zone in which they
are located.
8.
Parking spaces shall be provided as required and made available
for use prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
9.
The existing landscape shall be preserved in its natural state
wherever possible. Side and rear yards on lots in nonresidential
districts which abut a residential district shall be landscaped to
provide a visual screen between districts. Parking lots shall be
landscaped with a continuous border of shrubbery along all lot
lines abutting residential properties. Large parking lots covering
more than 1/4 acre shall be provided with deciduous shade trees
designed to reduce solar heating in the summer and provide for
windbreaks. All parking or outdoor storage areas shall be
separated from a public road by a landscaped buffer strip at least
15 feet wide, planted with shade trees a minimum two inches
diameter at breast height and dense medium height shrubs to
screen parked vehicles. All such planting shall be maintained as an
effective visual screen. Shrubs or trees which die shall be replaced
within one growing season.
10.
Main Street Revitalization Districts and W-2 Zone parking
requirements—General. (None of A1-A10 of this section applies to
MSRD Zones or the W-2 Zone, and any requirement under Article
VI (Performance Standards), Section 49 (Off-street parking and
loading) may be waived by the Planning Board upon request of an
applicant. The applicant must demonstrate that the waiver request
is necessary due to existing conditions and would serve a useful
purpose.) [Amended 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.41]
Parking areas with more than two parking spaces shall be so
arranged that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into the
street.
(a)
No off-street parking area shall have more than two openings
onto the same street, each opening not to exceed 26 feet in
width.
(b)
Off-street parking and loading spaces for nonresidential uses,
where not enclosed within a building, shall be effectively
screened from view by a continuous landscaped area not less
than nine feet in height along exterior lot lines, except that
driveways shall be kept open to provide visibility for entering
(c)
11.
Section 49 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 49
CHCT:1027
and leaving. No off-street parking and loading shall be
permitted within the front of a building unless the applicant
can prove that there is no other alternative.
Exterior lighting shall not create glare onto the street or onto
or into residential properties. Lighting fixtures shall be in
concert with the existing historic lighting on Main Street.
(d)
A parking facility may be jointly used by two or more principal
buildings or uses where it is clearly demonstrated that said
parking facility would substantially meet the intent of the
requirements by reasons of variation in the probable time of
maximum use by patrons or employees of such establishments.
(e)
Parking spaces shall be provided as required and made
available for use prior to the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
(f)
The existing landscaping shall be preserved in its natural state
wherever possible. Parking lots shall be landscaped with a
continuous border of shrubbery along all lot lines. Large
parking lots covering more than one quarter of an acre shall
be proposed with a landscape plan stamped by a licensed
landscape architect. The plan should include plantings in
coordination with the City's arboretum, if possible. Except
where screening is provided, parking areas should be designed
and landscaped to avoid long, uninterrupted rows of vehicles.
Parking lots containing more than 30 spaces shall be broken
into separate parking areas by the use of landscaped islands,
pedestrian and bicycle areas and/or buildings.
(g)
Additional requirements for commercial and industrial establishments.
Access points from a public road to commercial and industrial
operations shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and
to avoid generating traffic on local access streets of a primarily
residential character.
1.
All parking areas shall be located off the street so that vehicles can
be turned around within such areas without backing into the street.
2.
All parking areas, driveways and other areas subject to vehicular
traffic shall be paved with bituminous concrete or an equivalent
surfacing over a gravel subbase at least five inches in thickness,
and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where needed.
3.
All driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual
obstructions higher than three feet above street level for a distance
of 25 feet measured along the intersecting driveway and street
lines in order to provide visibility for entering and leaving vehicles.
4.
B.
Section 49 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 49
CHCT:1028
All yards abutting or across a street from a residential use or
property shall be continuously maintained in lawn or other
landscaping unless screened from the residential use.
5.
Parking and loading areas for commercial establishments shall be
located at the side or rear of the principal building as much as
possible.
6.
Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the
building or use to be served so that trucks, trailers, and containers
shall not be located for loading or storage upon any City street.
Specific loading requirements are listed below:
The following minimum off-street loading bays or berths shall
be provided and maintained in the case of new construction,
alterations, and changes of use.
Office buildings, hotels, and motels with a gross floor area
of more than 100,000 square feet require one bay.
(i)
Retail, wholesale, warehouse and industrial operations
with a gross floor area of more than 5,000 square feet
require the following:
Square Feet Number of Bays
5,001 to 40,000 1
40,001 to 100,000 2
100,001 to 160,000 3
160,001 to 240,000 4
240,001 to 320,000 5
320,001 to 400,000 6
(ii)
Each 90,000 square feet over 400,000 square feet requires
one additional bay.
(iii)
(a)
No loading docks shall be on any street frontage. Provision for
handling all freight shall be on those sides of any buildings
which do not face on any street or proposed streets.
(b)
7.
The Board may waive any of the above requirements based on
evidence presented by the developer that public health, safety and
welfare is best served by a design other than one that conforms to
all of the following requirements.
8.
Parking lot design criteria (not applicable to single-family dwellings and
duplexes).
Vehicular entrance and exit.
Entrances and exits shall be clearly identified by the use of
signs, curb cuts, and landscaping.
(a)
1.
C.
Section 49 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 49
CHCT:1029
Entrance/exit design shall be reviewed by and be in
conformance with the standards of the Maine Department of
Transportation traffic personnel for size, location, sight
distance, grade separation, and possible future changes in
highway alignment on any affected public roads.
(b)
Interior vehicular circulation.
Major interior travel lanes shall be designed to allow
continuous and uninterrupted traffic movement.
(a)
Painted arrows and/or elevated signs shall be used as
necessary to define desired circulation patterns.
(b)
Customer/employee and service traffic shall be separated to
the greatest extent possible.
(c)
One-way travel lanes may be used as a traffic control device in
conjunction with roadway dividers.
(d)
Enclosures, such as guardrails, curbs, fences, walls, and
landscaping, shall be used to identify circulation patterns of
parking areas and to restrict driving movements diagonally
across parking aisles, but not to reduce visibility of oncoming
pedestrians and vehicles.
(e)
2.
Parking.
Access to parking stalls should not be from major interior
travel lanes, and shall not be immediately accessible from any
public way.
(a)
Parking areas shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle
to proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles.
(b)
Parking aisles shall be oriented perpendicular to stores or
businesses for easy pedestrian access and visibility.
(c)
All parking spaces and access drives shall be at least five
feet from any side or rear lot line, except for the additional
requirements in buffer yards.
(d)
Lighting of parking areas may be required at the discretion
of the governing body. All artificial lighting used to illuminate
any parking space or spaces shall be so arranged that no
direct rays from such lighting shall fall upon any neighboring
property or streets.
(e)
Parking stalls and aisle layout shall conform to the following
standards:
(f)
3.
Section 49 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 49
CHCT:1030
Table 6-49A
Parking Stall Size
Parking
Angle
(degrees)
Stall
Width
Skew
Width
Stall
Depth
Aisle
Width
90 9 feet 0
inches
N/A 18 feet 0
inches
24 feet 0
inches
60 8 feet 6
inches
10 feet 5
inches
18 feet 5
inches
16 feet 0
inches oneway
45 8 feet 6
inches
12 feet 9
inches
17 feet 0
inches
12 feet 0
inches oneway
30 8 feet 6
inches
17 feet 0
inches
16 feet 5
inches
12 feet 0
inches
Painted stripes shall be used to delineate parking stalls.
Stripes shall be a minimum of four inches in width. Where
double lines are used, they shall be separated a minimum of
one foot on center.
(g)
In aisles utilizing diagonal parking, arrows shall be painted on
the pavement to indicate proper traffic flow.
(h)
Bumpers and/or wheel stops shall be provided where overhang
of parked cars might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through
roads, restrict pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways, or
damage landscape materials.
(i)
Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided for places of
public accommodation, as defined in 5 M.R.S.A. § 4553, in
accordance with the requirements of 5 M.R.S.A. § 4594 (one
clearly marked space for every 25 spaces), or comply with the
ADA Standards for Accessible Design (28 CFR Part 36) ADA
Design Guide 1 — Restriping Parking Lots "Minimum Number
of Accessible Parking Spaces" Table.
(j)
Parking spaces shall be provided to conform to the number
required in the following schedule. Where a proposed use
does not fall clearly into one of the listed activities, the Board
shall determine the activity, which most closely resembles the
proposed use, and the proposed use shall comply with the
parking standards of that category.
The Planning Board may reduce the off-street
requirements of proposals in the MSRD Zones and the W-2
Zone:
(1)
(k)
Section 49 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 49
CHCT:1031
Where legal on-street parking is located within 1,000
feet of a nonresidential use and the Board determines
that this parking will be available to meet some or all
of the parking demand.
a.
Where publicly supplied off-street parking is located
within 500 feet of a nonresidential use and the Board
determines that this parking will be safe, convenient,
and available to meet some or all of the parking
demand.
b.
Where it is clearly demonstrated that the parking
demand will be lower than that established by this
section and that the reduction will not detract from
neighborhood property values, inconvenience the
public, or increase congestion on adjacent streets.
c.
For the reuse or redevelopment of a parcel if the
Planning Board determines that the new use will not
significantly increase the demand for parking
compared to the former use.
d.
If the Planning Board determines that the demand
for parking will be less than the standard because
some customers/users will walk or take alternative
transportation to the site.
In these cases, the owner of the property seeking
the reduction or his/her representative shall be
responsible for providing documentation to the
Planning Board substantiating the reduced parking
demand or alternative supply.
e.
In applying or modifying the parking standards for any
proposed use, the Planning Board shall consider:
No portion of any lot which is used to satisfy the front
yard requirements of this ordinance shall be used for
parking for any commercial or industrial use.
a.
Parking spaces shall be sufficient to accommodate the
nonresidential use during a typical week.
b.
The likelihood of people walking or bicycling to the
proposed use and the number of bicycle racks
proposed. The Board shall consider any plan by the
applicant to make the site more appealing for
pedestrians and bicyclists.
c.
d. The size of the structure and the site.
The environmental, scenic, or historic sensitivity of
the site (including applicable limitations on
e.
(2)
Section 49 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 49
CHCT:1032
impermeable surfaces). In cases where sufficient area
for parking cannot be created on the site without
disturbance to these resource values, the board may
require a reduction in the size of the structure so that
the available parking will be sufficient.
f. The availability of on-street parking.
Availability of off-site off-street parking that is open
to the public, owner or controlled by the applicant,
or available on a shared unit basis. Availability of
accessible satellite parking shall also be considered.
g.
Accessibility to public transit facilities such as public
bus stations or routes, or scheduled bus services to
the site.
h.
Other standards used in generally accepted traffic
engineering and planning manuals.
i.
Parking requirements for residential and related uses.
These requirements may be waived for applications that
involve dwelling units with less than 1,000 square feet of
floor area, senior citizen housing, single bedroom dwelling
units, efficiency dwelling units and studio apartments.
These requirements may also be waived if the applicant
can demonstrate that all required parking can be
accommodated through mixed use development, shared
parking or other situations deemed acceptable.
(3)
All new buildings or redevelopment of existing buildings
in the MSRD districts shall include a parking plan with
a bicycle and pedestrian circulation plan component. The
plan shall show the locations where bicycles and
pedestrians are likely to travel both into the site and within
it. The parking plan shall be designed to provide safe
pedestrian and bicycle access, and shall proposed
improvements necessary to link pedestrian and bicyclists
from identified points outside of the development.
The parking plan shall delineate bicycle-parking
facilities. Such facilities shall be located as close as
possible to the principal building. The provision of
bicycle parking may be used to offset the number of
automobile spaces required.
a.
Pedestrian pathways shall be provided within and
between parking areas and between buildings, and
other parking areas.
b.
(4)
Section 49 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 49
CHCT:1033
All applications with parking plans containing 10 or
more new parking spaces shall provide sidewalks on
portions of their frontage that abut a public road.
c.
Off-street parking stalls provided in excess of the minimum
requirements as set forth in Table 6-49B, Parking Space
Requirements, may be designated for compact car use. These
designated spaces shall be clearly identified with signage for
"Compact Cars Only", shall be 90° angles only, and shall not be
less than eight feet by 16 feet.
Table 6-49B
Parking Space Requirements
[Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
Activity Minimum Required Parking
Amusement centers 1 space for every two
amusement devices
Art studio 2 spaces/1,000 square feet of
floor area
Automobile repair garages
and body shops and gasoline
filling stations
5 spaces for each bay or area
used for repair work
Bank, credit unions 1 space/150 square feet of floor
area
Barber/beauty shop 4 spaces/chair/work station/
employee area
Building material storage
and sales
1 space for each 500 square
feet of floor area
Bed-and-breakfast, motel,
hotel, inn, rental cabin(s),
housekeeping cottage(s), or
rental cottage(s)
1 space for each sleeping room
or dwelling unit and for every 2
employees on the largest shift
Church, synagogue 1 space for every 3 seats in the
largest assembly room. When
individual seats are not
provided, each 20 inches of
benches or similar seating shall
be considered as 1 seat for the
purpose of this section
Child-care facility 1 space for every 4 children
facility is licensed to care for
Distribution center 1 space/2,000 square feet of
floor area plus 1 space per
employee on the maximum
working shift
(l)
Section 49 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 49
CHCT:1034
Table 6-49B
Parking Space Requirements
[Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
Activity Minimum Required Parking
Flea market 3 spaces/table
Funeral homes 1 space for every 100 square
feet of floor space
Home occupations Same as for "mixed use"
Hospitals, nursing homes,
congregate care facilities
1 space for every 3 beds and 1
for every 2 employees on the
maximum working shift
Industrial businesses 1 space/employee on the
maximum working shift
Library, museum, art gallery 1 space for each 500 square
feet of floor space
Marina 1 space for each ship or
mooring
Medical offices (MDs, ODs,
dentists)
5 spaces for each doctor,
dentist, or other medical
practitioner
Mixed use Total of individual uses
Office buildings, business
services
1 space for every 200 square
feet of floor area
Private clubs or lodges 1 space per every 75 square
feet of floor space
Recreational assembly
places, e.g., dance halls,
nonprivate entertainment
facilities
1 space for each 75 square feet
of floor space
Commercial recreation
facility, fitness spa
1 space for each 100 square
feet of floor area
Residential 2 spaces per dwelling unit (1 if
designed exclusively for, and
occupancy is restricted to
Restaurant 1 space/3 seats
Retail businesses, and
personal services businesses
1 space for every 300 square
feet of floor space
Schools:
Primary 1.5 space per classroom
Secondary 1/4 space per student
Section 49 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 49
CHCT:1035
Section 50. Preservation of landscape/natural vegetation.
Table 6-49B
Parking Space Requirements
[Amended 4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.24]
Activity Minimum Required Parking
Postsecondary 1/4 space for each student and
1 space for each faculty and
staff member
Commercial school (dancing,
arts, ceramics)
1 space/50 square feet floor
area
Self-storage Minimum 5 spaces, or 1 space/
50 bays and/or units,
whichever is greater
Theater, hall, auditorium 1 space for every 3 seats
Veterinarian clinic, kennel,
animal hospital
5 spaces/veterinarian
Warehouse and storage 1 space/2,000 square feet floor
area plus 1 space per employee
on the maximum working shift
Wholesale business 1 space/1,000 square feet floor
area plus 1 space per employee
on the maximum working shift.
NOTES:
1. Where the calculation of the aforementioned parking
spaces results in a fractional part of a complete parking
space, the parking spaces required shall be construed to
be the next highest number.
2. The above are minimum standards, and additional parking
spaces may be required to meet the purposes and intent of
these provisions.
3. Where floor space is to be used in calculating the number
of required parking stalls, gross floor space shall be used
unless otherwise noted.
The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as
practicable, by minimizing tree removal; and any grade changes shall
be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed
areas.
A.
Plans presented to the Board shall have annotated in the note section
specific measures to be taken to preserve natural vegetation.
B.
Section 49 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 50
CHCT:1036
Section 51. Private ways and roads. [Ord. of 2-4-1997(2); Ord. of
6-2-1998(2); Ord. No. 2003.15, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 2003.76,
7-15-2003]
Limits of a private way: The road beginning from the edge of the traveled
way of a public road and all associated sub roads that spur off from this
road. The portion of the private way within the public right-of-way shall be
built according to public street standards. Maintenance of this right-of-way
area shall be the responsibility of the homeowner's association.
Plans presented to the Board shall have a detailed landscaping plan,
indicating the type and number of trees, shrubs or other plantings that
will be placed on the property. The plan shall clearly show the location
of each type of planting (this does not necessarily require specific siting
of each single planting). The landscaping plan shall bear the seal of a
landscape architect licensed in the State of Maine.
C.
The Board may require special bonding or letter of credit or other form
of security to ensure that required landscaping will be performed and
maintained. Such bonding as may be required shall not be in force for
more than three years from date of approval.
D.
No building permit shall be issued to erect a structure on a lot lacking
frontage on a public way unless a private way meeting the following
criteria has been approved by the Planning Board and constructed
within a deeded right-of-way, no less than 50 feet in width. The land
within the right-of-way of an approved private road shall not be used
to meet the area requirements of any lot obtaining its frontage from
the private road. The creation of a private road shall not reduce the
frontage, lot area, or other dimensional requirements of an existing
conforming lot below that required by the zone in which it is located nor
reduce the frontage, lot area, or other dimensional requirements of an
existing nonconforming lot. Driveways to corner lots shall gain access
from the street of lower classification when a corner lot is bounded by
streets of two different classifications. The restriction shall appear as a
note on the plan and as a deed restriction. Also, the lots legal frontage
shall be determined by this requirement.
A.
See schedule of fees (located in Attachment A of this Code) for
associated costs for development. Fees are required for review of plans,
and inspection of work. A performance guarantee will also be requested
by the City for all associated roadway work.
B.
For private road construction standards see Table 6-50. The private
way shall have drainage, ditches and culverts at all appropriate points
according to Subsection E of this section, stormwater management.
Gravel surfaces will be allowed for roads servicing up to four lots,
or reclaimed asphalt may be used in lieu of the base gravel course
as shown in Table 6-50. For roads with five to 10 lots, the roadway
will require paving as shown in Table 6-50. Any private way serving
more than 10 lots shall meet the public road design and construction
C.
Section 50 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 51
CHCT:1037
standards for the City of Biddeford (Chapter 62). Each lot shall have the
minimum required feet of frontage on a private way as set forth in the
City's Zoning Ordinance requirements.
The construction of the private way shall follow the requirements
stated in Chapter 62, Sections 62-127 through and including 62-137.
The City Planner, Code Enforcement Officer, City Engineer and Fire
Department shall review and may approve the use of a private way in
accordance with Table 6-50 requirements in order to provide access
and frontage to no more than three lots provided that the project does
not entail a subdivision review. If a proposed private way is to provide
access to more than three lots, or if staff members are not unanimous
in their approval of the proposed private way, the Planning Board shall
review and may approve the proposed private way in accordance with
the following provisions:
A plan showing the private way shall be prepared by a registered
professional engineer. The plan shall be labeled "plan of a private
way" and shall provide an approval block for the signatures of the
board members. The plan shall delineate the proposed way and
each of the lots to be served by the private way. A copy of the
signed standard boundary survey of the roadway shall be included
in the package. Monumentation of the roadway is required. See
public street standards, Section 62-87, for details.
1.
A street plan and an erosion control plan is required for a single
lot private way. A street plan, cross section, erosion control, utility
plan, and drainage plan shall be submitted for each private way
serving two or more lots. The utility plan should contain the
following information: locations and size of existing and proposed
utility connections, including sewer, water, power, telephone,
stormwater drainage systems, power poles, light poles, and nearest
hydrant(s).
Adequate light shall be provided on all streets. The number
and location of all streetlights shall be installed according to
the following guidelines: in urban areas, the lights shall be
located at all intersections and on every other pole, in nonurban
areas lights shall be located at all intersections and to
service three homes. For overhead power, type and size of
streetlights to be determined by public works. If underground
power is used, the applicant needs to coordinate with the
engineering department for City standard light fixtures and
poles.
A note on the plan shall state, "The City of Biddeford shall
not be responsible of the cost of materials, installation,
maintenance, or power for the streetlighting. The
homeowner's association shall assume all costs associated
with the lighting system."
a.
2.
D.
Section 51 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 51
CHCT:1038
Lots shall conform to zoning requirements for size, frontage, and
setbacks for the area in which they are located.
3.
The plan shall bear notes that the City of Biddeford will not be
responsible for the maintenance, repair, or plowing of the private
way and that further lot divisions utilizing the private way are
prohibited without prior approval of the board.
4.
Prior to Planning Board approval, the applicant shall submit a
street name to the 911 coordinator to determine if the street name
is acceptable for the 911 system.
5.
If the private way is to provide access to two or more lots, a
maintenance agreement shall be required by the board and
recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds. The maintenance
agreement shall specify the rights and responsibilities of each lot
owner with respect to the maintenance, repair and plowing of the
private way. If the road is not in good condition in the judgment
of the Fire Department, the parties to the maintenance agreement
may be notified that the road needs repair and that the City may
discontinue emergency services.
6.
Private ways need to be inspected by the City's engineering staff
during the construction process. Failure to include the City in
reviewing the construction may result in the City's dismissal of any
attempts to make the private way a public road at a later date.
If the owner did not include the City's staff in the construction
process and wished to have the road accepted as a public road
at a later date, the owner would need to hire at the owner's
expense a registered civil engineer to inspect the roadway and
to certify that the road has been constructed according to City
standards. This certification (stamp) would need to be submitted
to the committee responsible for capital projects and then the
City Council for final acceptance. The proposed public road must
comply with the requirements stated in Chapter 62 of this Code,
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places. If the road does not
meet the requirements of Chapter 62, then the road will need to be
upgraded to the point that it would be eligible for recommendation
to the Council for acceptance as a public road. All costs and work
for such improvements to bring the road up to public standards
shall be borne solely by the developer or lot owners.
7.
All private roads need to have a paved apron access to the public
road it extends off from. Table 6-50 states the minimum lengths
required based on number of lots. The paved apron shall conform
to public road standards for minor residential streets. The road
shall be constructed such that a grade of ±3.0% from the existing
edge of pavement will allow the generated flows to be handled by
the drainage system.
8.
Section 51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 51
CHCT:1039
The construction of private ways shall meet the following minimum
standards:
Table 6-50
Private Roads Construction Requirements1
Number of Total Lots Served by Road
Requirements153 Gravel 2 Gravel
3 to 4
Gravel
5 to 10
Paved6
More
than 10
Minimum
roadway
travel width
(feet)
124 16 20 2011 See Note
7
Minimum
shoulder
width
(gravel) each
side (feet)
2 2 2 211 See Note
7
Sidewalk
width9 (feet)
N/A 5 5 5 See Note
7
Maximum
roadway
grade10
10% 8% 8% 8% See Note
7
Minimum
roadway
grade
1.0% 1.0% 1.0% 1.0% See Note
7
Roadway
crown
(inches per
feet)
3/8 3/8 3/8
gravel, 1/
4 paved
1/4 See Note
7
Maximum
dead-end
length (feet)
2,000 1,500 1,500 1,500 See Note
7
Minimum
center-line
radius (feet)
150 150 150 150 See Note
7
Minimum
entrance
radius
(curbed or
gravel) (feet)
Note 8 30 30 30 See Note
7
Minimum
paved apron
(feet)
40 40 50 50 See Note
7
9.
Section 51 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 51
CHCT:1040
Table 6-50
Private Roads Construction Requirements1
Number of Total Lots Served by Road
Requirements153 Gravel 2 Gravel
3 to 4
Gravel
5 to 10
Paved6
More
than 10
Turnaround
at dead-end
Hammer
head or T
Hammer
head or
T
Hammer
head or T
Hammer
head or
T
See Note
7
Stormwater
drainage
approval
City
Engineer
City
Engineer
City
Engineer
City
Engineer11
See Note
7
Subbase
course (heavy
gravel)
MDOT Type
D (inches)
18 18 18 18 See Note
7
Base course
(crushed
gravel MDOT
Type A, or
reclaimed
asphalt)
(U.N.O)
(inches)
2 4 4 4 (no
reclaim)
See Note
7
Hot
bituminous
pavement2:
Total
thickness
required
(inches)
N/A N/A 3 1/4 3 1/4 See Note
7
Base course,
MDOT B-mix
(inches)
N/A N/A 2 2 See Note
7
Surface
course,
MDOT C-mix
(inches)
N/A N/A 1 1/4 1 1/4 See Note
7
NOTES:
U.N.O. = Unless Noted Otherwise
All materials to meet specified current MDOT standards. (Refer to
MDOT Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges.)
Section 51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 51
CHCT:1041
NOTES:
1 These provisions may be subject to Chapter 62 (Streets and
Sidewalks) of this Code.
2 In accordance with Section 62-131, Paving of the City of
Biddeford Code.
3 No profile necessary, however finish elevations along the road
center line shall be shown on the plan view. A benchmark must
be designated on the plan.
4 One turnout to provide space for two vehicles to pass shall be
provided for every 500 feet of the private way.
5 All horizontal road geometries shall comply with the Chapter
62 (Streets and Sidewalks) of this Code.
6 Paving: The surface coat shall not be placed sooner than one
year after the base coat has been placed unless the
engineering office considers this acceptable or a maintenance
guarantee for 150% of the roadway construction costs is
posted for a period of at least one year after the surface coat is
placed.
7 Follow design requirements based on Chapter 62, Section
62-81, Definitions, and Section 62-129, Table A.
8 See "Driveway Aprons and Curb Cuts" Chapter 62, Section
62-111 for requirements.
9 The criteria for determining whether or not to have a sidewalk
on a private street shall be made on the basis of if there is
an existing sidewalk within a one-thousand-foot radius of the
project site, the developer will need to create a new sidewalk
from the end of the existing sidewalk a length equivalent to the
length of the proposed private way. If the developer chooses,
they may wish to give the City the equivalent monetary value
for the project for the City to undertake.
10 Exceptions to the maximum road grades listed above are as
follows:
(a) Within 75 feet of an intersection the road grade shall be no
greater than 3%.
(b) Roads with slopes greater than 8% (up to a maximum of
14%) have to increase the level off distance by 25 feet for
each percent over 8% at intersections.
11 For roads built in the urban area as defined in Chapter 62
(Streets and Sidewalks) the public road requirements are
eleven-foot travel lane widths, three-foot shoulders and
subsurface drainage.
Pavement joints: Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the
existing pavement shall be sawcut along a smooth line to form a
neat, even, vertical joint.
10.
Section 51 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 51
CHCT:1042
Turnaround: A hammerhead or T-turnaround shall be constructed
to comply with the applicable standards of this section, and the
perpendicular cross piece of the "T" shall have the same width as
its associated road, and shall extend a minimum of 40 feet to either
side of the center line of the dead-end street. The cross piece of the
"T" shall be located within a fifty-foot wide right-of-way that shall
extend at least 20 feet beyond the ends of the pavement. No lot may
be accessed from either ends of a hammerhead or a T-turnaround.
Culs-de-sac may also be used for turnarounds. See Chapter 62,
Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places for requirements.
11.
The applicant will provide a stop sign and street name sign meeting
City specification at the intersection with the public street, located
per the City's ordinance.
12.
Driveways widths shall comply with requirements stated in
"Driveway Aprons and Curb Cuts" Chapter 62, Section 62-111.
13.
Intersection requirements: See Chapter 62, Section 62-104,
Intersections.
14.
The plan shall be recorded in the York County Registry of Deeds
within 30 days of the date of the Planning Board approval. If the
plan is not recorded within this time period, the approval of the
Board shall be null and void.
15.
In reviewing requests for approval of private ways under this
subparagraph, the Board shall apply such standards and criteria,
and may impose such conditions, as are applicable to conditional
uses.
16.
The owner, or owners, shall convey, where applicable, to the City
an easement, described by metes and bounds, for sewer purposes
over the entire right-of-way and shall record the easement in the
York County Registry of Deeds.
17.
Existing private roads or projects previously approved by the
Planning Board before the enactment of the revised code sections
dated January 13, 2003, shall be exempt from those changes.
However, if an extension to a private road is requested, land is
to be subdivided with access to an existing private road, or a
dwelling unit is added to an existing private road, an application
must be submitted to the Planning Board for approval. If it is
deemed that the existing road is not suitable for expansion or
increased traffic, the applicant will need to upgrade the road to
the appropriate private road standards.
18.
After a private way has been approved by the Board, no further
lots shall be created which are to be provided access by means of
the private way without the prior approval of the Board. Where a
proposed subdivision is on a private way approved by the Board,
19.
Section 51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 51
CHCT:1043
a copy of the approval shall be submitted with the subdivision
application.
Stormwater management. In order to preserve rural natural resources
and keep construction costs down, the City of Biddeford will require the
developer to implement a stormwater management plan utilizing lowimpact
water collection structures.
For roads serving five or less lots, or roads located within cluster
subdivisions, vegetative buffers and swales shall be utilized. However,
if there are extenuating circumstances that do not afford the use
of vegetative structures (land slope, wetland protection, neighboring
properties, etc.), and the applicant's engineer has proven that there
are no other reasonable alternatives, the Planning Board will work
with the applicant to determine the best means of stormwater
management.
For roads serving greater than five lots, traditional stormwater
structures may be used, although if feasible, vegetative structures
should be incorporated.
The following information is from the Maine DEP Best Management
Practices "Stormwater Management For Maine" Section 6.2
"Vegetative BMPs" (Nov. 95). Refer to the most current version of
this source for further information. Applicant shall be responsible for
meeting current standards.
6.2.1 Vegetative Buffer:
Design criteria. References to "Table 6-1": For buffer removal
efficiencies see this table in the most recent version of the MDEP Best
Management Practices.
1. Maximum contributing drainage area: The length of the vegetated
buffer should be at least as long as the runoff flow path across the
contributing drainage area. The depth, or buffer width referred to
in Table 6-1, of the buffer strip should not be more than 250 feet
in length without an intervening level spreader.
2. Maximum slope: Must be less than 30% to be included in the
calculation of buffer width. Areas with slopes greater than 30% are
too steep to be effective as a treatment buffer but should be left
undisturbed. The optimum slope for effective treatment is around
1%.
3. Distribution of runoff over the buffer: To be treated, runoff must
enter the buffer as sheet flow and cannot be allowed to channelize.
Buffers will not treat shallow concentrated or channelized flow.
Runoff should be distributed across the buffer strip so that the
maximum flow velocities are well below one fps. The maximum
allowable Q10 velocity should be less than three fps (Galli, 1993).
E.
Section 51 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 51
CHCT:1044
4. Restabilization of buffers used for sediment control during
construction: If a buffer has been used to trap sediment during
construction, sediments shall be removed and buffer will be
regraded and the top of the buffer will be reseeded.
5. Pretreatment for buffers with "bare soil" contributing areas: To
prevent a heavy sediment loading from damaging the buffer, sites
that will have areas of bare soil for a long time can not utilize this
BMP without first pretreating the runoff with a sediment control
BMP.
6. Buffer width (length): The recommended minimum buffer width is
25 feet (Maine DEP, 1992). Only continuous width may be counted
when calculating buffer width. Maximum buffer width (length) is
250 feet.
7. Provision of ditch turnouts: Turnouts should receive no more than
one cfs of peak flow during a storm event. If the peak flow is
greater than one cfs, the spacing between turnouts should be
reduced so that the peak flow from each turn-out's drainage area
is less than 1.0 cfs. The following formula can be used to find the
peak flow from a drainage area to a ditch turnout (Maine DEP,
1992):
Peak Flow = (Impervious area in ft2)(0.000139) + (pervious area
in ft2)(0.000069)
The turnout should extend into the side ditch or cut slope in
a manner that it intercepts the ditch runoff and carries it into
the buffer area. The buffer end of the turnout must be level or
equipped with a level spreader such as a shallow stone trench to
promote sheet flow. Refer to Erosion and Sediment Control for
Construction (MDEP, 1991) for level spreader designs.
Use Table 6-1 to determine the treatment factor of the buffer by
measuring the length the road runoff travels through the buffer
continuously or, in cases where the runoff parallels the road, until
the runoff encounters the next ditch turnout.
8. Buffer vegetation: For buffer strip design and practice in Maine,
the following vegetation designations are suggested to be utilized:
a. Wooded: Example of a wooded buffer is shown in Figure 6.3.
b. Non-wooded: Fields or reverting fields, as well as forested
areas where more than 40% of the timber has been harvested
in the past 10 years or where ground cover or leaf litter has
been disturbed. When mowed the height should be cropped to
not less that six inches.
c. Seeded: Mowed lawns or seeded or sodded areas previously
disturbed by construction activity. An example of a seeded
buffer is shown in Figure 6.3.
Section 51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 51
CHCT:1045
Refer to the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook
(Maine DEP, 1991) for appropriate seed mixtures and
application methods for seeded buffers.
Figure 6.3: Schematic of a Seeded and Wooded Buffer Strip
Maintenance of the buffer. The Planning Board will require the
applicant to submit a maintenance agreement and a maintenance
schedule for the buffer. These items need to be approved of by the
Board as part of the project.
Maintenance requirements for buffers can be reduced by managing
them as undisturbed, natural areas. Wooded buffers should be
maintained as specified in Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds
(Maine DEP, 1992) (pp. 60-62).
1. Mowing: Four to six inches of dense grass cover or natural
vegetation, and the area should receive the minimum fertilizer
application needed to maintain the grass in a healthy condition.
Fertilizer use should be in accordance with the Maine Erosion and
Sediment Control Handbook (Maine DEP, 1991) and BMP 7.2 (Me
DEP BMP Stormwater).
2. Inspection frequency: Annually. All eroded areas should be
repaired, seeded and mulched. A shallow stone trench should be
installed and maintained as a level spreader to distribute flows
evenly in any area showing concentrated flows.
Section 51 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 51
CHCT:1046
3. Access and use: Buffers should not be traversed by all-terrain
vehicles or other vehicles. Activities within buffers should be
conducted so as not to damage vegetation, disturb any organic
duff layer, and expose soil.
6.2.2 Vegetative Swale:
Design criteria.
1. Soils: Underlying soils should have a high infiltration rate (at least
1.0 inches/hour).
2. Channel design: The channel should be designed for low velocity
flow. A velocity of one fps is the maximum design storm flow
velocity recommended when vegetated swales are being designed
as a BMP. Higher velocities might be permissible for channel
stability, but could result in resuspension of settled particulates.
The maximum allowable Q10 velocity should be less than three
fps. Flow depths in the swales should be minimized to increase
the amount of vegetative filtering and settling. A maximum design
flow depth of one foot is suggested. The minimum width of the
flat bottom of a trapezoidal channel shall be at least three times
the channel depth. Non-trapezoidal channels should have similar
depth to width relationships.
The grade of the channel should be as flat as possible, and
preferably less than 2% (MPCA, 1989). Channels should be
designed for capacity and stability in accordance with Erosion and
Sediment Control BMP 36.0 of the Maine Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook for Construction (1991).
3. Infiltration and sedimentation enhancement: The hydrologic
performance of vegetated swales can be improved if check dams
are used to temporarily pond runoff (see swale with check dams
BMP).
4. Vegetation: Vegetation for swale linings should be selected based
on soils and hydrologic conditions at the site, in accordance with
applicable erosion and sediment control BMPs described in the
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for Construction.
Recommended grasses include Ky-31 tall fescue, reed canary
grass, redtop, roughstalked blue grass, and mixtures thereof
(Galli, 1993).
5. Construction considerations: Construct and stabilize the waterway
in advance of any other channels or facilities that will discharge
into it.
Maintenance of the buffer. The Planning board will require the
applicant to submit a maintenance agreement and a maintenance
schedule for the buffer. These items need to be approved of by the
Board as part of the project.
Section 51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 51
CHCT:1047
Routine maintenance should include: the immediate repair of newly
formed channels or gullies, reseeding/sodding of bare spots, removal
of trash, leaves and/or accumulated sediments, and the control of
woody or other undesirable vegetation. Swales must be maintained to
remove fine sediment if their infiltrative capacity is to be maintained.
In addition, the buffer strip may require periodic mechanical aeration
to restore infiltration capacity. This aeration must be done during
a time when the area can be reseeded and mulched prior to any
significant rainfall. It is important to install erosion and sediment
control measures to stabilize this area as soon as possible and to retain
any organic matter in the bottom of the trench. Routine fertilization
and/or use of pesticides is strongly discouraged. A minimum mow
height of six inches is generally recommended (Galli, 1993).
Vehicular traffic should be excluded from the waterway. The area
should be inspected for failures following heavy rainfall and repaired
as necessary. If complete re-seeding is necessary, half the original
recommended rate of fertilizer should be applied with a full rate of
seed.
6.2.3 Swales with Check Dams:
Design criteria.
1. Soils: Swales with check dams should not be located on soils
with a final infiltration rate (f) less than 1.0 inches per hour. The
recommended depth to seasonal high groundwater or bedrock is a
minimum of two feet.
2. Channel design: The design storm channel velocity should be no
greater than one fps, and the maximum Q10 velocity should be
less than three fps. The grade of the channel should be less
than 5%, but preferably less than 2% for maximum storage and
effectiveness. Channels should also be designed for capacity and
stability in accordance with Erosion and Sediment Control BMP
36.0 of the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Handbook for
Construction (1991).
Channel side slopes shall not exceed 3 (horizontal): 1 (vertical) for
seeded or sodded slopes, or 2:1 for riprap slopes, although the
channels may be vee-shaped, parabolic, or trapezoidal (Maryland,
1984).
If underdrains are provided under the swale, there should be a
minimum of two feet of "soil" between the bottom of the swale and
the top of the drainpipe.
Section 51 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 51
CHCT:1048
Figure 6.4: Examples of Check Dam Swales and Railroad Tie
Swales
3. Check dam design: The check dam should be constructed of
durable rock or rock-lined material so that it will not erode. The
area just downstream of the check dam should be protected from
scour with properly designed rock riprap or protective channel
lining. The check dam may have a solid level surface integrated
into it for added durability as shown in Figure 6.4.
Check dam heights are generally six to 12 inches, depending
on channel slope and desired storage capacity. The check dams
should be notched or ported to allow the flows in excess of their
infiltrative capacity to be bypassed. Check dams should be
designed so that the water ponded behind them will infiltrate in 12
hours or less (Galli, 1993).
Section 51 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 51
CHCT:1049
Section 52. Office buildings.
Section 52A. Office residential zones. [Ord. No. 2003.4, 1-21-2003]
Maintenance of the buffer: The Planning Board will require the
applicant to submit a maintenance agreement and a maintenance
schedule for the buffer. These items need to be approved of by the
board as part of the project.
Grassed waterways need to be checked regularly to repair erosion
problems, remove accumulated debris, and to check the condition and
integrity of the check dams.
The level of sediment deposition in the channel should be monitored
regularly, and removed from grassed channels before permanent
damage is done to the grassed vegetation, or if infiltration times
are longer than 12 hours. Sediment should be removed from riprap
channels when it reduces the capacity of the channel.
For roads and driveways within Shoreland and Resource Protection
Areas, additional design standards apply to these projects. See Article
XIV, Shoreland Zoning, Section 15-H for requirements.
For stream crossings, DEP permits must be obtained prior to Planning
Board approval.
F.
Parking for professional offices shall be located to the side or rear of the
building, and shall be screened from view from all streets and abutting
residential properties.
A.
All outdoor lighting shall be directed in such a manner as to avoid
"overspill" onto abutting residential properties, or glare into the street.
B.
The conversion of an existing building or structure to a nonresidential
use shall be allowed only if within an existing residential or converted
residential structure in order to retain the essential residential
character of the neighborhood.
1.
The conversion or expansion of an existing building or structure to a
nonresidential use shall be allowed only if there is adequate off-street
parking to meet the requirements of Article VI, Section 49, Off-Street
Parking and Loading, of this ordinance and a maximum of 3,600 square
feet of commercial space.
2.
Parking shall be located on the rear of the property, and may only be
allowed on the side if the applicant demonstrates that this is the only
location where the parking lot can be built due to the uniqueness of the
lot.
3.
Parking areas on corner lots shall not be placed between the principal
building and frontage(s). If the lot is used only for parking, no parking is
allowed in the setback and all setbacks must be the maximum required
4.
Section 51 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 52A
CHCT:1050
for that zone. Access to a parking area on a corner lot shall be off the
less traveled frontage.
Off street parking areas for more than three vehicles and loading
spaces, as may be required, shall be totally screened from the view of
the adjoining property by trees, shrubs, fences and other landscaping
materials. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely
to arise, physical screening sufficient to deter small children from
entering the premises shall be provided.
5.
Shared parking and driveways are encouraged to limit curb cuts and
maintain architectural continuity. The width of driveways shall be kept
to the minimum requirement.
6.
In areas where existing buildings have an established uniform setback
from the street, any new building or modification to an existing building
shall maintain this established relationship as set forth in Article V,
Section 4 of this ordinance.
7.
Any required side or rear yard area for uses other than residential
located within 30 feet of a residential lot or a residential zoning district
shall be maintained as a buffer area meeting the standards of Article
VI, Section 12, Buffers.
8.
The proposed use shall use vegetation, fencing, walkways which are
compatible with the predominant character of the neighborhood in size,
scale and material.
9.
The landscaping shall be preserved in its existing state, insofar as
practicable, by minimizing tree removal. Any grade changes shall be
in keeping with the general appearance of the neighboring residential
properties.
10.
The proposed use shall be provided with sufficient setbacks and/or
screening to provide a visual and sound barrier sufficient to minimize
any adverse impacts on other uses in the neighborhood.
11.
All outdoor lighting shall be shielded to avoid overspill onto abutting
residential properties, or glare into the street. The style of the light
fixtures and standards shall be consistent with the architectural style of
the residences in the neighborhood.
12.
Lighting with a lumen output equal to or greater than a two-hundredwatt
mercury light shall not be directed towards the sky or adjacent
properties. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or hooded so that the
lighting elements are not exposed to normal view by motorists,
pedestrians or from adjacent dwellings.
13.
Signs must conform to the standards as outlined in Article VI, Section
59B, except the sign may be illuminated between the hours of 5:00
p.m. and 10:00 p.m. EST. No flashing or rotating signs are permitted,
14.
Section 52A CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 52A
CHCT:1051
Section 53. Primary and secondary schools, fraternal organizations,
and not-for-profit clubs. [Ord. No. 2001.45, 5-16-2001]
Schools, fraternal organizations and not-for-profit shall be permitted as a
conditional use in accordance with the provisions below:
Section 53A. (Reserved)102
Section 54. Recreational vehicles.
and direct illumination shall not exceed 1/2 of one footcandle upon the
abutting residential properties.
Exterior alterations shall be minimized and shall be related to the
existing terrain and to existing residences in the neighborhood. The
height of the addition to existing buildings shall be comparable to
the average height of the existing residential buildings in the
neighborhood.
15.
New construction must be architecturally similar to the existing
residential buildings in the neighborhood, including the height, bulk
and facades of the building. For instance, front porches, shutters and
windows, roof shape, building scale, and building placements at even
angles with existing residential buildings.
16.
17. Outdoor storage is prohibited.
Proposals to locate in the office residential district shall be subject to
site plan review.
18.
A. The buffers standards of this ordinance shall be met.
B. No building shall be closer than 50 feet from any property line.
When adjacent to residential properties, parking areas and outdoor
activity areas shall be effectively screened from view by a continuous
vegetative barrier, or stockade fence, not less than six feet in height.
C.
A recreational vehicle may be stored or parked on a residential lot as
an accessory use to a dwelling unit subject to the following standards:
Unoccupied recreational vehicles less than 24 feet in length shall
either be stored inside a garage or other structure or shall be
located so as to meet the front setback requirements for the district
where located and so as to be at least 10 feet from the side or rear
lot lines.
1.
Unoccupied recreational vehicles 24 feet or more in length shall
either be stored inside a garage or other structure or shall be
2.
A.
102. Editor's Note: Former Section 53A, which contained provisions on universities, colleges
and university uses, adopted 5-16-2001 by Ord. No. 2001.45, was repealed 1-21-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003.4.
Section 52A BIDDEFORD CODE Section 54
CHCT:1052
Section 55. Refuse disposal.
The disposal of all solid and liquid wastes shall be provided for on a timely
basis and in an environmentally safe manner. The impact of the disposal of
industrial or chemical wastes or by-products on groundwater and surface
water quality shall be considered by the Planning Board and Building
Inspector in reviewing applications for subdivision, site review, conditional
use and building permits. The disposal of such wastes shall be made at
an environmentally acceptable location and shall be in accordance with
all applicable local, state, and federal requirements, including the permit
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection.
Section 56. Restaurants. [Ord. of 8-3-1993(1); Ord. No. 2006.13,
3-7-2006]
1.
a. The following provisions address restaurants, whether year-round
or seasonal, seat down or takeout, building or mobile. Subsections A
through E refer to nonmobile food service operations. Subsection F
addresses mobile food service operations.
b. For the purpose of this section, the term "restaurants" shall be
divided into three categories:
(1) Establishments in permanent buildings;
(2) Establishments in mobile units, either towed or self-propelled,
preparing and serving food products on a particular site; and
(3) Establishments in mobile units, either towed or self-propelled,
serving prepared food products, and traveling to selected
locations on a daily basis, and remaining on-site for limited
time periods, i.e. during lunch breaks, etc. Such units are often
referred to as catering services or food services.
located between the rear lot line and the rear setback line of the
dwelling unit. Such recreational vehicles shall comply with side
setback requirements of the district where located and shall be set
back at least 10 feet from the rear property line.
No recreational vehicle stored as an accessory use to a dwelling
unit under this subsection shall be occupied during such storage.
3.
Guests of residents of the City of Biddeford who are traveling in or
with a recreational vehicle may occupy that recreational vehicle on
the land of said residents of Biddeford, but only on a completely
temporary basis not to exceed seven days in any ninety-day period.
4.
The application for a permit shall state the maximum seating capacity
of the restaurant. Any expansion or enlargement over the stated
capacity shall require a new permit, and shall comply with setbacks,
square footage, and all other requirements of this ordinance.
A.
Section 54 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 56
CHCT:1053
Any restaurant located within 500 feet of an existing public sewer line
shall connect with the sewer system at the expense of the owners.
When subsurface sewage disposal is proposed, completed soil
evaluation forms (HHE-200) shall be submitted. All proposed
subsurface disposal systems shall meet the requirements of the Maine
State Plumbing Code.
B.
All parking and loading facilities shall be located to side or rear of
the building, and shall be screened from abutting residential lots.
Screening shall be comprised of a continuous landscaped area not less
than eight feet in width, containing evergreen shrubs, trees, fences,
walls, berms, or any combination, forming a visual barrier not less than
six feet in height. In the Rural Farm Zone, the parking and loading
facilities shall also be screened from all public roadways.
C.
D. (Reserved)
Storage and disposal of refuse, fuel, and other potentially hazardous
materials shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard, rodent
harborage, insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards, or air
pollution. Areas where such activities occur shall be effectively
enclosed and screened by safety fences, walls, or any combination
thereof.
E.
Mobile food service operations shall comply with the State of Maine
rules relating to eating and lodging places, as periodically amended,
and shall require a victualer's permit from the municipal officers.
Further, mobile food service operations, preparing food on-site,
unless permanently connected to public utilities and approved by
the Planning Board, shall not be left on-site or displayed, or left in
public view, in the location of business during nonbusiness hours,
unless otherwise conditioned by the City Council in their specific
permit/licensing process.
a.
The Building Inspector shall review mobile food service operations,
preparing food on-site, to ensure, as a minimum, the following:
The placement of the vehicle:
Shall not hinder vehicular traffic or cause traffic
congestion; and
a.
b. Shall not hinder, or interfere with, pedestrian traffic; and
Shall not block or otherwise hinder access to or from
private property; and
c.
Shall not adversely impact on abutting properties in
regards to:
(1) Noise.
d.
1.
b.
F.
Section 56 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 56
CHCT:1054
Section 57. Sandblasting.
(2) Odor, fumes or smoke.
(3) Light and glare.
The operator shall have written permission from the property
owner to locate the vehicle on said property.
2.
The operator shall have available, and under written
agreement, at least three off-street parking spaces. In cases
where on-street parking is available immediately in front, the
operator must have one off-street parking space for any vehicle
belonging to an employee working on a given shift.
3.
The operator shall provide at least one fifty-five-gallon
covered trash receptacle, or similar sized container, to
hold wastes and debris. No paper, food or other wastes
shall be allowed to accumulate on-site.
a.
The waste container shall be emptied at least daily into
an approved commercial dumpster (it being emptied by a
licensed hauler on a regular basis) or other suitable and
approved means of transport away from the site. It shall be
the responsibility of the operator to ensure that all wastes
are handled and disposed of properly.
b.
4.
The operator shall ensure that there is an adequate supply of
potable water for cleaning equipment and the preparation of
foods.
5.
The operator shall ensure that there is an adequate and safe
source of electrical power.
6.
The operator shall ensure that all storage of food supplies and
other business material is within the vehicle or other container
secured to the vehicle. No loose material shall be permitted
outside of the vehicle.
7.
There shall be no signs placed on sidewalks or other rights-ofway.
No temporary or mobile signs shall be allowed.
8.
The trailer, or vehicle, being used shall be in good upkeep and
provide a neat appearance.
9.
No person, owner, occupant or contractor shall sandblast any structure
in the City without first obtaining a building permit.
A.
No sandblasting shall be permitted within 100 feet of a public way or
sidewalk except behind a protective cover over the structure or part
being sandblasted. Protective covers shall be of nonflammable material
and of sufficient strength and texture to prevent the escape of sand,
B.
Section 56 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 57
CHCT:1055
Section 58. Subsurface wastewater disposal and sludge spreading.
[Ord. of 3-5-1991(2)]
dust and other particles onto or over public ways and sidewalks. There
shall be filters to protect the public from exposure to the operations.
If any sand should escape onto any public way or sidewalk, said
sandblasting shall cease immediately until the protective cover is
tightly secured, and all sand is cleaned up outside the cover on the
public way or sidewalk.
C.
The Building Inspector shall have the authority to temporarily block off
all or part of a public way or sidewalk in instances where a building is
so close to a public way or sidewalk that there is insufficient room to
erect a protective covering around a building without encroaching upon
a public way or sidewalk.
D.
All areas sandblasted that are of brick and mortar shall be covered
with a protective sealer that will prevent deterioration of the brick
and mortar, as a result of the hard exterior surface being removed or
damaged from sandblasting.
E.
The hours of operation for sandblasting shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. during weekdays, and shall be prohibited during weekends,
unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board.
F.
Subsurface wastewater disposal systems.
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules (rules).
The minimum setback for new subsurface sewage disposal
systems shall be no less than 100 horizontal feet from the
normal high-water line of a perennial water body, such as a
lake, pond or year-round stream, and wells or other drinking
water supplies.
1.
Replacement systems shall meet the standards for the
replacement systems as contained in the rules.
2.
A.
Any lot proposed shall have a separate soils test and HHE-200 form
prepared by a licensed site evaluator. Disposal system locations
shall be indicated on plats presented to the Building Inspector or
Planning Board.
The certified plumbing inspector (LPI) of the City of Biddeford
shall be present when test pits are being dug to ensure that the
pit meets all standards and that the pit is filled after digging to
avoid a potential safety hazard.
1.
Further, the LPI shall be notified prior to placement of any
tanks or leach field. He shall be present to verify installation.
2.
B.
I.
Section 57 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 58
CHCT:1056
In the case that the LPI is not available, the Building Inspector
may observe.
3.
Not exclusive of Subsection B above, common or shared disposal
systems may be allowed by the Planning Board upon presentation
of detailed plans approved by the Maine Department of Health and
Human Services, Division of Health Engineering, and documents
detailing plans and agreements for system maintenance.
C.
Sewage and industrial sludge spreading (including land spreading of
contaminated soils as defined by Maine Department of Environmental
Protection).
The City of Biddeford recognizes the advantages that the spreading
of selected sludges has for agricultural lands. The City also realizes
that this spreading can pose problems for abutting property
owners. The City of Biddeford therefore requires that any proposal
for the spreading of sewage or industrial sludge, or contaminated
soils be reviewed by the Planning Board prior to permitting by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). This review
will allow for public input and allow concerns to be presented to the
applicant and the DEP prior to any action by the State Department.
A.
Any proposed spreading or storage of sewage or industrial sludge,
or contaminated soil, shall submit an application to the City
planning office. The Planning Board shall schedule a site review of
the application within 30 days of receipt of the application.
B.
Ten copies of the application shall be submitted. Such application
shall include:
A narrative description of proposed spreading operation to
include:
a. The application submitted to DEP.
1.
C.
The City Planner shall provide copies of the DEP application to the
City Engineer and the City's environmental specialist for review
and comment. These comments shall be submitted to the Planning
Board and shall be made part of the permanent record for the
application.
D.
The Board may conduct a public hearing concerning the
application. The Bureau of Remediation and Solid Waste
Management, Division of Solid Waste Management, shall be
notified of the meeting.
E.
The Bureau of Remediation and Solid Waste Management, Division
of Solid Waste Management, shall be notified of the board's
decision concerning the application. In the case of a negative/
disapproval of the application, a copy of the findings of fact and
supporting materials shall be forwarded along with the decision.
F.
II.
Section 58 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1057
Section 59. Signs. [Ord. of 8-17-1991; Ord. of 9-3-1996; Ord. of
3-4-1997; Ord. of 2-3-1998(2); Ord. of 6-1-1999(2); Ord. No.
2001.90, § 10, 10-16-2001; Ord. No. 2003.66, 7-1-2003; Ord. No.
2003.77, 7-15-2003; Ord. No. 2006.49, 8-1-2006; 4-16-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013.26; 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.113]
Purposes. The purposes of these sign regulations are to encourage the
effective use of signs as a means of communication in the City; to
maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the City's ability
to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve
pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse impacts
of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair
and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
A.
General regulations for all districts.
Sign permits. No signs, other than exempt signs as listed in
Subsections B13 and B14 below, shall be erected, altered,
enlarged, or replaced except as provided in this ordinance. No
person, firm, corporation, or organization shall erect, enlarge, or
replace a sign without a sign permit issued by the Code
Enforcement Office in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance. All sign permit applications shall include a drawing
showing dimensions, types of materials to be used, and type and
intensity of illumination (if applicable). If the applicant for a sign
permit is not the owner of the property on which the sign is to be
located, the owner's approval must be obtained prior to submission
of a permit application.
1.
Nonconformity. Any sign existing at the time of adoption of this
ordinance but exceeding the specified standards or otherwise not
meeting these requirements shall be considered a nonconforming
sign. No sign shall be altered, changed, enlarged or replaced
unless it is in conformance with existing regulations, except as
permitted in Subsection B3. A nonconforming sign damaged or
destroyed by fire, wind, or any cause other than the willful act
of the owner or agent may be reconstructed as before if such
construction is performed within six months of such casualty.
2.
Modification, replacement, or relocation. A permit may be obtained
from the Code Enforcement Office to modify existing
nonconforming signs. Except for landmark signs, which are given
special consideration Subsection B18 of this ordinance, the Code
Enforcement Office shall be limited in its power to issue permits
under this heading in that:
No sign shall be altered such that it is not in compliance with
this section, except that:
A sign may be repaired and maintained to preserve its
function and attractiveness; and
(1)
a.
3.
B.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1058
Sign boards may be changed out to reflect changes in the
business for which the sign serves or change of occupancy
for which the sign serves.
(2)
b. No existing nonconforming sign shall be increased in size.
No sign shall be relocated unless the sign is in conformance
with the requirements outlined herein for such location.
c.
Maintenance.
All signs and sign structures shall be properly maintained
and kept in a neat and proper state of appearance. Signs
found with missing letters or otherwise indicating a lack of
maintenance or upkeep shall be considered "in a state of
disrepair."
a.
Where permits are required, sign permits are issued upon the
assumption of complete liability in writing by the person or
firm for any damage resulting from the sign.
b.
All signs of any type which are found by the Code Enforcement
Office to be in a state of disrepair or are considered dangerous
shall be repaired or removed on order from the Code
Enforcement Office. Upon failure to comply with this order
within the time specified in the order, the Code Enforcement
Office is hereby authorized to cause removal of this sign, and
any expense resultant thereto shall be borne by the owner of
the business or, if the business owner cannot be reasonably
located, by the owner of the building to which the sign is
attached. In any case where the Code Enforcement Office must
notify a business operator that a sign is in disrepair, the
property owner shall be notified.
c.
4.
Unused signs.
In order to maintain public safety and avoid visual blight, signs
advertising, or otherwise announcing, activities or products no
longer on site shall be removed.
a.
Signboards for businesses which have closed or relocated shall
be removed by the property owner within 30 days from the
date the accompanying use is. A nonconforming, unused sign
with no signboard advertising a bona fide occupancy, or any
portion of the sign structure or support thereof that is
nonconforming, shall be removed within one year of nonuse.
b.
Signs which are not used may be taken down by the City,
or designated agents of the City, provided that the property
owner has not first reutilized the sign. The cost of such
notification and removal by the City or its designated agents
shall be billed to the property owner.
c.
5.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1059
Construction and installation.
Signs to be securely fastened. All signs and any other awnings,
shades, marquees or other structures extending over a
sidewalk or public road or way shall be constructed in a
structurally sound manner and, if erected above ground level,
shall be securely fastened or supported in a manner
satisfactory to the Code Enforcement Office to restrain
swinging, oscillation or other movement that would endanger
people or property.
a.
Professional installation. Where permits are required,
construction and installation of all signs shall be by qualified
professional sign makers with experience in the trade.
Qualifications and examples of work may be required to be
submitted at the Code Enforcement Office's discretion.
b.
6.
On-premises signs. All signs shall relate to the premises on which
they are located and shall only identify the occupant of such
premises or advertise the services available within said premises,
except for those exempted in Subsection B13.
7.
Prohibited signs and displays. The following signs and displays are
prohibited in the City of Biddeford:
Off-premises signs, except those signs specifically exempted in
Subsection B14.
a.
Moving signs: signs with visible moving, revolving, or rotating
parts or visible movement of any description, except for socalled
"barber poles."
b.
Optical illusions: signs which create the effect of optical
illusion.
c.
Roof signs: signs mounted wholly or in part on any roof or
above the highest exterior point of any building. This does not
include signs that are an integral part of the roof structure or
are part of the roofing material.
d.
Fluorescent or phosphorescent painted signs: signs using any
kind of paint which causes the sign to glow in the dark.
e.
Temporary and/or portable signs which fail to meet standards
for setback, size, lighting, and use requirements of the district
in which they are located, except those signs otherwise
exempted in Subsection B13 and 14 and as provided for in
Subsection C, below.
f.
g. Neon signs, unshielded, except for permitted window signs.
8.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1060
Blinking, flickering, flashing, or rotating signs other than those
that conform to Section B16 of this ordinance as electronic
message centers.
h.
Animated-type signs, being any sign that uses movement or
change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or
scene.
i.
Strings of lights: strings of lights, with the exception of special
occasions be they religious, civic or national, and not to exceed
45 days with the approval of the Code Enforcement Office.
j.
Bare bulbs: bare bulbs, with the exception of time/temperature
signs and theater marquees.
k.
Large window signs: signs posted in windows (including door
windows) covering more than 20% of window area, but in
any event not to exceed four square feet. See Subsection A15
below for additional window sign regulations.
l.
m. Inflatable signs.
Sexually explicit signs, being any sign that, by way of images,
words or otherwise, is obscene as defined by M.R.S.A. Title 17,
Section 2911, or which depicts a nude or seminude male or
female, meaning a state of dress in which genital, pubic area,
buttocks, anal cleft, or nipple and areola of the female breast
are less than completely and opaquely covered, are prohibited.
n.
Measurement of sign area: Use the area of the smallest plane
rectangle, circle, triangle or combination thereof that will wholly
contain the sign, including any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the sign, or used to differentiate
the sign from the structure against which it is placed, but does
not include supporting posts or any structural elements outside the
limits of such perimeter which do not form an integral part of the
display.
Wall signs: The above method shall also be used to measure
wall signs, which are signs painted on the surface of a wall,
or attached parallel to and are no more than 15 inches from
a wall. Note: When extending over sidewalks or public ways,
wall signs shall not extend more than eight inches from a wall.
a.
Hanging signs (double-faced), which are signs attached to and
projecting from a building other than a wall sign. Use the
above method for only one side of the sign.
b.
Three-dimensional signs: Using the above method, calculate
the projected area of both the front view and one side view of
the sign; then use 1/2 of the total of these areas.
c.
d. Awning signs:
9.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1061
For opaque awnings, sign area is measured using the
above method and shall be considered part of the
allowable sign area, except that only those sections which
incorporate writing, symbols, emblems or other types of
graphics used for the purposes of identification or
advertisement shall be included in computing sign area.
Street names and numbers shall not be considered to be
signs for the purposes of this section, unless a business
located within the building has the street name and/or
street number as its name.
(1)
For awnings that are translucent and internally
illuminated and that incorporate any message, trademark
or symbol, the sign area shall be computed as the twodimensional
projection of the awning onto the face of the
building on which the awning is to be installed. Such
awnings which wrap around the building corner(s) shall be
treated as separate awnings on each respective building
face and shall be considered as signs if they include any
message, trademark or symbol. Internally illuminated
bands shall be permitted across the building face without
being included in the calculations under this subsection,
provided such bands do not include any message,
trademark or symbol and that the bands do not exceed
three feet in height.
(2)
Where only a portion of the awning is translucent and
internally lit, only the area of the translucent, illuminated
portion shall be included in computing sign area, unless
any message, trademark or symbol appears on the opaque
portion(s) of the awning. Opaque portions of these
awnings shall be computed in accordance with Subsection
B9d(1) above.
(3)
External illumination. In all zones where externally lit signs are
allowed the illumination shall be by steady, stationary, shielded
light sources directed solely on the sign in such a manner as to not
cause glare for motorists, pedestrians, or neighboring premises.
10.
Visibility to public ways. For traffic safety, where vision may be
obscured entering a public way, the whole of the signboard or
display elements of any sign shall be either:
a. Below three feet in height above the street grade; or
b. Above 10 feet in height above the street grade.
11.
Extension over sidewalks and public ways. Except as specifically
stated below, no sign, or part/component thereof, shall extend over
or into public ways, rights-of-way or sidewalks.
12.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1062
Ground signs, except as permitted in Subsection B12e and
exempted in Subsection B14.
a.
Hanging signs. Hanging signs attached to the structure by way
of a frame or bracket which overhangs a pedestrian walkway
or public sidewalk are permitted, provided that they do not
project more than five feet from the building or 2/3 of the width
of the sidewalk, whichever is less, and have a vertical height
clearance of 10 feet between the bottom of the sign and the
ground.
b.
Wall signs. Wall signs attached parallel to the structure surface
are permitted, provided that they do not project more than
eight inches from the building.
c.
Awnings and canopies. Awnings and canopies projecting over
a public right-of-way with or without signs shall project no
further than five feet from the building or two-thirds of the
width of the sidewalk, whichever is less, and have a vertical
clearance of 10 feet. Signs on awnings shall be considered part
of the allowable sign area.
d.
Separate signage. Temporary signs (not including those signs
permitted as exempt on-premises and off-premises signs in
Subsection B13 and 14), such as sandwich boards, may be
allowed on sidewalks or other areas beyond the edge of a
public street, where no private land exists between the
building and the right-of-way, provided they are permitted as
separate signage each year by the Code Enforcement Office in
accordance with the following conditions:
The signage shall not be affixed to any building or
structure, including but not limited to fences, poles and
other signs, as well as other fixed objects such as trees;
(1)
The signage will not exceed 24 inches in width or 36
inches in overall height;
(2)
(3) The signage shall be displayed during business hours only;
The signage shall be of a design which is not offensive to
abutters or passersby;
(4)
The signage shall not block or hinder visibility of vehicular
traffic on the adjacent and/or nearby roadways;
(5)
(6) The signage shall not block or hinder pedestrian traffic;
No more than one temporary sign per establishment for
each street frontage having a public entrance shall be
allowed; and
(7)
e.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1063
The signage shall only be allowed on the street frontage
having a public entrance and shall only be located between
the lot lines of the parcel on which the establishment is
located.
(8)
Exempt on-premises signs. The following on-premises signs may
be erected and maintained without the approval of the Board of
Appeals or Code Enforcement Office:
Real estate: on-premises signs erected for the purpose of
advertising the sale of real estate; provided, however, that no
such sign shall exceed eight square feet in size and that no
person shall erect more than two such signs on any parcel of
land. All such signs shall be removed within 15 days after the
sale of the premises.
a.
Subdivision real estate: The Planning Board may approve a
sign advertising land in a subdivision but only after the
subdivision has received final Planning Board approval. Such
sign shall not exceed 64 square feet in size.
b.
Rental use of buildings, or portions thereof, may be advertised
by one temporary sign containing not more than two square
feet of area, without artificial lighting, and located on the
premises.
c.
Holiday decorations: temporary decorative materials in place
for a holiday or celebration.
d.
Nameplates: signs indicating the owner or occupant of a
residential building, provided that such sign does not exceed
two square feet.
e.
No trespassing signs: signs prohibiting hunting, fishing, or
trespassing, provided that such signs are not more than two
square feet in size.
f.
Home occupations: signs erected according to the home
occupations standards of this ordinance (Article VI, Section
38).
g.
Construction signs: signs erected during construction,
provided they are not larger than 16 square feet. There shall be
no more than one such sign per lot, and such signs shall not be
in place longer than six months. The Code Enforcement Office
may authorize an extension of this time period upon request
and with adequate justification by the applicant.
h.
Directory signs for commercial establishments not on street
level, not larger than four square feet.
i.
j. Door signs not larger than two square feet.
13.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1064
Restaurant menus posted in windows and not larger than two
square feet.
k.
Official plaque or historic markers obtained from the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission or other like organizations.
l.
Signs indicating awards honoring achievements from the state
or federal governments or their agencies. Such signs will be
limited to no more than two per property, and will be no larger
than 32 square feet in size, and will not be displayed for more
than two years. The Building Inspections Office will be notified
of the proposed signage, and award documentation will be
provided along with the letter of notification.
m.
Temporary signs, including banners, advertising or
announcing a new business or occupant of a building where
the intent of the new business or occupant is to receive
approval for, fabricate, and install a permanent sign subject to
the following:
The temporary sign is permitted for no more than 45
days from the date it was initially installed, whether or
not it remains installed for a consecutive forty-five-day
period. Under no circumstances shall a temporary sign be
installed or reinstalled for the same business/occupant at
the same premises for at least another 30 days.
(1)
Where a permanent sign is subject to approval of a
certificate of appropriateness outlined in Article XV
(Historic Preservation), within 15 days of the initial
installation of the temporary sign an application for a
certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted for
review to the Planning Department. Upon approval of the
certificate of appropriateness, the temporary sign shall
remain for no more than an additional 30 days. If the sign
subject to the certificate of appropriateness has not been
installed within the 30 days, the temporary sign shall be
removed and no other temporary sign shall be permitted
on the premises for the same business and/or occupant.
(2)
n.
Signs identified and meeting the standards as "categorical
signs" in the Maine Travelers Information Services Act (23
M.R.S.A. § 1913-A), Section 2 (Types of signs outside the rightof-
way).
o.
Exempt off-premises signs. The following off-premises signs may
be erected and maintained without the approval of the Board of
Appeals or Code Enforcement Office:
Those signs identified and meeting the standards as
"categorical signs" in the Maine Travelers Information
Services Act (23 M.R.S.A. § 1913-A), Section 1 (Types of signs).
a.
14.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1065
Those signs identified and meeting the standards as "publicly
owned bus stop outdoor advertising signs" in the Maine
Travelers Information Services Act (23 M.R.S.A. § 1908-A),
subject to compliance with Subsection B17 below. "Publicly
owned bus stop outdoor advertising signs" are only affixed
to bus shelters and are subject to Subsection B17 of this
ordinance.
b.
Common carriers: signs on the rolling stock of common
carriers or on registered and inspected motor vehicles, except
those determined by the Code Enforcement Office to be
circumventing the intent of this ordinance, including but not
limited to signs which are continuously or repeatedly in the
same location.
c.
Temporary sales: temporary unlit signs, excluding real estate
signs and mobile/portable signs, erected and maintained for a
period of not more than 48 hours to advertise sales of goods
which are not ordinarily undertaken by the person so
advertising as a regular course of business, including but not
limited to so-called lawn sales and garage sales; provided,
however, that no such sign shall exceed 10 square feet in
size, no such sign shall contain any commercial message, and
that no person shall erect more than one such sign on any
parcel of land. Said signs shall be removed within 24 hours
of completion of the sales of goods, except that no such sign
may be erected for more than five consecutive days or five days
within a one-week period, whether or not the temporary sale
continues.
d.
Public events: signs to be maintained for not more than three
weeks announcing an auction, public supper, lawn sale, fair,
exposition, or any other public event, campaign, drive or like
event of a public, civic, philanthropic or religious organization.
The date of this event shall be conspicuously posted on such
signs. No such sign shall be erected within any traffic or
median island located within any publicly travelled way. No
such sign shall be erected within any City park without the
approval of the Code Enforcement Office, Recreation
Department, and Department of Public Works.
e.
Legal notices and identification, information, or directional
signs required by governmental bodies.
f.
g. Flags and insignia of government.
Signs directing traffic and parking on private property but
bearing no advertising matter.
h.
Official plaques or historic markers obtained from the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission or other like organizations.
i.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1066
Signs indicating awards honoring achievements from the state
or federal governments or their agencies. Such signs will be
limited to no more than two per property and will be no larger
than 32 square feet in size and will not be displayed for more
than two years. The Building Inspections Office will be notified
of the proposed signage, and award documentation will be
provided along with the letter of notification.
j.
Political signs: signs erected for the purpose of promoting or
opposing the election of a candidate for public office, a pending
public referendum, or other public policy matter; provided,
however, that such signs may not be placed within the rightof-
way prior to six weeks before the election, primary,
referendum, vote, hearing or meeting to which they relate and
must be removed by the candidate or political committee not
later than one week thereafter (Title 23 M.R.S.A. § 1913-A).
Further:
No such sign shall be erected within any traffic islands
or medians on public ways in the City of Biddeford that
interfere with a driver's free and unobstructed view of
other vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(1)
Political signs shall be set back from the edge of the
sidewalk so as not to obstruct its use or any part thereof.
Where there are no sidewalks, such sign(s) shall be set
back five feet from the curbs or the edge of the road.
(2)
No political sign(s) shall be placed in such a manner as
to interfere with a motorist's unobstructed view of other
vehicular or pedestrian traffic or placed in such a manner
as to otherwise create a safety hazard.
(3)
The Police Department or Code Enforcement Office may
remove political signs that are found in violation of this
section.
(4)
Political signs bearing political messages relating to an
election, primary or referendum are not permitted in or
on any of the City's parks. Parks and Recreation staff or
the Department of Public Works may remove a sign that is
placed in violation of this subsection.
(5)
k.
Traffic control signs and construction signs erected by or on
behalf of the Maine Turnpike Authority, Maine Department of
Transportation, or the City of Biddeford.
l.
Directional signage erected by the City of Biddeford for the
purposes of wayfinding.
m.
15. Window sign regulations.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1067
Window signs (including those on doors) are limited to 20% of
a window area.
a.
Of the allowable 20% of the window area, up to four square
feet may be illuminated, including unshielded neon.
b.
Signs advertising business information related to hours of
operation, open/closed, and/or vacancy/no vacancy are not
included in the allowable window sign area so long as they
are in the aggregate no larger than 10 square feet in area.
Any such signage above 10 square feet in area counts towards
the allowable window sign area. All corporate sponsors/
commercial messages shall count towards the maximum
allowable window sign area, regardless of size.
c.
Restaurant menus are not included in the allowable window
sign area so long as they are no larger than two square feet in
area. Anything above two square feet in area counts towards
the allowable window sign area.
d.
Electronic message centers (EMCs). Where permitted, electronic
message centers are subject to the district regulations in which
they are located as well as the following:
EMCs may change messages no more than once every five
minutes. EMCs shall not have scrolling, rolling, blinking, or
intermittent lighting. EMCs displaying time and/or
temperature are exempt from these requirements.
a.
EMCs are permitted as any sign type (e.g., freestanding, wall,
window, or projecting) except that EMCs may make up no more
than 50% of the allowable sign area, and time and temperature
displays may make up no more than 50% of the allowable EMC
display. In no case shall the EMC portion or element of a sign
be larger than 40 square feet.
b.
Gas stations, public schools and government facilities may
install EMCs in any zoning district in accordance with the
regulations herein.
c.
Gas stations may install EMCs solely for advertising fuel prices
in any zoning district except for the Institutional (IN) Zone.
EMC readerboards (the electronic portions of the sign) shall in
no case total more than nine square feet in the aggregate. Gas
station pumps may not have EMCs affixed to them.
d.
Permitted illumination shall conform to the following criteria:
EMC illumination shall be single-color only except that gas
stations advertising fuel prices may have up to two colors,
each advertising a different price of fuel for sale.
(1)
e.
16.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1068
The illuminance shall be measured with an illumination
meter set to measure footcandles accurate to at least two
decimals. Illuminance shall be measured with the EMC off
and again with the EMC displaying a solid message for an
EMC. All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to
the face of the EMC at the distance determined by the total
square footage of the EMC as set forth in the Sign Area
Versus Measurement Distance Table below.
(2)
The difference between the off and solid-message
measurements using the EMC measurement criteria shall
not exceed 0.3 footcandle and shall not exceed 0.5
footcandle at any abutting residential property line.
(3)
All permitted EMCs shall be equipped with a sensor or
other device that automatically determines the ambient
illumination and shall be programmed to automatically
dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be
adjusted to comply with the 0.3 footcandle measurements.
(4)
Sign Area Versus Measurement Distance Table:
Area of Sign
(in square feet)
Measurement Distance
(in feet)
10 32
15 39
20 45
25 50
30 55
35 59
40 63
45 67
50 71
55 74
60 77
65 81
70 84
75 87
80 89
85 92
90 95
95 97
100 100
(5)
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1069
Area of Sign
(in square feet)
Measurement Distance
(in feet)
110 105
120 110
130 114
140 118
150 122
160 126
170 130
180 134
190 138
200 141
220 148
240 155
260 161
280 167
300 173
Publicly owned bus stop outdoor advertising signs in the Maine
Travelers Information Services Act (23 M.R.S.A. § 1908-A). Where
affixed to a bus shelter, said signs shall be limited in number to six
and may be no larger than the sides of the shelter itself. EMCs are
permitted on bus shelters where EMCs are permitted in the zone
where the shelter is located.
17.
Landmark signs. Landmark signs are signs existing as of the
adoption of this ordinance that the City of Biddeford has
determined has special significance in the City of Biddeford. The
City of Biddeford has determined that these signs, although they
may be nonconforming for a variety of reasons, should have special
considerations and should be able to be removed and either
reconstructed off-site and reinstalled at their original location or be
removed and replaced with a replica sign in its original location.
The City of Biddeford has identified the following signs as landmark
signs. There is no statute of limitations in which these landmark
signs can be removed, repaired, and reinstalled or removed and
replaced with a replica.
"Alex's Pizza" projecting sign located at: 93 Alfred Street (Tax
Map 38, Lot 428).
a.
The Lincoln Mill clocktower, located at: 17 Lincoln Street (Tax
Map 71, Lot 5).
b.
18.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1070
The Biddeford City Hall clocktower, located at: 205 Main
Street (Tax Map 38, Lot 133).
c.
District regulations.
In the Suburban Residential, R-1-A, R-1-B, C-R, W-1, and W-3
Districts, only the following signs shall be permitted: [Amended
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.110]
A home occupation may display a sign as permitted under
the home occupation standards of this ordinance (Article VI,
Section 38).
a.
Permitted nonresidential uses may display one nonilluminated
sign. No sign shall be larger than four square feet or located
on the roof of a building.
b.
Any sign may be located within the front setback but shall not
be closer than 10 feet to the street right-of-way and shall be no
closer than 10 feet to either of the side lot lines.
c.
Permanent project signs identifying a specific housing,
subdivision or project. These signs shall be limited to:
(1) One sign per project or subdivision.
(2) Such sign shall be no more than 32 square feet in size.
(3) Such sign shall be no more than four feet in height.
Such sign shall be located in such a manner as to not
interfere with traffic safety or cause a hazard regarding
sight distance for automobile traffic.
(4)
d.
Unless otherwise permitted, no sign shall exceed eight feet in
height.
e.
Electronic message centers are not permitted except that gas
stations, public schools and government facilities may install
EMCs in accordance with the regulations.
f.
1.
In the MSRD-2, R-2, R-3, and OR Districts, the following signs shall
be permitted:
A home occupation may display a sign as permitted under
the home occupation standards of this ordinance (Article VI,
Section 38).
a.
In the R-2 and R-3 Districts, permitted nonresidential uses may
display one nonilluminated sign not exceeding eight square
feet in area, except as provided in Subsection C2f below, nor
located on the roof of a building. Any sign may be located
within the front setback but shall not be closer than 10 feet to
b.
2.
C.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1071
the street right-of-way and shall be no closer than 10 feet to
either of the side lot lines.
In the MSRD-2 District, permitted nonresidential uses may
display one externally illuminated sign not exceeding eight
square feet in area, except as provided in Subsection C2f
below, nor located on the roof of a building. In the OR District,
permitted nonresidential uses may display one externally
illuminated sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area, except
as provided in Subsection C2f below, nor located on the roof
of a building. Where an existing principal building is within 15
feet of the street right-of-way, a ground sign may be located
within 10 feet of the street right-of-way if it can be
demonstrated to the Code Enforcement Office that there is no
other location on the lot that could accommodate a sign to
meet the ten-foot setback.
c.
d. No signs shall be taller than 10 feet in height.
Permanent project signs identifying a specific housing
subdivision or project. These signs shall be limited to:
(1) One sign per project or subdivision.
(2) Such sign shall be no more than 32 square feet in size.
(3) Such sign shall be no more than four feet in height.
Such sign shall be located in such a manner as to not
interfere with traffic safety or cause a hazard regarding
sight distance for automobile traffic.
(4)
e.
Electronic message centers are not permitted, except that gas
stations, public schools and government facilities may install
EMCs in accordance with the regulations.
f.
In the B-2, MSRD-3, and Industrial Districts, only the following
signs shall be permitted:
A home occupation may display a sign as permitted under
the home occupation standards of this ordinance (Article VI,
Section 38).
a.
On each premises there is permitted one sign affixed to the
exterior of a building for each occupancy therein. Affixed signs
shall not be placed on the roof of a building. In cases where the
building fronts on two or more streets, or is visible to traffic on
roadways or streets other than the street on which the building
fronts, one additional sign per occupancy may be affixed to
each side visible. The combined size of affixed signs shall not
exceed 25% of the total frontal facade area of the building or
storefront. Frontal facade area shall be computed as follows:
width of front x height of sales area (the rectangle formed by
b.
3.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1072
the width of the building/storefront and the distance between
the floor and the ceiling of the top floor of the sales area) x 0.25
= maximum size of sign allowable.
Ground, or pole, signs are limited in number to one per lot,
except as provided in this section. The top edge of any such
freestanding sign shall not be higher than 20 feet vertical
measured above the grade of the street nearest the sign
support(s).
Any sign may be located within the front setback, but in
the B-2 and Industrial Districts said signs shall not be
closer than 10 feet to the street right-of-way, and shall be
no closer than 10 feet to either of the side lot lines.
(1)
Where an existing principal building is within 15 feet of
the street right-of-way, a ground sign may be located
within 10 feet of the street right-of-way.
(2)
One additional ground or pole sign is permitted on a lot
that is immediately adjacent to I-95 right-of-way and
where a principal building on said lot is located within
500 feet of I-95 right-of-way. Said sign shall be located no
further than 500 feet from the I-95 right-of-way and shall
be located within 50 feet of a principal building and shall
be located for the purpose of gaining visibility to travelers
on I-95.
(3)
c.
No freestanding sign shall have a signboard area (or display
area, if no signboard) exceeding 72 square feet in gross area.
The gross area is the measure of the area within a line
connecting and completely enclosing the extreme-most points
of the sign.
d.
Where more than one business sign is attached to a single pole,
there shall be a limit of 72 square feet per business, up to a
maximum sign size of 210 square feet.
e.
Unless otherwise permitted, no sign shall exceed 20 feet in
height.
f.
Temporary or portable signs may be used, provided the
following requirements are met:
Signs must meet the setback and size requirements
outlined in Subsection C3(1) through (3) above.
(1)
Signs shall conform to the requirements in Subsection B12
of this section.
(2)
A permit has been obtained from the Code Enforcement
Office. Such permit shall be displayed in the store office at
all times. The permit shall be for no more than 30 days and
(3)
g.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1073
shall not be renewed within six months of initial issue or
more than twice within a calendar year.
No more than one such sign shall be located on a lot,
regardless of the number of businesses operating on said
lot.
(4)
Electronic message centers are permitted subject to the
regulations herein.
h.
All signs shall conform to M.R.S.A. Title 23 except as provided
in Subsection B16a, relating to the changing of messages on
EMCs.
i.
In the Rural-Farm and Limited Rural-Farm Districts, only the
following signs shall be permitted:
A home occupation may display a sign as permitted under
the home occupation standards of this ordinance (Article VI,
Section 38).
a.
Permitted nonresidential uses may display one nonilluminated
sign not exceeding eight square feet in area nor located on the
roof of a building.
b.
Any sign may be located within the front setback, but shall not
be closer than 10 feet to the street right-of-way, and shall be no
closer than 10 feet to either of the side lot lines.
c.
Permanent project signs identifying a specific housing
subdivision or project.
These signs shall be limited to one sign per project or
subdivision.
(1)
(2) Such sign shall be no more than 32 square feet in size.
(3) Such sign shall be no more than four feet in height.
Such sign shall be located in such a manner as to not
interfere with traffic safety or cause a hazard regarding
sight distance for automobile traffic.
(4)
d.
Unless otherwise permitted, no sign shall exceed 20 feet in
height.
e.
Electronic message centers are not permitted, except that gas
stations, public schools and government facilities may install
EMCs in accordance with the regulations herein.
f.
4.
In the B-1, MSRD-1, and W-2 Districts, only the following signs
shall be permitted:
a. No establishment shall have more than two signs.
5.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1074
Street level businesses shall not have a sign or signs with a
combined aggregate surface area greater than two square feet
for each linear foot of building frontage up to a maximum of
100 square feet total nontemporary signage.
b.
Businesses above the first floor shall not have a sign greater
than 12 square feet.
c.
There shall be no freestanding signs or electronic message
centers except in the B-1 and MSRD-1 Zones along Elm Street
in the following defined area: From the Biddeford City line with
Saco (northerly-most point of Elm Street) to the northerly side
of Center Street, and except that gas stations, public schools
and government facilities may install EMCs in accordance with
the regulations herein.
d.
Additionally in the MSRD-1, MSRD-2 and MSRD-3 Districts, the
following shall apply:
The Historic Preservation Commission (HPC), or its designee,
shall review all sign applications within this district. The Code
Enforcement Office shall not issue a sign permit unless the
HPC has issued a certificate of appropriateness or one has
been issued by the appropriate reviewing authority.
a.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to remove
all business signs within 30 days from the date the
accompanying use is discontinued.
b.
Businesses above the first floor shall not have a sign greater
than 12 square feet.
c.
Internally illuminated signs are not permitted except as
provided in Subsection C2f, 3h, 4f, and 5d herein. All new sign
illumination shall be from shielded external sources.
d.
Signs shall be made of wood, metal, or stone, except that
awnings may be made of fabric or canvas, and window signs
and gas station EMC fuel price readerboards (the electronic
portions of the signs) may made of any material.
e.
Corporate sponsors/commercial messages are not permitted
on any sign except for allowable window signs. The area of
corporate sponsors in window signs contributes towards the
total allowable sign area. See Subsection B15 of this
ordinance.
f.
6.
In the IN Zone, the following signs shall be permitted, provided
that no individual sign shall be larger than 32 square feet and that
all signs shall be consistent with the design standards set forth in
the approved institutional master plan:
7.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 59
CHCT:1075
Institution sign: one sign identifying the institution in the
center of the campus or at a key location within the campus.
This sign shall be ground mounted, located within a landscape
area, or attached to a landscape feature such as a wall, boulder
or similar object. An institution sign may be externally lit with
a shielded light source.
a.
Gateway signs: one sign identifying the institution located at
each principal entrance to the campus from the major road
network. Gateway signs shall be ground mounted, located
within a landscape area, or attached to a landscape feature
such as a wall, boulder or similar object. Gateway signs may be
externally lit with a shielded light source.
b.
Building and facility signs: Each building or facility may be
identified by a sign at the principal entrance and at each
additional major entrance to the building or facility. Building
or facility signs shall be attached to the building or facility or
shall be ground mounted or attached to a landscape feature.
Building and facility signs may be externally lit with a shielded
light source.
c.
Directional signs: Signs providing directions to buildings or
facilities may be placed at appropriate locations within the
campus in accordance with the sign standards contained in the
institutional master plan. Directional signs may be externally
lit with a shielded light source.
d.
Public safety and regulatory signs: Signs setting forth public
safety regulations, parking regulations, or other public
informational signs may be placed at appropriate locations
within the campus in accordance with the sign standards
contained in the institutional master plan. Safety and
regulatory signs may be externally lit with a shielded light
source.
e.
Informational kiosks: Facilities for the posting of temporary
notices or campus information such as kiosks and bulletin
boards may be placed at appropriate locations within the
campus in accordance with the sign standards contained in the
institutional master plan. Kiosks and bulletin boards may be
externally lit with a shielded light source.
f.
Temporary signs and banners: Temporary signs and banners
related to campus events may be placed at appropriate
locations within the campus in accordance with the sign
standards contained in the institutional master plan, provided
that such signs and banners do not remain in place for more
than 10 days.
g.
Administration. In cases where there is an actual or perceived hardship,
an applicant for a sign permit may apply for an administrative appeal
D.
Section 59 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 59
CHCT:1076
Section 60. Storage of materials.
Section 61. Stormwater management.
to the decision of the Code Enforcement Office. Such appeal shall be
submitted in accordance with Article IX of this ordinance. In reviewing
administrative appeals under this section the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider the following as the guiding criteria for the City's attempt
to regulate signs:
1. The purpose of this ordinance as outlined in Subsection A1 above.
The City is attempting to avoid a "neon jungle" along the major
roadways of the City.
2.
The City is attempting to maintain the rural and residential
character of the several zoning districts where residential use
is the primary land use, while trying to ensure that permitted
commercial/industrial activities are able to identify their locations.
3.
In light of the above criteria, the City has adopted the standards set
forth herein.
4.
All materials stored outdoors shall be stored in such a manner as to
prevent the breeding and harboring of insects, rats or other vermin.
This shall be accomplished by enclosures in containers, raising
materials above ground, separation of material, prevention of stagnant
water, extermination procedures or other means.
A.
All new construction and development, whether or not served by a
stormwater collection and transportation system, shall be designed
to reflect or resemble, as nearly as possible, natural runoff
conditions in terms of volume, velocity and location of runoff.
1.
If runoff, after development, would exceed predevelopment runoff
conditions, the offsite impact must be evaluated in terms of
potential soil erosion and sedimentation, drainage capacity, and
the land use/land cover characteristics. Appropriate methods of
reducing off-site impact shall be employed.
2.
Stormwater management evaluations and designs shall be based
on a twenty-four-hour, twenty-five-year occurrence interval storm.
3.
The Planning Board may, when it deems it appropriate, require
calculations that are based on a fifty-year storm.
4.
A.
All development plans shall define maintenance requirements and
identify parties responsible for maintenance of the stormwater control
system. Whenever practical, underground stormwater management
systems shall be employed. When methods of reducing stormwater
impact are necessary or desirable, stormwater runoff control plans
shall include:
B.
Section 59 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 61
CHCT:1077
1. Control methods effective both during and after construction.
Control methods compatible with upstream and downstream
characteristics.
2.
Documentation by the designer that increasing the volume and
rate of runoff from the proposed development will not aggravate
conditions downstream or upstream.
3.
Provisions for on-site storage and gradual discharge of excessive
flows, or contribution toward increasing downstream capacity
(e.g., by enlarging existing culverts), when the channel
downstream is not able to accommodate the increased volume or
rate of runoff created by the proposed development.
4.
Consideration of the following factors:
(a) Impact: on-site, downstream, upstream, and basin-wide.
Costs: initial, amortized, operation and maintenance (cost paid
by person if not on-site).
(b)
(c) Intensity of rainfall.
Timing of rainfall (e.g. falling of snow or during the spring
snowmelt).
(d)
Amount of precipitation in the basin during the five days
preceding the storm in question.
(e)
Hydrologic soil groups throughout the basin (i.e., the soil's rate
of water infiltration and transmission).
(f)
Hydrologic conditions throughout the basin (soil's moisture
content, humus/organic content, temperature, and whether or
not it is frozen).
(g)
Vegetative cover throughout the basin (vegetation helps soil
dry out after a rainfall, intercepts some precipitation during
the rainfall and slows down the flow of water over the land).
(h)
Area of land covered by impervious surfaces throughout the
basin (roads, sidewalks, roofs, driveways, patios, etc.).
(i)
Topography throughout the basin (slopes affect the rate of
runoff, marshland reduces peak discharge rate by slowing
down the rate of runoff).
(j)
Size and shape of watershed (peak discharge rates are slower
in long, narrow watersheds).
(k)
5.
Stormwater runoff systems should be designed to facilitate aquifer
recharge when it is advantageous to compensate for groundwater
C.
Section 61 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 61
CHCT:1078
Section 62. Studies and impact/development fees.
withdrawals or reductions in infiltration. Conversely, designs should
avoid recharge where groundwater effects might be harmful.
Design of permanent storage facilities should consider safety,
appearance, recreational use, and cost and effectiveness of
maintenance operations, in addition to the primary storage function.
Natural overland flows, and open drainage channel and swale
locations should be the preferred alignments for major components of
a residential drainage system.
The use of enclosed components (such as underground piping) should
be minimized where the existing natural systems are able to
accommodate storm runoff. Energy dissipators (to reduce high flow
velocities) and other forms of outfall protection shall be employed
where enclosed drains discharge onto erodible soils.103
The City of Biddeford recognized that a community must have
development of new residential, commercial and industrial facilities in
order to maintain an adequate supply of quality housing, employment
opportunities, and in general a strong economic base for the
community. These developments will, or should enhance to the
community and provide benefit to the residents of the community by
providing improved quality of life, increased employment, greater
convenience, and more equitable tax base.
A.
The Planning Board is empowered by the State of Maine (State
Subdivision and Comprehensive Planning Laws, 30-A M.R.S.A.) and the
municipal officers to review development proposals to ensure that they
are consistent with various regulations, and the City's comprehensive
plan and will not have adverse impact on the community's services,
infrastructure and quality of life factors such as water quality, scenic,
esthetic or historic characteristics.
B.
In the review of specific proposals, the Board may require additional
studies and reports when there is reason to believe that a given project
may have unreasonable or adverse impact on a given neighborhood or
the community as a whole. Examples of this type of situation would
include, but shall not be limited to: traffic and road conditions, sewage
disposal system and capacity, groundwater supplies, solid waste, fire
protection, open space, and municipal facilities such as schools.
Such reports and studies may include, but shall not be limited to:
Traffic study: To be completed by a traffic engineer; this study
shall report the possible impact that a given project may have
on the City's roadways. Besides meeting the standards
a.
1.
C.
103. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for stormwater management in shoreland areas, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98.
Section 61 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 62
CHCT:1079
established for professionally completed reports, this study
shall include local traffic accident information for the last five
years prior to development.
Soils study: To be completed by a soils scientist; this study
shall report on soil capability for the entire area that will be
immediately affected by the proposed project. This study shall
include, as a minimum, the impacts of runoff, erosion, and the
impact of subsurface wastewater disposal, if applicable.
b.
Groundwater study: To be completed by a certified expert in
hydrological studies. This study will provide information on the
impact of a given project on local groundwater supplies.
c.
Drainage study: To be completed by a professional engineer.
This study shall report on the impact of water runoff on the
surrounding area and will provide information on measures
that will be taken to minimize and mitigate erosion and flood
potential.
d.
Fiscal impact study: To be completed by an accountant or other
recognized authority (credentials shall be part of the report).
This study shall report on the cost to the community that a
given project will have. It will include accurate estimates of
the anticipated revenues that a given project will contribute to
the community, minus costs for county taxes, services (police
and fire protection, solid waste disposal, sewage treatment),
education, increased road costs, etc. The per capita method
of analysis will be utilized in the development of this report.
Datum for this study will be obtained from the various City
departments; the population data will be based on the most
recent State of Maine estimates or U.S. census whichever has
the highest number.
e.
Any study presented to the Board may be reviewed by a third party,
such as the Southern Maine Regional Planning Commission or a
recognized expert in the specific field. The cost of such review shall
be borne by the applicant.
2.
When a study indicates that there will be an adverse impact on
the community, such as reduction in the level of service for specific
intersections; a net cost to the City because of the number of
children in the existing school buildings, or an overtaxing of
sewage infrastructure such as lines or pumping stations, the board
shall require the applicant to work with the City Planner to develop
a plan/program to mitigate the situation. This mitigation can take
the form of physical improvements or payment in lieu of
construction.
3.
Where the specific impact of a project requires the payment of a
development or impact fee, such fee shall be calculated on either a per
capita or proportional basis. The Board and applicant shall come to an
D.
Section 62 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 62
CHCT:1080
Section 63. Swimming pools.
Section 64. Timber harvesting.
agreement of when payment shall be made (options include payment
following plan approval, or payment per lot at time of issuance of
permit).
Funds collected as development or impact fees shall be placed into
an interest-bearing escrow account. Such account shall be for the
exclusive purpose for which the fees were collected. Any funds
collected but not expended on the improvements shall be returned to
the applicant when the improvements funded have been completed.
No person or firm shall begin construction of or erect a swimming
pool without first obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector shall issue a permit only after determining from
plans or specifications presented by the applicant that the proposed
swimming pool will conform with the following requirements.
Pools to be kept enclosed. Swimming pools shall be kept enclosed
as required by state law.
1.
Setback requirements. No swimming pool shall be constructed
closer than 10 feet from the side or rear lot line, nor closer to the
front line of any lot than would be permitted for buildings or other
structures by other provisions of this ordinance. All mechanical
equipment for the purposes of filtering, heating, pumping,
cleaning, filling, draining or any other maintenance-related activity
shall not be located closer to a property line than the minimum yard
setbacks of the zoning district in which the pool is located.
2.
A.
Within the strip of land extending 75 feet inland from the normal highwater
line in a Shoreland Zone abutting a great pond, or stream, or
upland edge of a wetland there shall be no timber harvesting, except to
remove safety hazards.
A.
Except in areas as described in Paragraph A, above, timber harvesting
shall conform with the following provisions:
Selective cutting of no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four inches in diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground
level, on any lot in any ten-year period is permitted. In addition:
Within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal distance,
from the normal high-water line of a great pond, stream, or
upland edge of a wetland there shall be no clear-cut openings,
and a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation,
including ground cover shall be maintained as described in
Article V, Section 7.
(a)
1.
B.
Section 62 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 64
CHCT:1081
At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high water line of a great pond, stream, or upland
edge of a wetland, harvesting operations shall not create single
clear-cut openings greater than 10,000 square feet in the
forest canopy. Where such openings exceed 5,000 square feet,
they shall be at least 100 feet apart. Such clear-cut openings
shall be included in the calculation of total volume removal. For
the purposes of this section, volume shall be considered to be
the basal area.
(b)
No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet of the normal
high-water line of a water body. In all other areas slash shall either
be removed or disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the
ground and no part thereof extends more than four feet above the
ground. Any debris that falls below the normal high-water line of a
water body shall be removed.
2.
Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as
travel routes except when:
(a) Surface waters are frozen; and
The activity will not result in any ground disturbance, or cause
erosion into the stream when the surrounding ground thaws.
(b)
3.
All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert,
except in areas with low banks and channel beds which are
composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface which would not
be eroded or otherwise damaged.
4.
Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and
designed so as to prevent water runoff from directly entering the
water body or tributary stream. Upon completion of timber
harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed and
areas of exposed soil revegetated.
5.
Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the
operation of machinery used in timber harvesting results in the
exposure of mineral soils shall be located such that an unscarified
filter strip of vegetation at least 75 feet in width for slopes up to
10% shall be retained between the exposed mineral soil and the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland.
For each ten-percent increase in slope, the unscarified strip shall
be increased by 20 feet. The provisions of this section shall apply
only to a face sloping toward the water body or wetland, provided,
however, that no portion of such exposed mineral soil on a back
face shall be closer than 25 feet from the normal high-water line of
a water body or upland edge of a wetland. The width of this strip
shall vary according to the average slope of the land as follows:
6.
Section 64 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 64
CHCT:1082
Section 65. Vegetation clearance above public rights-of-way.
Tree branches which hang out over a sidewalk shall be at least six feet
above the level of the sidewalk. Tree branches which hang out over the road
shall be at least 13.5 feet above the level of the road.
Section 66. Underground tanks.
Average Slope of Land
Between Exposed Mineral
Soil and Normal High-Water
Mark
Width of Strip Between
Exposed Mineral Soil and
Normal High-Water Mark
(feet along surface of the
ground)
Greater than 10% 95
20% 115
30% 135
40% 155
50% 175
60% 195
70% 215
Harvesting operations shall be conducted in such a manner and at such
a time that minimal soil disturbance results. Adequate provision shall
be made to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation of surface waters.
C.
Repeal of Article VI (Performance Standards), Section 64, Timber
harvesting. This section in its entirety related to timber harvesting
activities is repealed on the statutory date established under 38
M.R.S.A. § 438-B, Subsection 5, at which time the State of Maine
Department of Conservation's Bureau of Forestry shall administer
timber harvesting standards in the City of Biddeford. NOTE: The
statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. § 438-B, Subsection 5,
is the effective date of state-wide timber harvesting standards. That
date is "the first day of January of the second year following the year
in which the Commissioner of Conservation determines that at least
252 of the 336 municipalities identified by the Commissioner of
Conservation as the municipalities with the highest acreage of timber
harvesting activity on an annual basis for the period 1992-2003 have
either accepted the state-wide standards or have adopted an ordinance
identical to the state-wide standards." 38 M.R.S.A. § 438-B, Subsection
5, further provides that "the Commissioner of Conservation shall notify
the Secretary of State in writing and advise the Secretary of the
effective date of the state-wide standards." [Added 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
D.
All underground tanks shall be registered with the Maine Department
of Environmental Protection.
A.
Section 64 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 66
CHCT:1083
Section 67. Vision clearance.
In all zones no fence, wall, or sign shall be erected, and no hedges, trees,
or other growth shall be planted which may cause danger to traffic on a
street or road by obstructing the view. Where essential for traffic safety, a
property owner shall be required to keep vegetation, signs or other visual
obstruction below three feet in height in the required setback.
Section 68. Water quality.
The City of Biddeford acknowledges that clean, safe groundwater is
essential to life and is an increasingly scarce natural resource. Groundwater
sources must be protected.
Section 69. (Reserved)104
New underground tanks shall comply with standards established by
the DEP land quality bureau. Certification of such compliance shall be
provided to the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of any permit.
B.
Older tanks not meeting DEP standards shall be removed by the
property owner.
C.
Unless reviewed and approved by the responsible City agency, no
activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any
treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous, or solid
materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxiousness, toxicity, or
temperature, or any combination of the aforementioned, that run off,
seep, percolate, or wash into surface or ground waters so as to
contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters or cause nuisances, such
as objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil or
scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness or be harmful to human,
animal, plant, or aquatic life, or to impair designated uses or the water
classification of the water body or groundwater.
A.
Whenever soils types common to groundwater aquifer areas are
identified, a detailed soil study will be conducted to determine the
extent of possible groundwater deposits. This information shall be
included on the site plan, as well as notes specifying on-site limitations
to general/site specific development or construction. As a minimum
these notes shall include:
No underground storage tanks for the storage of fuel or hazardous
waste, and no landfills or salt/sand storage areas, shall be located
on identified aquifers.
1.
Special catch basins shall be used to catch runoff/drainage water
from roadways and other paved surfaces to reduce the possibility
of salt/oil contamination of groundwater sources.
2.
B.
104. Editor's Note: Former Section 69, Wetlands protection, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98.
Section 66 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 70
CHCT:1084
Section 70. Wildlife preservation.
The City of Biddeford recognizes that there needs to be a balance between
development and the preservation of wildlife resources. The preservation
of local wildlife and habitat areas is responsibility entrusted to the land
stewards of today for the benefit and enjoyment of our children and their
children's children. The following section is intended to provide the grounds
and basis for that balance.
Section 71. Telecommunications facilities. [Ord. No. 2001.107,
11-20-2001; Ord. No. 2004.81, 9-21-2004]
Any project involving parcels of land of greater than five acres, or any
portion of a larger parcel greater than five acres, shall be required to
conduct a wildlife study by a certified wildlife biologist.
A.
This provision may be waived provided the developer presents a letter
from the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife stating that
there are no significant habitat areas involved in the project area or the
abutting, adjacent land area.
B.
If significant wildlife or fisheries habitat are involved on the site, the
developer must mitigate the situation. Such mitigation shall include, as
a minimum:
The clustering of the project to protect to the greatest extent the
wildlife habitat pursuant to the standards of the cluster housing/
development standards of this ordinance;
1.
Setting back of any construction at least 100 feet from the upland
edge of any wetland area over 20,000 contiguous square feet;
2.
The setting back of any construction at least 100 feet from any
stream or waterway;
3.
Preserve the existing vegetation in such a manner that the only
vegetation cut or removed shall be necessary for the actual
construction involved. Specific vegetation to be retained and to be
removed shall be indicated on the development plan;
4.
Provisions shall be made to eliminate noise disturbance in the area.
This shall include the construction of sound barrier fencing; the
planting of additional vegetation such as trees, etc.
5.
C.
Mitigation measures shall be indicated clearly on the development plan
prior to final approval.
D.
Purpose. This section is designed and intended to balance the interests
of the residents of the City of Biddeford, telecommunications providers,
and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications
facilities within the town. These standards are also intended:
A.
Section 70 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 71
CHCT:1085
To minimize the adverse impacts of such facilities including —
visual impacts, environmental impacts, impacts to historically
significant areas, health and safety impacts and property value
impacts;
1.
To encourage co-location of carriers and minimize the total number
of towers located within the town;
2.
To permit the construction of new towers only where all other
reasonable opportunities have been exhausted;
3.
To encourage the users of towers and antennas to configure them
in a way that minimizes the need for additional towers in the City
of Biddeford;
4.
To provide for the removal of structures which are no longer being
used for telecommunications purposes.
5.
Uses exempt from the regulations in this section:
An antenna not more than 35 feet in height operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio operator as part of the amateur radio
service.
1.
Radio or television satellite dish antenna for the sole use of the
resident occupying a residential parcel on which the satellite dish
is located.
2.
A single receive only antenna not more than 35 feet in height for
the sole use of the occupant of a residential parcel.
3.
A citizen and radio or two-way FM radio antenna not more than 35
feet in height.
4.
A municipal, public safety or public works telecommunication
facility.
5.
B.
Permits required. All new telecommunications facilities which exceed
125 feet in height shall be reviewed by the Planning Board and must
conform to the requirements of this section, as well as Article XI
and Article VII prior to requesting a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer.
New telecommunications facilities below those threshold heights shall
be considered a permitted accessory use, and shall need only a
building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, if such
telecommunications facility is accessory to a principal use on the lot
and is used for the private communications of the owner of or business
located on the lot.
C.
Review process and hearing requirements.
All applications under this section shall be reviewed as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with the
1.
D.
Section 71 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 71
CHCT:1086
procedure, standards and submission requirements of this section.
The Planning Board shall apply the standards of Article XI and
Article VII when reviewing such applications.
The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing within 30 days
of determining that it has a complete application. Notification of
the hearing shall be provided as follows:
In writing, at least 10 days prior to the hearing, to all owners
of property that directly abut or are located within 1,000 feet
(typically 250 feet) of any property line of the property for
which the conditional use permit is requested. (Notice to the
owners within the first 500 feet shall be by certified mail, the
remaining notice shall be by first class mail.) Notice shall also
be given to any town located within 1,000 feet of the proposed
telecommunications facility. The applicant shall provide this
notification and shall present proof of such notification to the
City Planner. The notification shall include: the name of the
applicant, location of the property, a brief description of the
project, and a plot plan identifying the proposed site layout in
relation to nearby streets and properties.
a.
By the City posting notice of such hearing in City Hall a
minimum of 10 days in advance of the hearing.
b.
By the City advertising in a newspaper of general circulation
notice of the hearing a minimum of 10 days in advance of the
hearing.
c.
2.
The Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing, review the
application, and issue findings of fact which outline the reasons it
approves or denies the telecommunications structure application.
The Board shall use the standards identified in Article VII and
Article XI as well as those noted below to make its decision. The
Planning Board may establish reasonable conditions to ensure
conformity with the purposes of this ordinance and the adopted
City of Biddeford Comprehensive Plan.
Factors considered in making decisions:
Height of proposed tower or other structure does not exceed
that which is essential for its intended use and public safety.
a.
b. Proximity of tower to residential development or zones.
c. Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
d. Surrounding topography.
e. Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
3.
Section 71 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 71
CHCT:1087
Design of the tower, antenna, or facility with particular
reference to design characteristics that have the effect of
reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
f.
g. Proposed ingress and egress to the site.
Availability of suitable existing towers and other alternative
tower structures.
h.
Visual impacts on view sheds, ridge lines, and other impacts
by means of tower location, tree and foliage clearing and
placement of incidental structures.
i.
That the proposed facility/tower/dish will not unreasonably
interfere with the view from any public park, natural scenic
vista, historic building or major view corridor.
j.
That the proposed facility/tower/dish is not constructed in such
a manner as to result in needless height, mass, and guy-wire
supports, with documentation having been provided and
reviewed regarding the design capacity and/or the remaining
co-location capacity of the tower/facility.
k.
The Planning Board may use any technical and professional
services necessary to assist in their review of a facility. Services
may include but are not limited to: an analysis of shared use, an
analysis of visual impact, an analysis of the structure satisfying
federal and state requirements, an analysis of alternative sites, and
other issues required to satisfying requirements of this section.
The applicant shall be required to pay all costs involved with these
professional services.
4.
The Code Enforcement Officer may use professional and technical
services to inspect construction of an approved project. The
applicant shall pay all costs incurred for these inspection services.
5.
A permit granted by the Planning Board under this section shall
expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within six
months of the date on which the permit is granted, and if the work
is not substantially completed within one year of the approval date.
6.
Zoning districts/performance standards/dimensional requirements.
In the LRF and I-3 Districts telecommunications facilities shall
be allowed as a conditional use conforming to the performance
standards and dimensional requirements noted below. [Amended
10-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.110]
1.
E.
Section 71 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 71
CHCT:1088
In addition, the shared use of preexisting accessory-use towers
and alternative tower structures is permitted in the Medical Zones
(M), — 125 feet, Business Zones (B-1, B-2), and Industrial Zones
(I-1, I-2, I-4) — 250 feet. Maximum height is measured from top
of the tower or attached apparatus to the bottom of the tower
or other structure on which the tower is mounted. The tower or
structure height is not increased beyond the following limits:
Suburban Residential Zones (SR), Residential Zones (R-1-A, R-1-B,
R-2, R-3), Coastal Residential Zone, Institutional Zone (IN), Rural
Farm (RF): communication towers are prohibited.
Height. Towers, antennas and facilities shall not exceed a height of
150 feet except that where evidence of acceptable design and colocation
is provided to the Planning Board, an additional 25 feet of
height per each additional user is permitted, (based upon signed
agreements to be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer prior
to the issuance of any building permit). No telecommunications
facility shall exceed a height of 250 feet.
2.
Conforming lots. The lot where a new freestanding tower is located
must be conforming. The lot cannot have grandfathered conditions
that do not meet requirements of the zoning ordinance. If the
tower is located on a lot with another use, both uses shall meet
the minimum area requirements for each use. Integration into
an existing grandfathered structure is allowable as long as the
existing structure meets all engineering requirements.
3.
Setbacks.
All telecommunications towers shall be setback from the lot
lines of any residential use or residential zoning district a
distance equal to at least 125% of the tower height. The tower
height used shall be the maximum design height approved for
the site.
a.
Tower, guys and accessory facilities shall meet the minimum
zoning district setback requirements.
b.
The center of the base of the tower must be set back a
minimum of 125% of the tower height, or the required
minimum setback of the zone in which it is located, whichever
is greater.
c.
No part of the structure or accessory structures, including
anchoring systems and storage buildings shall be located in the
setback required for the zone.
d.
4.
Aesthetics, landscaping, buffers and fencing. All
telecommunication facilities shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment to the greatest extent feasible. To this
end the following measures shall be implemented.
5.
Section 71 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 71
CHCT:1089
Towers shall have a galvanized steel finish or be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obstructiveness.
a.
All telecommunications structures shall maintain the required
setbacks as undisturbed vegetated buffers, except for the
access road. The Planning Board may require additional
plantings in the buffer area to enhance the quality and
effectiveness of the buffer area to serve as a visual screen.
The size and quantity of plantings shall be subject to Planning
Board approval.
b.
At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screenings and landscaping that will blend the tower
facilities to the natural setting and built environment.
c.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other federal or state authority. If lighting is required,
the Planning Board may review the available lighting
alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding properties and views.
d.
Road access to the telecommunications structure shall be the
minimum size necessary to allow safe access. Maximum use
of existing roads, public or private, shall be made, provided
said use is consistent with safety and aesthetic considerations.
Road construction shall at all times minimize ground
disturbance and vegetation cutting. Road grades shall closely
follow natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance
and soil erosion potential. The Planning Board may require
the preparation and implementation of an erosion and
sedimentation control plan.
e.
The base of a telecommunications tower may not be located in
a wetland or floodplain or slope greater than 33%.
f.
A security fence or wall not less than eight feet in height from
the finished grade shall be provided around the tower. Access
to the tower shall be through a locked gate.
g.
Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from adjacent properties. The standard buffer shall
consist of a landscaped strip at least six feet wide outside
the perimeter of the compound. The plantings shall consist of
alternately spaced evergreens having a height of not less than
six feet above the height of the ground elevation at the time of
installation. The Planning Board may waive these landscaping
requirements where the board determines that the amount and
type of existing on-site vegetation is adequate to fully screen
the facility. Existing mature trees and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
h.
Section 71 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 71
CHCT:1090
Antenna mass. The mass of antennas, including required support
structures, shall not exceed 450 cubic feet per user. The mass shall
be determined by the appropriate volumetric calculations using
the smallest regular rectilinear, cuboidal, conical, cylindrical or
pyramidal geometric shapes encompassing the entire perimeters of
the array and all of its parts and attachments.
6.
More than one tower per lot. If more than one tower is proposed for
a lot, they shall be located as close together as technically possible.
7.
Nonaccessory uses. Nonaccessory uses located on the same lot as
a tower shall be located a minimum of 125% of the tower height
from the base of the tower.
8.
Location. All telecommunication facilities shall be located so as to
minimize their visibility and to minimize the total number of towers
in Town. The following measures shall guide the location.
Wireless telecommunication facilities shall not be sited in
areas of high visibility unless a finding is made that no other
location is technically feasible, and unless the facility is sited
below the ridgeline or designed to minimize its profile by
blending with the surrounding existing natural and man-made
environment in such a manner as to be effectively
unnoticeable.
a.
No facility shall be located as to create a significant threat to
the health or survival of rare, threatened or endangered plant
or animal species.
b.
9.
Other requirements.
Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural
integrity of telecommunications facilities, written approval by all
applicable state and federal agencies, including but not limited to
the FAA and FCC, or a statement from the agency that no approval
is required, including a description of any conditions or criteria for
the approval or exemption from approval.
1.
Advertising. No advertising or signage is permitted on
telecommunications facilities.
2.
Certification. Certification from a registered professional engineer
in the State of Maine that this proposal will not interfere with
established public safety telecommunications. For building, polemounted
or tower facilities, certification by a registered
professional engineer in the State of Maine that the design is
adequate to support, without failure, the maximum forces expected
from wind, earthquakes, ice/snow loading when the pole tower
is fully loaded with antennas, transmitter, other equipment, and
camouflaging, as described in the submitted plan.
3.
F.
Section 71 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 71
CHCT:1091
Investigation of existing alternative towers, sites, and structures.
Applicants shall identify all existing and proposed (on file in City
Hall) towers, including their heights, located in the City and within
a one mile of the town boundaries. Applicants must provide
evidence of the lack of antenna space on all such towers, (except
in cases where tower access is denied by tower owner), and shall
identify alternative tower structures and sites which have been
investigated as an alternative to constructing a new tower.
Applicant shall address the pros and cons of utilizing co-location
and other alternative tower structures with respect to their
application and shall demonstrate that they cannot provide
adequate communication service utilizing such existing towers or
structures.
4.
Co-location. The applicant and owner shall allow other future
wireless service carriers, and including providing space at no
charge to public agencies (namely police, fire, ambulance,
communications and highway if requested at the time of review
by the Planning Board), using functionally equivalent personal
wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities
on a telecommunications tower and site, unless satisfactory
evidence is presented and the Planning Board concurs that
technical constraints prohibit co-location. Applicant and other
wireless service carriers shall provide a mechanism for the
construction and maintenance of shared facilities and
infrastructure and shall provide for reasonable sharing of cost
in accordance with industry standards. (A reasonable charge for
shared use is based on generally accepted accounting principles.
This charge may include, but not limited to, a pro rata share of
the cost of site selection, planning, project administration, land
costs, site design, construction and maintenance, financing, return
of equity, depreciation and all of the costs of adapting the tower
or equipment to accommodate a shared user without causing
electromagnetic interference, all being pertinent to the Southern
Maine Market area.) To ensure co-location, the Planning Board
may require co-location on a tower so as to prevent the need
for new carriers to build new towers, may deny an application
for a telecommunications facility because of inadequate provisions
and/or arrangements for co-location and may require an existing
tower to be extended in height (provided that a structural analysis
indicates that such extension is structurally feasible and safe) in
order to provide for co-location; provided, however, that the
Planning Board may do so only if the co-location fee or payment
required of the applicant by the owner of the existing tower is no
more than 10% above the industry average for similar co-location
arrangements.
5.
Plan requirements. Each applicant requesting a conditional use permit
under this section shall submit a scaled plan and application in
accordance with the following submission requirements:
G.
Section 71 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 71
CHCT:1092
Location of the proposed structure, including map/lot number and
street address.
1.
Name of owner or operator of the telecommunications facility and
owner of property.
2.
Proof of right, title and interest to use the property on which the
telecommunications facility is proposed.
3.
Name of company(ies) responsible for constructing and/or
maintaining the telecommunication facility.
4.
Date the telecommunication facility was initially constructed or is
proposed to be constructed.
5.
A description and construction detail of the telecommunication,
facility, including: plot plan identifying location of the tower on
the property; dimensions of the tower; structural supports, if any;
lighting; color; and equipment located on the structure, if any. This
description shall also identify any accessory structures that are
essential to operation of the telecommunication facility.
6.
A topographic map, drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (or
other appropriate scale as determined by the Planning Board) of
the property proposed as location of the structure. The topographic
map shall identify: accurate dimensions of the property; contours
at not less than five-foot intervals (or other appropriate scale as
determined by the Planning Board); existing vegetation,
particularly noting height, diameter, density, quality, and type
(deciduous or evergreen) of existing trees; wetlands, floodplains,
streams and open bodies of water; ledge outcrops; soils data,
medium intensity; all existing structures on the property; and any
rights-of-way, easements, or similar encumbrances on the property;
and other significant features.
7.
A locus map drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals
100 feet (or other appropriate scale as determined by the Planning
Board) that identifies all properties; all residences, all
nonresidential structures, all roads and the natural topography
(vegetation and contours at twenty-foot intervals) of the area
located within a radius of 1,000 feet of the proposed
telecommunication facility location.
8.
A landscape plan prepared at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet (or
other appropriate scale as determined by the Planning Board) that
identifies how the applicant shall satisfy landscape, screening and
buffering requirements.
9.
A visual impact analysis prepared by a landscape architect or
other qualified professional that quantifies the amount of visual
impact on properties located within 500 feet, within 2,500 feet and
within two miles of the proposed telecommunication structure. This
10.
Section 71 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 71
CHCT:1093
analysis will include recommendations to mitigate adverse visual
impacts on such properties. Consideration shall be given to views
from public areas as well as from private residences and from
archeological and historic resources including historic districts,
areas and structures, specifically those listed in the National
Register of historic places or eligible for inclusion or as determined
by the Biddeford Historic District Commission. The analysis of the
impact on historical and archeological resources shall meet the
requirements of the Maine State Historic Preservation Officer in
his/her review capacity for the FCC. The overall analysis shall
assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and other
existing and foreseeable telecommunication facilities in the area,
and shall identify and include all feasible mitigation measures
consistent with the technological requirements of the proposed
telecommunication service.
A photo simulation of the proposed facility as seen from the north,
south, east, and west from the facility. The photo simulation shall
be keyed to a location map.
11.
An analysis prepared by a qualified professional that describes
why this site and structure is critical to the operation for which
it is proposed. The analysis shall address, at a minimum; existing
and proposed service area maps; how this structure is integrated
with other company operations, particularly other structures in
Biddeford and surrounding communities; future expansion needs
in the area; the affect on company operations if this structure is
not constructed in this location; other sites evaluated for location
of this structure and how such sites compare to the proposed
site; other options, if any, which could be used to deliver similar
services, particularly if the proposed equipment can be co-located
(shared use) on an existing structure; and an analysis to the
projected life cycle of this structure and location.
12.
Certification by a structural engineer that construction of the
structure shall satisfy all federal, state and local building code
requirements as well as be able to satisfy the needs of maximum
permitted co-location at the site (as approved by the Planning
Board) per the height limits of the applicable zoning district.
13.
Payment of all required performance guarantees as a condition of
plan approval with a note on the plan so stating.
14.
15. Payment of the permit application fees.
Performance guarantees and removal of abandoned/unused facilities.
General guarantee. No building permit may be issued until the
applicant has filed a performance guarantee with the town
manager equal to 150% of the cost of completing the following
improvements:
1.
H.
Section 71 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 71
CHCT:1094
Section 72. Condominium conversions. [Ord. No. 2006.12,
3-21-2006]
The construction of any drainage systems involving piping,
culverts, or retention or detention facilities; and
a.
The construction of erosion and sedimentation control
measures or landscaping required to meet the standards of this
section; and
b.
Other site improvements required by the board to meet the
standards of this section.
c.
Removal of abandoned/unused facilities. The owner of a
telecommunications facility shall be required to remove the tower
should it not be used for the use or uses approved for a period
of 12 consecutive months. The tower owner shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer on an annual basis regarding the status of
the use of the tower. The tower, any associated buildings used
only for sheltering communications equipment, and any fencing
or other appurtenances shall be removed at such time as they
have no longer been used for a period longer than six months. An
applicant for a conditional use permit under this section shall post
a performance guarantee with the town prior to obtaining a permit
that is equal to 150% of the cost of removing the structure.
The performance guarantee covering such removal shall be for
a minimum term of five years. It must contain a mechanism,
satisfactory to the town, for review of the cost of removal of
the structure every five years, and a mechanism for increasing
the amount of the guarantee should the revised cost estimate so
necessitate.
2.
Purpose. The purpose of this article is to regulate the conversion of
rental housing to condominiums in order to:
Minimize the potential adverse impacts of such conversion on
tenants.
1.
To ensure that such converted housing is safe and decent.
To these ends, this article shall be liberally construed.
2.
A.
Applicability. This article shall apply to the conversion of any rental unit
to a condominium.
B.
Definitions. For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall be
defined as follows, unless otherwise clearly implied:
CONDOMINIUM — Any interest in real estate created pursuant to the
Unit Ownership Act, 33 M.R.S.A. § 560 et seq., or its equivalent, as it
may from time to time be amended.
C.
Section 71 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 72
CHCT:1095
DEVELOPER — Any person or other legal entity, but not including
an established lending institution unless it is an active participant in
a common promotional scheme, who, whether acting as principal or
agent, records a declaration of condominium that includes real estate,
any portion of which was previously a rental unit.
TENANT — Any occupant in lawful possession of a rental unit, whether
by lease, sublease, or otherwise.
UNIT — Any building, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used
primarily as a separate dwelling.
Protection of tenants.
Notice of intent to convert. A developer shall give to each tenant
written notice of intent to convert at least 120 days before the
tenant is required by the developer to vacate. The notice shall set
forth specifically the rights of tenants under Subsections 72D1,
72D2, and 72E, and shall contain the following statement: "If you
do not buy your apartment, the developer of this project is required
by law to assist you in finding another place to live and in
determining your eligibility for relocation payments." The notice
shall also set forth the offer price and all terms and conditions
of the option to purchase. If the notice specifies a date by which
the tenant is required to vacate, the notice may also serve as a
notice of termination under the applicable law of forcible entry and
detainer, if it meets the requirements thereof. The notice shall be
hand-delivered to the tenant or mailed, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, postage prepaid, to the tenant at the address
of the unit or such other address as the tenant may provide. The
notice shall be effective when actually received. No tenant may
be required by a developer to vacate without having been given
notice as required herein, except for the reasons specified in the
applicable law of forcible entry and detainer, and in accordance
with the procedures thereof. The terms of a tenancy, including rent,
may not be altered during the notice period, except as expressly
provided in a preexisting written lease. If, within 120 days after a
tenant is required by a developer to vacate, the developer records
a declaration of condominium without having given notice as
required herein, the developer shall be presumed to have
converted in violation of this article.
1.
Option to purchase. For a sixty-day period following the giving of
notice as required in Subsection 72D1, the developer shall grant
to the tenant an exclusive and irrevocable option to purchase the
unit of which the tenant is then possessed, which option may
not be assigned. If the tenant does not purchase or contract to
purchase the unit during the sixty-day period, the developer may
not convey or offer to convey the unit to any other person during
the following 180 days at a price or on terms more favorable
than the price or terms previously offered to the tenant, unless
2.
D.
Section 72 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 72
CHCT:1096
Section 73. Planned unit developments. [Ord. No. 2006.13,
3-7-2006]
the more favorable price or terms are first offered exclusively and
irrevocably to the tenant for an additional sixty-day period. This
subsection shall not apply to any rental unit that, when converted,
will be restricted exclusively to nonresidential use. If, within two
years after a developer records a declaration of condominium, the
use of any such unit is changed such that but for the preceding
sentence, this subsection would have applied, the developer shall
be presumed to have converted in violation of this article.
Relocation payments. If the tenant does not purchase the unit, the
developer shall, before the tenant is required by the developer to
vacate, make a cash payment to the tenant in an amount equal to
the amount of rent paid by the tenant for the immediately preceding
two months. Additionally, the developer shall, upon demand, provide
assistance to the tenant in the form of referrals to other reasonable
accommodations.
E.
Conversion permit. Before conveying or offering to convey a converted
unit, the developer shall obtain a conversion permit from the Code
Enforcement Office. The permit shall issue only upon receipt of a
completed application therefore in a form to be devised for that
purpose, payment of a fee of $150 per unit, and a finding, upon
inspection, that each unit, together with any common areas and
facilities appurtenant thereto, is in full compliance with all applicable
provisions of Chapter 18 (Building Code), Chapter 18 (Electrical
Installations), Chapter 18 (Minimum Standards for Dwellings) of this
Code, and the Life Safety Code as adopted by the state. The developer
shall post a copy of the permit in a conspicuous place in each unit, and
shall make copies available to prospective purchasers upon request.
F.
Variation by agreement. No provision of, or right conferred by, this
article may be waived by a tenant, by agreement or otherwise, and any
such waiver shall be void. Any attempt to require, encourage, or induce
a tenant to waive any provision hereof, or right conferred hereby, shall
be a violation of this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to void
any term of a lease which offers greater rights than those conferred
hereby.
G.
Purpose. The purpose of planned unit development regulations is to
encourage and allow more creative and imaginative design of land
developments in the growth areas of Biddeford. Planned unit
developments are intended to allow substantial flexibility in planning
and designing a proposal. This flexibility often accrues in the form of
relief from compliance with conventional zoning ordinance site and
design requirements. Ideally, this flexibility results in a development
that is better planned, that contains more amenities, and ultimately
a development that is more desirable to live in than one produced
in accordance with typical zoning ordinance and subdivision controls.
A.
Section 72 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 73
CHCT:1097
An intrinsic premise upon which the approval of a planned unit
development (PUD) must be conditioned, is that while more lenient
siting requirements may be granted, the planned unit developments
are encouraged to contain features not normally required of traditional
developments.
Objectives. Through proper planning and design, each planned unit
development should be designed with the following objectives in mind:
To allow for the design of developments that are architecturally and
environmentally innovative, and that achieve better utilization of
land than is possible through strict application of standard zoning
and subdivision controls.
1.
To encourage land development that, to the greatest extent
possible, preserves natural vegetation, respects natural
topographic and geologic conditions, and refrains from adversely
affective flooding, soil, drainage, and other natural ecologic
conditions.
2.
To combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms, and
structural/visual relationships within an environment that allows
mixing of different land uses in an innovative and functionally
efficient manner.
3.
To provide for abundant, accessible, and properly located public
open and recreation space, common open and recreation space,
and other public and commonly held facilities.
4.
To promote the efficient use of land resulting in networks of
utilities, streets and other infrastructure features that maximize
the allocation of fiscal and natural resources.
5.
To enable land developments to be compatible and congruous with
adjacent and nearby land developments.
6.
To create a method for the permanent preservation of historic
buildings and/or landmarks.
7.
B.
Applicability.
Planned unit developments are permitted in zones where the
proposed use is a permitted use or is permitted by conditional
use permit. For example, only those zones that permit multifamily
housing shall allow a residential PUD.
1.
PUDs are permitted on tracts of land a minimum of two acres
in size. Net lot acreage and density requirements, as Article VI,
Section 44 applies to all proposed PUDs.
2.
A tract of land to be developed as a PUD shall have a minimum lot
size of two acres, except that a planned unit development may have
a lot size of less than two acres if the Planning Board finds that a
3.
C.
Section 73 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 73
CHCT:1098
planned unit development is in the public interest because one or
more of the following conditions exist:
The property or its neighborhood has historical character of
importance to the community that will be protected by use of a
planned unit development;
a.
The property is adjoining a property which has been developed
or redeveloped under a planned unit development, and a
planned unit development will contribute to the maintenance
of the amenities and values of the neighboring planned unit
development;
b.
Unique or innovative design concepts developed to further the
goals of the Biddeford Comprehensive Plan and the objective
of this section.
c.
Authority. The Biddeford Planning Board shall review all applications
for planned unit developments. All plans for PUDs shall conform to
either subdivision (Chapter 66, Biddeford Code of Ordinances) or site
review (Article XI of the Biddeford Land Development Regulations),
whichever shall apply.
D.
Approval criteria. Approval criteria shall be the applicable approval
criteria for subdivision, site plan review, and/or conditional use permits,
whichever apply.
E.
Permitted uses. Any use consistent with the Biddeford Comprehensive
Plan and is a permitted use or is permitted by conditional use permit
in any of the zones according to Article V, Establishment, of Zones, of
the Biddeford Land Development Regulations is permitted in a planned
unit development (PUD).
Mobile homes are not permitted in a planned unit development.
F.
Performance standards.
Setbacks:
The front, side, and rear setbacks around the periphery of the
planned unit development site shall at a minimum be the same
as imposed in the respective zones.
a.
Buildings and structures shall be adequately setback from
internal vehicular access ways and parking areas so as to
ensure the public's health, safety, and welfare. In no
circumstance shall buildings or structures be permitted closer
than five feet to any vehicular access way or parking area.
b.
All buildings must be separated from each other by at least 20
feet.
c.
1.
2. Frontage:
G.
Section 73 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 73
CHCT:1099
The planned unit development lot must have frontage equal to
50% of the frontage required in its respective zone, but no less
than 50 feet of frontage.
a.
All buildings within the PUD must be situated so as to provide
adequate access to internal streets and access ways, to the
satisfaction of the Biddeford Fire Department.
b.
Building height:
The maximum building height shall be the same as imposed in
the respective zones.
a.
3.
Building design and orientation:
Buildings shall be located and oriented, as much as possible,
with respect of scenic vistas, natural resources and features,
topography, and natural drainage conditions.
a.
Buildings and structures shall be designed to be
architecturally pleasing and to be compatible with the
surrounding neighborhood and natural environment.
b.
4.
Waste disposal:
All planned unit developments shall provide private solid waste
disposal.
a.
5.
Utilities:
All utilities in a planned unit development shall be located
underground.
a.
Public sewer and water is required for all planned unit
developments.
b.
6.
Recreation/open space requirements:
All planned unit developments shall maintain the following
amount of recreation/open space land:
Residential:
MSRD Zones, R2 Zone—Ten percent of the total lot
size as recreation/open space land, or 1,000 square
feet per residential unit, whichever is greater.
i.
All other zones—Twenty percent of the total lot site as
recreation/open space land, or 1,000 square feet per
residential unit, whichever is greater.
ii.
(1)
Office:
MSRD Zones, OR Zone—Five percent of the total lot
site as recreation/open space land.
i.
(2)
a.
7.
Section 73 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 73
CHCT:1100
All other zones—Ten percent of the total lot size as
recreation/open space land.
ii.
Commercial:
MSRD Zones—Five percent of the total lot site as
recreation/open space land.
i.
All other zones—Ten percent of the total lot size as
recreation/open space land.
ii.
(3)
(4) Industrial. Five percent of the total lot site as open space.
Mixed-use. The greater of the applicable standards listed
above.
(5)
In all zones, the Planning Board may reduce the amount of
required recreation/open space land if there is public
recreation areas (e.g. parkland) located within a reasonable
distance of the project location and the applicant contributes
an in-lieu-of fee as follows:
Recreation/open space facilities value calculation (based
on the "City of Biddeford Planned Unit Development
Recreation/Open Space Facilities Value Calculation
Methodology"):
The base value for calendar year 2006 for recreation/
open space facilities shall be $67,000 per acre.
i.
On January 1 of each subsequent calendar year shall
be increased by 8% to reflect the average adjustment
between 2001 and 2005.
ii.
(1)
The applicant can reduce the amount of recreation/open
space land required if a pro-rated contribution is provided
to a targeted parks and recreation capital improvement
fund. For example, the board could allow the applicant to
reduce the amount of recreation/open space land required
for a project by 20,000 square feet if the applicant
contributed $30,753 (67,000 x 0.459) to the fund.
(2)
The parks and recreation department, following
appropriate City Council/finance committee approvals,
shall use such collected funds for capital improvements in
recreation facilities nearest to the project from which they
were collected.
(3)
Funds collected through this provision shall be placed into
a non-interest-bearing escrow account. If collected funds
are not used within 10 years, they shall be returned to the
applicant, without interest.
(4)
b.
Section 73 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 73
CHCT:1101
When considering a request to use the "in lieu of" option,
the Planning Board shall consider the following:
The proximity and accessibility of the project to
nearby public recreation land;
i.
The quality of the recreation/open space land that
could otherwise be provided on the project site;
ii.
iii. The character and demographic of the proposed PUD;
The preservation value and the potential impact that
development could have on sensitive lands if they
were not designated as recreation/open space lands.
iv.
(5)
Land that is subtracted out for net lot acreage or density
purposes (Article VI, Section 44) shall not be included in the
calculation of amount of recreation/open space land provided.
c.
Open space can be public, or held in common (e.g.,
homeowners' association, business association, etc.), or a
combination of the two.
d.
An open space plan must be submitted depicting the area to
be designated as open space, the natural features contained
therein, and any improvements to be undertaken (grading,
loam and seed, trails, playgrounds, etc.).
e.
An open space management plan must be submitted prior to
receiving final approval. The management plan must include
provisions to ensure that any common open space remains in
perpetuity.
f.
If open space is to be dedicated to the public (i.e. City), it
shall not be accepted without the approval of City Council.
No building permits shall be issued until either the City has
formally accepted the open space or the applicant has returned
to the board with a new proposal for the open space.
g.
Common open space standards. No open space area may be
accepted as common open space within a PUD, unless it meets
the following requirements:
The location, shape, size, and character of the common
open space is suitable for the planned unit development.
(1)
The common open space is for amenity or recreational
purposes, provided that the approved uses of the open
space are appropriate to the scale and character of the
PUD, considering its size, density, expected population
(number and land uses), and natural resource and natural
feature considerations including topography, floodplains,
wetlands, soils, existing vegetation, and surface water.
(2)
h.
Section 73 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 73
CHCT:1102
Common open space will be suitably improved for its
intended use, except that common open space containing
natural features worthy of preservation, such as wetlands,
be left unimproved. The buildings, structures, and
improvements to be permitted in the common open space
must be appropriate to the uses that are permitted for the
common open space.
(3)
For residential and mixed use planned unit developments:
Whenever practicable, open space in a residential or
mixed use development shall include a mixture of
active and passive recreational opportunities to
benefit the various residents of the project. Such
opportunities would include, but are not limited to,
ball and other playing fields, tennis courts, etc.
i.
In large-scale projects hiking trails or nature paths are
encouraged.
ii.
In projects that abut rivers or streams a public
easement is encouraged, to provide access to a limited
natural resource.
iii.
The plan shall reflect the natural capabilities of the
site to support development. Buildings, lots, and
support facilities will be clustered in those portions
of the site that have the most suitable conditions for
development. Environmentally sensitive areas,
including but not limited to wetlands, steep slopes,
floodplains, significant wildlife habitats, fisheries,
scenic areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants
and animals, unique natural communities and natural
areas, and sand and gravel aquifers will be maintained
and preserved to the maximum extent. The
development shall include appropriate measures for
protecting these resources, including but not limited
to modification of the proposed design of the site,
timing of construction, and limiting the extent of
excavation.
iv.
(4)
Landscaping and grading:
All PUD developments shall submit a landscaping and grading
plan.
a.
All areas indicated as natural open space shall be undisturbed
by grading, excavation or structures to the greatest extent
possible.
b.
Where drainage improvements, utility lines, hiking or bicycle
paths or similar recreational improvements are to be placed
c.
8.
Section 73 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 73
CHCT:1103
in natural areas, best engineering and design practices shall
be used to make such improvements as unobtrusive as
practicable.
The PUD preliminary and final plan shall include provision
for the retention of existing landscape features and for the
installation of appropriate new plantings of varying species,
dimensions and design.
d.
Buffers:
All requirements of Article VI, Section 12, Buffers, of the
Biddeford Land Development Regulations shall be adhered to.
a.
Further, all side and rear setback yards shall consist of natural
vegetation to screen the PUD from abutting properties. Where
natural vegetation does not exist, the side and rear setback
yards shall be landscaped with coniferous or deciduous trees,
native to the State of Maine and of sufficient size and bulk
to provide a buffer between the PUD and abutting properties.
Fencing may also be required, to provide additional screening
and security of the site.
b.
9.
Pedestrian and vehicular traffic:
Streets and accessways in a planned unit development shall
not be accepted as public streets.
a.
Sidewalks must be installed on one side of all access drives/
roads within a PUD.
b.
Mixed-use PUDs must provide a sidewalk system to connect
residential and nonresidential components.
c.
All internal pedestrian and vehicular streets and accessways
shall be adequately lit, and a lighting plan shall be submitted
for review.
d.
Internal accessways be designed and constructed to the
minimum standards for a five- to ten-lot private way (see
Article VI, Section 51), except that shoulders are not required
where curbing is installed. Accessways, however, do not need
to be within a fifty-foot deeded right-of-way.
e.
Interconnecting access between abutting parcels is
encouraged and shall be a consideration as part of the review
process of all PUDs.
f.
10.
Phasing of construction:
When the planned unit development is to be constructed in
stages during a period of time extending beyond a single
construction season, a schedule for the development of such
a.
11.
Section 73 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 73
CHCT:1104
stages or units shall be submitted stating the approximate
beginning and completion date for each such stage or unit and
the proportion of the total PUD public or private open space
and structures/units to be provided or constructed during each
such stage and the overall chronology of development to be
followed from stage to stage.
For all proposed phased developments, a detailed work plan
and erosion/sediment control plan must be submitted.
b.
The Planning Board must approve variations to an approved
phasing schedule of greater than six months.
c.
Mailboxes:
All PUD developments shall provide a group or common
mailbox system located in a convenient location so that it is
accessible to all tenants or residents.
a.
The applicant shall submit proof that the mailbox has been
approved by the local postmaster of their assigned
representative. Submit a landscaping and grading plan.
b.
12.
Application process. All PUDs with a residential component of greater
than three dwelling units shall be considered major subdivisions.
Regardless of whether or not the proposed PUD qualifies as a major
subdivision, all PUDs shall be reviewed under the major subdivision
three-step review process (sketch or concept plan, preliminary plan,
final plan), with submittal requirements matching those in Chapter
66 of the Biddeford Code of Ordinances. In addition proposed PUDs
applications shall also include the following:
Sketch or concept plan:
a. A legal description of the property in question;
b. The total number of acres to be included in the project;
A preliminary site analysis providing an overview of natural
resources and natural features and the most appropriate areas
for development.
c.
A statement of the approximate number of residential units
and/or the approximate number, type, and square footage of
nonresidential units;
d.
The approximate number of acres to be occupied and/or
devoted to or by each type of use;
e.
f. A list of waivers which may be requested;
The number of acres to be preserved as open space or
recreation space; and
g.
1.
H.
Section 73 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 73
CHCT:1105
An outline of the proposed PUD design principals and the
benefits that are expected to result from the adoption of the
PUD provisions pertaining to the subject site.
h.
Preliminary plan:
A detailed site analysis that identifies all natural resources
and natural features as well as the most appropriate areas for
development. Includes topography, floodplains, wetlands, soils,
existing vegetation, surface water.
a.
A traffic evaluation of the proposed use as it would affect
surrounding developments, properties, and transportation
networks. The level of the evaluation shall be determined by
the Planning Board, after receiving a recommendation from
the City Engineer, at the conceptual review stage of the
process.
b.
c. Calculations of the following:
Open space not to be otherwise occupied by buildings, parking,
housing units, streets, driveways, etc.
d.
Areas of environmental sensitivity such as streams, wetlands,
floodplain, etc.
e.
Amount of total impervious surface of the finished
development.
f.
Elevation renderings of key elements of the proposed project
consistent with the design principals and standards of the
project.
g.
Landscaping and buffering plan identifying locations, size, and
material types for all proposed landscaping, buffering, and
fencing.
h.
i. Lighting plan, including a photometric analysis.
A narrative describing:
The nature and concept of the project including a detailed
description of the design principals and standards to be
achieved within the project.
(1)
The proposed density, number and types of dwelling units
if a residential PUD.
(2)
A statement describing how the proposed project meets
the objectives of the PUD including the benefits that are
expected to result from the adoption of the PUD provisions
pertaining to the subject site.
(3)
j.
2.
Section 73 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 73
CHCT:1106
A detailed description of the legal mechanisms and
structures proposed to assure the perpetual maintenance
of all open space proposed.
(4)
A statement from a registered professional engineer
describing how the proposed project will be served by
public water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage or
properly permitted community systems.
(5)
A narrative description of the phasing or staging plan, if
applicable.
(6)
A specific listing of all waivers from the regulations of the
ordinance that are requested.
(7)
Final plan:
The final plan submittal shall include all requirements of the
Biddeford Subdivision Regulations as well as final versions
of all information required through the conceptual and
preliminary plan review process, outlined above.
a.
3.
Statute of limitations.
All applications that qualify as a major subdivision shall be subject
to the provisions set forth in Chapter 66, Section 66-57 of the
Biddeford Code of Ordinances.
1.
All other approvals shall be subject to the provisions set forth in
Article XI, II, Section 2.B., Statute of limitations, of the Biddeford
Land Development Regulations, except that:
In the case where an approved PUD becomes null and void,
the applicant shall have 30 days in which to apply to the
Planning Board for an extension. If an extension is requested,
the Planning Board will hold a public hearing with proper
notification as per Article X of the Biddeford Land
Development Regulations. The Planning Board will only grant
one extension to the PUD approval. Otherwise, the PUD will
require a new submittal to the Planning Board for review.
a.
An applicant may also apply for the extension to the approval
of the PUD prior to that approval becoming null and void.
b.
2.
I.
Interpretation.
The standards and criteria contained in these regulations shall be
interpreted as minimum requirements, and compliance with said
minimum requirements shall in no instance obligate or require the
Planning Board to approve any particular application solely on that
basis.
1.
J.
Section 73 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 73
CHCT:1107
Section 74. Blasting. [Ord. No. 2007.38, 6-19-2007]
Section 75. Small wind energy systems. [Ord. No. 2008.80,
10-7-2008]
Only after the Planning Board is fully satisfied that a proposed
application is in the best interest of the City, the general public,
and the general welfare of its inhabitants shall the application be
approved.
2.
In addition, the design standards contained in Article XI, Section 5,
site design and development criteria, shall also apply.
3.
In matters of judgment or interpretation of the requirements
contained in these provisions, the opinion and determination of
the Planning Board shall prevail. In any particular where these
regulations are in conflict with any other rules, regulations, or
ordinances of the City of Biddeford the more restrictive regulation
or provision shall prevail.
4.
All blasting operations shall be in accordance with Chapter 34,
Environment, Article V, Blasting of the Biddeford Code of Ordinances.
1.
The standards in Chapter 34 reflect minimum standards for blasting
operations, and the Planning Board may add to or increase these
standards based on its review of individual projects.
2.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to:
1. Oversee the permitting of small wind energy systems.
Preserve and protect public health and safety without significantly
increasing the cost or decreasing the efficiency of a small wind
energy system.
2.
A.
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall be
defined as follows, unless otherwise clearly implied:
METEOROLOGICAL TOWER (MET TOWER) — Includes the tower,
base plate, anchors, guy cables and hardware, anemometers (wind
speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment
anemometers and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring, and any
telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed
and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either
instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind
resource at a given location. For the purposes of this section, met
towers are those towers erected on a temporary basis primarily to
collect data relevant to the siting of small wind energy systems.
1.
OWNER — The individual or entity that intends to own and operate
the small wind energy system in accordance with this ordinance.
2.
B.
Section 73 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 75
CHCT:1108
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of
electric power production equipment. The manufacturer typically
specifies this output with a nameplate on the equipment.
3.
ROTOR DIAMETER —
Horizontal axis small wind energy systems: the cross sectional
dimension of the circle swept by the rotating blades.
a.
Vertical axis small wind energy systems: the cross sectional
dimension of the circle swept by the furthest outreaching part
of the blade.
b.
4.
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM (SWES) — A wind energy system,
including all equipment, machinery, and structures, that:
Is used to convert and then store or transfer energy from the
wind into usable forms of energy intended primarily for on-site
consumption, but may transfer excess energy into the grid;
a.
b. Has a rated nameplate capacity of 100 kilowatts or less; and
c. Has a total height of 170 feet or less.
5.
TOTAL HEIGHT —
Horizontal axis small wind energy systems: the vertical
distance from ground level to the tip of a wind generator blade
when the tip is at its highest point.
a.
Vertical axis small wind energy systems: the vertical distance
from ground level to the highest point of the small wind energy
system.
b.
6.
TOWER — The monopole (freestanding or guyed) structure that
supports a wind generator.
7.
WIND TURBINE — The blades, rotor, and associated mechanical
and electrical conversion components mounted on top of the tower.
8.
Authority.
In all zones except for the Stream Protection, Resource Protection,
and Resource Protection-1 Shoreland Zones, small wind energy
systems are a permitted use requiring a building permit from the
Biddeford Code Enforcement Office.
1.
In the Shoreland Zones identified above, small wind energy
systems also require Planning Board review and approval, as per
Article XIV of the Land Development Regulations.
2.
Small wind energy systems subject to this section shall be exempt
from review by any advisory boards or commissions of the City.
3.
C.
Section 75 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 75
CHCT:1109
Permitted uses. Small wind energy systems are considered accessory
uses and structures and are permitted uses in all zones in the City
of Biddeford, subject to the Biddeford Land Development Regulations
(Zoning Ordinance), including this section. In all zones except for the
Stream Protection, Resource Protection, and Resource Protection-1
Shoreland Zones, small wind energy systems a permitted use requiring
a building permit from the Biddeford Code Enforcement Office. In
the Shoreland Zones identified above, small wind energy systems also
require Planning Board review and approval, as per Article XIV of the
Land Development Regulations.
This section is not intended to apply to roof-mounted, building
integrated, building-mounted or architectural wind systems; this
section only covers stand-alone tower mounted systems. Roofmounted,
building integrated, building-mounted or architectural wind
systems shall be permitted subject to all applicable Federal, State, and
Local laws and regulations, and shall be permitted to have a maximum
height of 15 feet above the maximum allowed building height in the
zone, as defined in Art. II, Sec. 2, Definitions.
Small wind energy systems that are constructed and installed in
accordance with the provisions of this section shall not be deemed to
constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
D.
Performance standards. New small wind energy systems shall be a
permitted use in all zoning districts subject to the following
requirements:
Number per lot. On lots of less than one acre in size, a maximum
of one SWES is permitted per lot. On lots of one acre or larger, two
SWES are permitted.
1.
Height.
On lots of one acre or less in size, the maximum total height
shall be 80 feet.
a.
On lots larger than one acre, the maximum total height shall
be 170 feet.
b.
The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed height
does not exceed the height recommended by the manufacturer
or distributor of the small wind energy system.
c.
2.
Setbacks.
Wind towers for small wind energy systems shall be set back
a distance equal to 1.1 times its total height, measured at the
center of the base of the tower, from the following:
All property lines, unless appropriate easements are
secured from adjacent property owners.
i.
a.
3.
E.
Section 75 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 75
CHCT:1110
All inhabited or inhabitable residential structures, other
than those owned or inhabited by the owner.
ii.
All overhead public utility and telephone lines, unless
written permission is granted by the affected utility or
telephone company.
iii.
Public and private road rights-of-way, unless written
permission is granted by the owner(s) with jurisdiction
over said right(s)-of-way.
iv.
Other rights-of-way, including railroads, utility corridors,
etc.
v.
Other Small Wind Energy Systems, telecommunications
towers, and water towers.
vi.
In no case shall small wind energy systems be permitted within
the front, side, or rear setback of any property.
b.
Guy cables for small wind energy systems shall be setback
at least 10 feet to any property line, unless appropriate
easements are secured from adjacent property owners.
c.
Access and safety.
The minimum distance between the ground and any part of the
rotor blade shall be 15 feet.
a.
The tower's climbing apparatus shall be no lower than 15 feet
from the ground.
b.
All access doors to SWES towers and electrical equipment
shall be clearly labeled as such and shall be locked except
during maintenance.
c.
4.
Lighting. Small wind energy systems shall not be artificially
lighted, except to the extent required by the Federal Aviation
Administration or other applicable authority.
5.
Electrical. Electrical controls and control wiring shall be wireless
or underground except where necessary to connect the small wind
energy system to the transmission or distribution network,
adjacent to that network, and shall comply with the latest adopted
versions of the NFPA 70 (NEC).
6.
Design and aesthetics.
Small wind energy systems towers shall be monopole
(freestanding, or guyed). Lattice towers are prohibited.
a.
Wind turbines and towers shall have a color or finish that
is non-reflective and non-obtrusive (galvanized steel, brushed
aluminum, or white) as was originally applied by the
b.
7.
Section 75 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 75
CHCT:1111
manufacturer, unless otherwise required by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
At small wind energy system sites, the design of buildings and
related structures shall use materials, colors, screening and
landscaping that will blend the small wind energy system to
the natural setting and existing environment and structures.
c.
Small wind energy systems shall not be used for displaying
any advertising except for the reasonable identification of the
manufacturer of the small wind energy system that may be
placed on the nacelle (cover of the electrical generator) of the
small wind energy system or an unobtrusive nameplate.
d.
Noise. The operation of all small energy wind systems shall comply
with Article VI, Section 48 (Noise), and Chapter 34, Article III, of
the Biddeford Code of Ordinances.
8.
Code compliance. A small wind energy system shall comply with all
applicable federal, state, and local building and electrical codes.
9.
Met towers.
Met towers shall be permitted under the same standards,
permit requirements, restoration requirements, and permit
procedures as a small wind energy system.
a.
Met towers are permitted as a temporary use to remain
installed for no more than three years.
b.
10.
Utility notification and interconnection. Small wind energy systems
that connect to the electric utility shall comply with Title 35-A
and 65-407 Public Utility Commission's Rule 313, Consumer Net
Energy Billing.
11.
Permit requirements.
Building permit. A building permit shall be required for the
installation of a Small Wind Energy System.
1.
Site plan required. The building permit application shall be
accompanied by a site plan that includes the following:
a. Property lines and physical dimensions of the property;
Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the
property;
b.
The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the
property;
c.
d. Any overhead utility lines on the property;
e. Location of the proposed wind system tower.
2.
F.
Section 75 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 75
CHCT:1112
Location plan required. The building permit application shall be
accompanied by a location plan depicting the following:
a. Location of the proposed wind system tower;
The location of all inhabited or inhabitable residential
structures within 250 feet of the proposed location of the wind
system tower;
b.
All overhead public utility and telephone lines within 250 feet
of the proposed location of the wind system tower;
c.
All public and private road rights-of-way within 250 feet of the
proposed location of the wind system tower;
d.
Other rights-of-way, including railroads, utility corridors, etc.,
within 250 feet of the proposed location of the wind system
tower;
e.
Other small wind energy systems, telecommunications towers,
met towers, and water towers within 250 feet of the proposed
location of the wind system tower; and
f.
g. Distances between the proposed tower and all of the above.
3.
Documents required. The building permit application shall be
accompanied by the following supporting material:
Copies of any recorded easements necessary to meet the
setbacks requirements as contained in Subsection D3 above;
a.
Wind system specifications, including manufacturer and
model, rotor diameter, tower height, tower type (freestanding
or guyed);
b.
Evidence that the proposed height does not exceed the height
recommended by the manufacturer or distributor of the small
wind energy system;
c.
Tower foundation blueprints or drawings completed or
reviewed and stamped by a Maine licensed professional
engineer, with seal;
d.
Tower blueprints or drawings completed or reviewed and
stamped by a Maine licensed professional engineer, with seal;
and
e.
Other supporting documentation as deemed necessary by the
Code Enforcement Office.
f.
4.
Fees. The fee required for a building permit from the Code
Enforcement Office must accompany the application for a building
permit for a small wind energy system.
5.
Section 75 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 75
CHCT:1113
Section 76. Recycling facilities. [Added 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2010.70]
Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire
if the small wind energy system is not installed and functioning
within 12 months from the date the permit is issued.
6.
Removal of unsafe/abandoned small wind energy systems.
Unsafe. Small wind energy system found to be unsafe by the
Code Enforcement Office shall be repaired by the owner to
meet current federal, state, and local safety standards or shall
be removed within six months.
a.
Abandonment. A small wind energy system that is not used
for a consecutive twelve-month period shall be deemed
abandoned. The Code Enforcement Office shall notify the
owner by registered mail and shall provide 30 days for a
response. In such a response the landowner shall set forth
reasons for the operational difficulty and provide a reasonable
timetable for corrective action.
After receiving the response, if the Code Enforcement Office
still determines the small wind energy system is abandoned,
the owner of a small wind energy system shall remove the
wind turbine from the tower at the owner's sole expense
within 120 days from receipt of the original notice from the
Code Enforcement Office.
b.
7.
No new recycling facility may commence operation without first being
reviewed and approved according to the procedures and standards
applicable to conditional uses under Article VII of the City of Biddeford
Zoning Ordinance.
A.
All outside storage shall be under cover and/or screened from view from
adjacent properties.
B.
The site shall be landscaped to blend with the natural vegetation that is
present or was recently on the site.
C.
Recycling facilities may only accept materials for which the facility
has been approved by the Planning Board. Recycling facilities must
prepare and submit a written materials management plan (MMP) for
the handling and management of all materials entering the facility and/
or created at the facility. The MMP shall include, but not be limited to: a
description of all incoming and outgoing materials; facility capacities; a
QA/QC inspection program designed to ensure that only those materials
approved by the Planning Board are accepted at the facility; a facilitywide
process flow diagram and detailed narrative; material descriptions
with contamination percentages; storage and processing equipment
and locations; storage and/or processing hold times for all materials
at the facility; and a control plan for unacceptable materials. No
D.
Section 75 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 76
CHCT:1114
Section 77. Medical marijuana. [Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No.
2016.88]
Section 78. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs). [Added 3-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017.16]
conditional use approval shall be granted for a recycling facility without
an approved MMP and associated appropriate operational controls as
per Article VII, Section 7f. Recycling facilities shall not operate without
an approved MMP. No modification of an approved MMP shall occur
without prior review and approval of the Planning Board. Application
for the modification of an approved MMP shall be submitted at least
three months prior to the expected modification. MMPs are
nontransferrable. In the event of a sale or transfer of ownership, it
is recommended that an MMP be submitted 180 days prior to the
anticipated sale or transfer of ownership.
Before submission of a conditional use application, the applicant must
demonstrate his or her authorization to cultivate, process and store
medical marijuana pursuant to the Maine Use of Medical Marijuana
Program.
A.
As an accessory use, medical marijuana home production shall be
allowed in any qualifying patient's residence or any medical marijuana
caregiver's primary year-round residence in every base zone and
overlay zone, without any requirement for land use permitting.
B.
No medical marijuana dispensary or medical marijuana growing facility
shall be closer than 250 linear feet, measured in a straight line from
the dispensary or facility building entrance, to the nearest point on
the boundary of any property which is occupied by a licensed day-care
facility, school, Town park, Town playground or church.
C.
Before granting an approval, the Planning Board shall ensure the
applicant has reviewed his or her property and building security plans
with the Biddeford Police Department and the Police Department finds
the security measures are consistent with state requirements.
D.
No signs containing the word "marijuana," or a graphic/image of any
portion of a marijuana plant or otherwise identifying medical marijuana
shall be erected, posted or in any way displayed on the outside of a
medical marijuana dispensary or a medical marijuana growing facility.
Interior advertisements, displays of merchandise or signs depicting the
activities of a medical marijuana dispensary or a medical marijuana
growing facility shall be screened to prevent public viewing from
outside such facility.
E.
No use shall emit offensive, harmful, or noxious odors beyond the
property line.
F.
A. Purpose and intent. The intent of permitting ADUs is to:
Section 76 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 78
CHCT:1115
Provide older homeowners with a means of obtaining rental
income, companionship, security, and services, thereby enabling
them to stay more comfortably in homes and neighborhoods they
might otherwise be forced to leave;
1.
Add moderately priced rental units to the housing stock to meet the
needs of smaller households and make housing units available to
moderate income households who might otherwise have difficulty
finding housing;
2.
Develop housing units in single-family neighborhoods that are
appropriate for households at a variety of stages in their life cycle;
3.
4. Provide housing units for persons with disabilities;
Protect stability, property values, and the residential character of a
neighborhood.
5.
Procedural requirements.
Review procedure:
One ADU is permitted per residentially zoned parcel (See
Article V, Table A, Table of Land Uses.), except within the
Coastal Residential (CR) Zone, including the RP and LR overlay
districts within the CR Zone, where ADUs are not permitted.
ADUs are also permitted on nonresidentially zoned parcels
containing a single nonconforming (as to use) dwelling unit
which was in existence as of January 1, 2017. A permit for
an ADU may be issued by the Code Enforcement Office so
long as all of the standards in this section are met. [Amended
6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017.57]
a.
The Code Enforcement Office shall conduct the administrative
review of all applications for an ADU. All findings and decisions
of the Code Enforcement Office shall be final except where
subject to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals as provided
in Article IX of the Biddeford Land Development Regulations.
b.
1.
Application fee required:
In addition to all applicable building, electrical, plumbing, etc.,
permit fees, ADU applications shall cost a nonrefundable fee of
$200.
a.
2.
B.
Use and dimensional regulations.
The Code Enforcement Office may issue a building permit
authorizing the installation and use of an ADU within an existing
or new owner-occupied, single-family dwelling, attached to an
existing or new owner-occupied, single-family dwelling, or in a
detached structure on a single-family home lot only when the
following conditions are met:
1.
C.
Section 78 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 78
CHCT:1116
The unit will be a complete, separate housekeeping unit
containing both kitchen and bath.
a.
Only one ADU may be created within a single-family house or
house lot.
b.
ADUs may be created on lots meeting the minimum lot size
for a single-family dwelling in the zoning district or on legally
nonconforming lots as of January 1, 2017.
c.
ADUs shall not be intended for sale and shall remain in
common ownership with the principal dwelling unit.
d.
All ADUs shall have a gross floor area of at least 300 square
feet.
e.
The gross floor area of an ADU (including any additions) shall
not be greater than 35% of the gross floor area of the principal
dwelling unit or 900 square feet, whichever is greater.
f.
Once an ADU has been added to a single-family residence or
lot, the ADU shall never be enlarged beyond the 35% of the
gross floor area of the principal dwelling unit or the 900 square
feet allowed by this ordinance.
g.
h. Rooftop decks are not permitted.
i. Balconies shall not face interior side lot lines.
j. An ADU may not have more than two bedrooms.
The construction of any ADU must be in conformity with all
applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and
regulations.
k.
One off-street parking space is required for an ADU unless
legal on-street parking or publicly supplied off-street parking
is located within 1,000 feet. Tandem parking is permitted.
l.
Internal ADUs shall also comply with the following:
Internal ADUs shall not result in additional entrances
facing a public street on the primary structure.
i.
Any stairways leading to the internal ADU shall be
enclosed.
ii.
m.
Attached ADUs shall also comply with the following:
Attached ADUs shall not result in additional entrances
facing a public street on the primary structure.
i.
Any stairways associated with an attached ADU shall be
enclosed.
ii.
n.
Section 78 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 78
CHCT:1117
Article VII
CONDITIONAL USES
Section 1. Authorization. [Ord. of 10-6-1998]
The Planning Board is hereby authorized to hear and decide upon
applications for conditional use.105
The primary exterior materials of an attached ADU shall
match the primary exterior materials of the principal
structure.
iii.
Detached ADUs shall also comply with the following:
Not less than 10% of the total area of the facade of a
detached accessory dwelling unit facing an alley or public
street shall be windows.
i.
Exterior stairways shall be allowed, provided that the
finish of the railing matches the finish or trim of the
detached accessory dwelling unit. Raw or unfinished
lumber shall not be permitted on an exterior stairway.
ii.
o.
In order to encourage the development of housing units for
disabled and handicapped individuals and persons with limited
mobility, the Code Enforcement Office may allow reasonable
deviation from the stated conditions where necessary to install
features that facilitate access and mobility for disabled persons.
2.
Occupancy requirements.
The owner(s) of the residence in which the ADU is created must
continue to occupy either the ADU or the principal dwelling unit.
1.
If an owner is unable or unwilling to fulfill the requirement to
occupy either the ADU or the principal dwelling unit, the owner
shall remove those features of the ADU that make it a dwelling unit.
2.
3. An ADU may not be occupied by more than three people.
D.
Administration and enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Office to administer
and enforce the provisions of this ordinance.
1.
No building shall be constructed or changed in use or configuration
until the Code Enforcement Officer has issued a permit. ADUs shall
not be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the Code Enforcement Office.
2.
E.
105. Editor's Note: The sentence, which immediately followed and provided for consideration of
recommendations made by the Coastal Area Committee, was removed from the Code
Section 78 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:1118
Section 2. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with modifications or
conditions, or disapprove all applications for conditional use permits. No
conditional use permit may be granted unless specific provision for such
conditional use is made in a particular zone.
Section 3. Activities requiring conditional use permits.
Section 4. Application procedure. [Ord. of 10-6-1998]
A conditional use permit shall be required or any land use or activity
which is classified as a "conditional use" in a particular zone. A
conditional use permit shall also be required for any increase or
expansion of any existing conditional use, as defined below:
1. Floor space increase of 25% or more within a ten-year period; or
New materials or processes not normally associated with the
existing use.
2.
A.
In cases where expansion will not change the existing use, or the
exterior dimensions of any existing building, the Planning Board may
pass upon the review procedure and waive the submission
requirements in order that the project may be expedited. Waivers shall
be issued in writing and shall state the reasons. No changes shall be
made in any approved conditional use without approval of that change
by the Planning Board.
B.
Fee for notification of abutters.
Whenever an applicant, during the course of a review required by
this ordinance, is required to notify abutters, he shall pay a fee to
cover first class postage for all notices sent to abutting property
owners.
1.
For the purpose of this section an abutting property shall be any
parcel of land within 200 feet of the boundary of the parcel on
which the proposed project is to be conducted or constructed.
2.
The list of abutting property owners shall be developed from
records maintained by the Tax Assessor's office.
3.
The postage fee for notification of abutters shall be paid upon
submission of application.
4.
A.
Submission requirements.
A person proposing a conditional use shall file an application with
the Planning Board on forms provided for the purpose. Failure of
1.
B.
pursuant to Ord. No. 2011.38, adopted 9-20-2011. Said ordinance disbanded the Coastal
Area Committee.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:1119
Section 5. Minor conditional uses. [Ord. No. 2002.3, 1-15-2002]
In order to process applications more efficiently, certain conditional uses,
due to the limited nature of the proposed use, may be reviewed by the Codes
Enforcement office. Only uses that meet all of the following applicability
standards may be reviewed as minor conditional uses:
the applicant to submit the required information shall constitute
a basis for denial without a review of the remainder of the
application.
All plans for conditional uses presented for approval under this
section shall conform to the application standards established for
either subdivision (Chapter 66, Biddeford Code of Ordinances) or
site review (Article XI of this ordinance), whichever shall apply to
the specific proposal.
2.
Applicability.
Home occupations in which there is no point of purchase for retail
merchandise or consumer service at the home. Phone and mail
order businesses, wholesale businesses and other similar
businesses may be reviewed as minor conditional uses.
a.
Home occupations in which there are not significant exterior
alterations to the building or the site.
b.
1.
Administration.
a. The applicant must apply for a minor conditional use permit.
Upon receipt of an application for minor conditional use, the codes
enforcement office shall send a notice of the application, including
the name of the applicant, address of the applicant, the nature and
address of the proposed use, to all property owners within 200
feet. The notices shall also include a deadline for comment on the
application, to be 10 calendar days from the date of the notice.
b.
The Codes Enforcement Office shall act upon all applications for
minor conditional uses, approval or referral to the Planning Board,
within five days of the close of the public comment period.
c.
d. The Codes Enforcement office may add conditions as appropriate.
2.
Criteria for approval. Minor conditional use applications shall be
approved by the Codes Enforcement Office unless the proposed use
does not satisfy the approval criteria of Section 1 above, or other local,
state, and federal laws. If in the opinion of the Codes Enforcement
Office, an application does not meet the approval criteria, then the
application shall be referred to the Planning Board, with a written
narrative describing why the criteria has not been met, for a full
conditional use review.
3.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1120
Section 6. Standards.
Planning board jurisdiction. The Planning Board shall review any
application for a minor conditional use upon a determination by the
Codes Enforcement office that the potential impacts from a proposed
use warrant a public hearing before the Planning Board. Upon referral
to the Planning Board, the applicant shall submit a full application for
conditional use.
4.
Applications for conditional use permits must meet the standards
specified in Article VI of this ordinance as well as the standards of
subdivision or site review. In addition, because of the unique nature
and particular concern that the general public may have relating to a
conditional use in a particular zone, the Planning Board shall consider
each of the applications in light of the guidelines presented below.
A.
The Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all
applications for a conditional use permit. The applicant shall have the
burden of proving that his or her application is in compliance with the
requirements of this ordinance and that none of the conditions listed
below would result from the approval of the conditional use permit.
Failure of the applicant to submit required information shall constitute
a basis for denial without a review of the remainder of the application.
After the submission of a complete application and a review of the
required submissions, the Planning Board shall approve the application
or approve it with conditions if the application meets the following
standards:
The proposed use meets specific requirements set forth in this
ordinance and would be in compliance with applicable state or
federal laws;
1.
The proposed use would not create fire safety hazards by providing
adequate access to the site, or to the buildings on the site, for
emergency vehicles and would not create hazards through the
storage of chemicals and wastes;
2.
The proposed exterior lighting, where allowed, would not create
hazards to motorists traveling on adjacent public streets or is
adequate for the safety of occupants or users of the site or would
not damage the value and diminish the usability of adjacent
properties;
3.
The provisions for buffers and on-site landscaping provide
adequate protection to neighboring properties from detrimental or
unsightly features of the development;
4.
The proposed use would not have a significant, detrimental effect
on the use and peaceful enjoyment of abutting property as the
result of noise, vibrations, fumes, odor, dust, glare, hours of
operation, or other causes;
5.
B.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6
CHCT:1121
The provisions for vehicular loading and unloading and parking
and for vehicular and pedestrian circulation on the site and onto
adjacent public streets would not create hazards to public safety or
traffic congestion;
6.
The proposed use would generate a volume of traffic that can
reasonably be accommodated by the existing road network, or
would not create unreasonable traffic hazards or would not
exacerbate an existing traffic hazard, or would not create
unreasonable traffic congestion;
7.
The proposed use would not have a significant, detrimental effect
on the value of adjacent properties which could be avoided by
reasonable modification of the proposal;
8.
The proposed use would not have an adverse impact on the privacy
of the residents of the immediate area (within 500 feet) which could
be avoided by reasonable modification of the proposal;
9.
The proposed use would be in compliance with Biddeford's
Comprehensive Plan;
10.
The proposed use would not have an adverse impact on the
immediate neighborhood or the community relative to architectural
design, scale, bulk and building height, identity and historical
character, or visual integrity, which could be avoided by reasonable
modification of the proposal;
11.
The design of the site would not result in significant flood hazards
or flood damage or would be in conformance with applicable flood
hazard protection requirements;
12.
Adequate provision has been made for disposal of wastewater or
solid waste or for the prevention of ground or surface water
contamination;
13.
Adequate provision has been made to control erosion or
sedimentation;
14.
Adequate provision has been made to handle stormwater runoff
or other drainage problems on the site; and the proposed
development will not unduly burden off-site surface water systems;
15.
The proposed water supply would meet the demands of the
proposed use for fire protection purposes;
16.
Adequate provision has been made for the transportation, storage,
and disposal of hazardous substances and materials as defined by
state law;
17.
The proposed use would not have an adverse impact on scenic
vistas or on significant wildlife habitat or wetland areas and water
18.
Section 6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:1122
Section 7. Conditions attached to conditional uses.
The Planning Board may attach such conditions, in addition to those
required elsewhere in this ordinance, that would mitigate any adverse
effects on adjoining or neighboring properties, which might otherwise
result from the proposed use. These conditions may include, but are not
limited to, specifications for:
Article VIII
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Section 1. Building Inspector. [Ord. of 10-6-1998]
bodies which could be avoided by reasonable modification of the
proposal;
When located in the Shoreland Zone, the proposed use would
meet the purposes of Shoreland Zoning as identified in Article XIV,
Section 1 (Purposes) of this ordinance. [Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
19.
a. Type of vegetation;
b. Increased setbacks and yards;
c. Specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities;
d. Landscaping and planting screens;
e. Periods of operation;
f. Operational controls;
g. Professional inspection and maintenance;
h. Sureties;
i. Deed restrictions;
j. Locations of piers, docks, parking and signs;
k. Type of construction; or
Any other conditions, restrictions, or safeguards that would uphold the
spirit and intent of this ordinance or further review by the Biddeford
Planning Board.
l.
Office of Building Official.
The Office of Building Official is hereby created and the executive
official in charge shall be known as the “Building Inspector.”
1.
A.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 1
CHCT:1123
The Building Inspector and assistant Building Inspectors shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
2.
Liability of Building Inspector. The Building Inspector or any employee
charged with the enforcement of this ordinance, acting in good faith
and without malice for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not
render himself liable personally and he is relieved from all personal
liability of any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the Building Inspector
or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him in the
enforcement of any provisions of this ordinance, shall be defended by
the City Solicitor until final termination of the proceedings.
B.
Right of entry. The Building Inspector and all other inspectors required
under this ordinance, in the discharge of their official duties, and
upon proper identification, shall have authority to enter any building,
structure or premises for cause at any reasonable hour.
C.
Powers and duties. The Building Inspector shall have the following
duties:
Enforce all laws relating to the construction, alteration, removal
and demolition of buildings and structures, and to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
1.
Examine preliminary plans to make sure plans meet minimum
BOCA standards, to determine completeness, and to evaluate
compliance with other municipal ordinances.
2.
Act upon building applications, refer Shoreland Zone applications
and conditional use permit applications to the Planning Board,
process variance applications and administrative appeals to the
Board of Appeals, to review nonconforming use changes, and to
maintain a record of fees collected.
3.
Enter any property at reasonable hours with the consent of the
property owner, occupant or agent, to inspect the property or
structure for compliance with the laws or ordinances set forth in
this section.
4.
5. Investigate complaints and reported violations.
6. Keep written inspection reports and thorough records.
7. Issue violation notices.
8. Participate in appeals procedures.
9. Appear in court when necessary.
D.
Section 1 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 1
CHCT:1124
Section 2. Building permits.
No person shall erect, locate, construct, enlarge, remove, demolish, convert
or change the nature of the occupancy and/or use of any building or
structure, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate
building permit from the Building Inspector for each building or structure.
No person shall undertake a building alteration, as defined by this
ordinance, without first obtaining a permit.
Section 3. Building permit applications.
Confer with citizens in the administration and enforcement of this
ordinance.
10.
Regularly attend meetings of the Board of Appeals and meetings of
the Planning Board as necessary.
11.
Revoke a permit if it was issued in error or if it was based on
erroneous information.106
12.
Contents of applications. Every applicant for a building permit shall
submit copies of a written application which shall include:
As to new buildings being erected, buildings being moved, and
exterior additions to existing buildings:
The shape, size and location of the lot for which application is
made.
(a)
The shape, size and location on the lot of the proposed
building, and of any proposed additions to existing buildings.
(b)
The shape, size and location of any other existing buildings on
the lot.
(c)
The location of adjacent buildings on adjacent lots, with
reference to the distance from the lot line.
(d)
1.
The above requirements shall not apply to alterations wholly within
an existing building unless new uses are proposed or additional
dwelling units are constructed.
2.
All applications shall also include:
(a) The name and address of the property owner.
The name, address, and telephone number of the person, firm,
or firms involved in construction on the property.
(b)
(c) The square footage of the proposed construction.
3.
A.
106. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Paragraph 13, which immediately followed this
paragraph and provided for consideration of recommendations made by the Coastal Area
Committee, was removed from the Code pursuant to Ord. No. 2011.38, adopted 9-20-2011.
Said ordinance disbanded the Coastal Area Committee.
Section 1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 3
CHCT:1125
A statement of the proposed use for any new or moved building
or altered portion of an existing building.
(d)
(e) Any other information the applicant wishes to furnish.
Any other information requested by the Building Inspector to
make the applications intelligible, and to determine whether
the proposed construction will conform to this ordinance, other
local ordinances and state law.
(f)
If the property is not served by a public sewer a valid plumbing
permit or a completed application for a plumbing permit,
including the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, shall be submitted.
(g)
A certification that the information in the application is
complete and correct to the best of the applicant's knowledge
and belief.
(h)
Information showing the location and boundaries of wetlands
and freshwater ponds.
(i)
All applications shall be signed (a) by the person or firm to do
the work and (b) by the owner of the property or other person
authorizing the work.
4.
All applications shall be dated, and the Building Inspector shall
note upon each application the date and time of its receipt at his
office.
5.
In all instances, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to
demonstrate that the requirements of the ordinance have been
met.
6.
Action on application. Upon receipt of a building permit application the
Building Inspector shall:
Decide whether the information in the application is sufficient for
him to determine whether, under the ordinance, the permit should
be issued, or if the application is otherwise inadequate.
If he feels the application is insufficient or inadequate, he shall
at once notify the applicant in writing, indicating what he feels
is required to correct the application. If the application is not so
corrected, he shall deny it.
1.
When an application conforms to the provisions of this ordinance
and other codes and ordinances of the City, upon payment of the
required fee, he shall within 10 days of its receipt issue the permit.
He shall file one copy of the application and building permit with
the City Clerk and keep one copy of the application and permit in a
permanent file in his office.
2.
3.
B.
Section 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 3
CHCT:1126
Section 4. Certificate of occupancy required.
If the application does not so conform, he shall, within 10 days,
deny the permit in writing, stating therein his reasons for such
denial.
a.
In the event the proposed building or structure is so
constructed or is of such usage as to require a review of
the application by other authorities or boards, the Building
Inspector shall refer the applicant to the appropriate authority
or board for review, approval or denial. Upon his receipt of the
decision of the reviewing authority or board, in writing, and if
such decision is an approval, the Building Inspector shall issue
the permit with any conditions prescribed by the reviewing
authority or board.
b.
The Building Inspector shall not issue any building permit if
he has knowledge that a particular structure or use would
be located in an unapproved subdivision, and/or if he has
knowledge that the structure or use would be in violation of
a particular state law or local ordinance. In either case, the
burden of proof shall be upon the applicant. In denying any
permit under these circumstances, the Building Inspector shall
state in writing the reasons for the denial.
c.
If he shall fail, for any reason, within 10 days either to issue a
permit or deny an application in writing, such failure shall be
deemed a denial so that the applicant may appeal to the Board of
Appeals if he so wishes.
4.
Lapse of permit. Following the issuance of a building permit, if no
substantial start is made on the construction within 12 months of
the date of the permit, it shall lapse and become void. Thereafter no
further work on such construction can be made until a new application
has been made and approved as aforesaid. All construction shall be
completed within two years of the date of issuance of the permit. The
fee for such permit shall be charged as a renewal fee.
C.
Validity of permits. Any permit issued which is not in conformity with
the provisions of this ordinance confers no rights and is a nullity.
D.
When required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the Building
Inspector is required in advance of the use occupancy of:
1. Any lot, or change of the use thereof.
A building hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing
building or lot.
2.
A.
Issuance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or
building or structure or use complies with all the provisions of this
ordinance. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file
B.
Section 3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:1127
Section 5. Enforcement.
in the office of the Building Inspector, and a copy shall be furnished, on
request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building or land involved. A duplicate copy shall be filed in the office of
the assessor, and the certificate of occupancy shall state specifically the
uses which it permits.
Violations. If the Building Inspector shall find that any of the provisions
of this code are being violated, he shall notify by certified mail the
person(s) responsible for such violation(s) indicating the nature of the
violation(s) and the state regulations regarding fines, and order the
action necessary to correct it. If following such investigation, he feels
the ordinance is being violated, it shall be his duty to start legal action
on behalf of the City. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use
of land, buildings or structures or additions, alterations or structural
changes; or discontinuance of any illegal activity.
A.
Fines. Each offense shall constitute a separate offense for each day the
violation occurs. The penalties for violation of this ordinance shall be as
prescribed in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, as follows:
Civil penalties. The following provisions shall apply to violations of
the laws and ordinances set forth in this section, and all monetary
penalties shall be civil penalties.
The minimum penalty for starting construction or undertaking a
land use activity without a required permit shall be $100, and the
maximum penalty shall be $2,500 for each violation.
1.
The minimum penalty for a specific violation shall be $100, and the
maximum penalty shall be $2,500.
2.
The violator may be ordered to correct or abate the violations.
Where the court finds that the violation was willful, the violator
shall be ordered to correct or abate the violation unless the
abatement or correction will:
a. Result in a threat or hazard to public health or safety;
b. Result in substantial environmental damage; or
c. Result in a substantial injustice.
3.
If the municipality is the prevailing party, it shall be awarded
reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the
court finds that special circumstances make the award of these fees
and costs unjust. If the defendant is the prevailing party, he may be
awarded reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs as
provided by court rule.
4.
In setting a penalty, the court shall consider, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
5.
B.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1128
Article IX
BOARD OF APPEALS
Section 1. Establishment and organization. [Ord. of 7-7-1992; Ord.
No. 2002.68, 9-3-2002]
(a) Prior violations by the same party;
The degree of environmental damage that cannot be abated or
corrected;
(b)
The extent to which the violation continued following a
municipal order to stop; and
(c)
The extent to which the municipality contributed to the
violation by providing the violator with incorrect information
or by failing to take timely action.
(d)
The maximum penalty may exceed $2,500, but shall not exceed
$25,000, when it can be shown that there has been a previous
conviction of the same party within the past two years of the
same law or ordinance.
a.
All proceedings arising under the provisions of locally
administered laws and ordinances shall be brought in the name
of the municipality, and those fines shall be paid to the
municipality.
b.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent an
aggrieved party from taking independent action, including
instituting injunctions, mandamus, or any other appropriate
action to prevent or abate a violation.
c.
6.
A Board of Appeals is a quasijudicial body which shall consist of five
voting members plus two associate members, all of whom shall be
resident of the City of Biddeford. Members of the Board of Appeals
shall reflect as much as possible several geographic areas of the City,
and shall have diverse professional and/or employment backgrounds.
In no case shall more than two members be from the same ward.
Current members whose terms expire after 12/2005 shall have their
term reduced to 12/2005. The term of office of a member and an
associate member shall be three years, provided that those members
and associate members appointed pursuant to this section shall
continue in such capacity until the expiration of the term to which they
are appointed, so long as they meet the qualifications of membership
imposed by this section. In order to comply with the provisions of this
ordinance requiring geographical balance, any current members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals who reside in the same ward with more than
two other members shall have their terms of office reduced to expire on
June 30, 2003.
A.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 1
CHCT:1129
Section 2. Proceedings of the Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 2002.68,
9-3-2002]
The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this ordinance, and shall
also adopt Roberts Rules of Order. Meetings shall be held at the call of
the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The
Chairman, or in his absence, the acting Chairman, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the
public. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing
the vote of each member upon each question, or of absence or failure to
vote, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions,
all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the offices
of the Board.
A municipal officer or his spouse may not be a member or associate
member of the Board of Appeals. No member shall serve more than
three consecutive terms, including any term or part of a term served
under any predecessor to this section. Any member appointed to fill a
vacancy for which more than half of the unexpired term remains, for
purposes of this provision shall be deemed to have served one full term.
B.
Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum for purposes
of conducting a meeting and taking action. When a regular member of
the board is unable to act because of interest, incapacity or absence,
an associate member shall be designated by the Chairman to act in
his/her stead. Members of the Board of Appeals shall be nominated by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. When there is a permanent
vacancy, a new member shall be appointed to serve for the remainder
of the unexpired term. A permanent vacancy arises upon the death,
resignation or removal of a member, or upon the failure of a member
at any time during his term to meet any of the qualifications herein
provided for appointment as a member. Members of the Board of
Appeals may be removed from office by the Mayor, Council or board
for cause after notice and hearing before the expiration of their term.
Failure to attend three or more consecutive meetings of the board
without excuse shall constitute cause for removal of a member.
C.
The chairman shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Council. Annually, at its first meeting in January, the Board of Appeals
shall elect a vice chairman and secretary from its own membership.
The term of these officers shall be one year. The chairman may not
be appointed for more than two consecutive terms. The results of
the annual election shall be submitted to the municipal officers. The
Chairman of the Board of Appeals is a voting member and his/her vote
shall be cast at the same time as other members of the board.
D.
Section 1 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 3
CHCT:1130
Section 3. Conflicts. [Ord. No. 2002.68, 9-3-2002]
Any questions raised by any interested party of whether a particular issue
involves a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a member from voting
shall be decided by a majority of the members present except the member
who is being challenged.
Section 4. Powers and duties. [Ord. of 12-19-1995; Ord. No.
2002.68, 9-3-2002]
Appeals shall be from decisions of the Building Inspector or Planning Board
to the Board of Appeals. The Department of Environmental Protection shall
be notified of the results of the appeals hearing involving land within
the Shoreland Zone. Any appeal denied by the Board of Appeals may be
appealed to the superior court in accordance with Maine State Rules of Civil
Procedures, Rule 80B.
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
Administrative appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is a zoning violation or error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the Building Inspector or Planning Board in
the enforcement of this ordinance. The following procedure governs
administrative appeals:
When errors of administrative procedures or interpretation are
found, the case shall be remanded back to the Building Inspector
or Planning Board for correction.
1.
A.
Variance appeals.
The board shall hear and decide cases where a relaxation of this
ordinance may be sought. Additional conditions and safeguards
may be prescribed by the Board upon the applicant so as to
minimize any adverse impact as a result of granting the variance.
The burden of proof rests with the applicant to demonstrate that
the conditions for a variance exists. A variance may be granted
by the Board for undue hardship which shall be interpreted only
in strict compliance with all of the following criteria and with the
criteria of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4353:
That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted; and
a.
That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances
of the property (not desired use or personal hardship) and not
to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and
b.
That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
c.
That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner; and
d.
1.
B.
Section 3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:1131
Section 5. Appeals to the Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 2002.68,
9-3-2002]
Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to
the public good, or impair the purposes and intent of this
ordinance.
e.
A variance is not justified unless all of the foregoing five criteria are
present in the case. A variance is a relaxation of the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance that may be granted by the Board
of Appeals only where strict application of this ordinance, or a
provision thereof, to the petitioner or his property, would cause
undue hardship. A variance may only be granted for a permitted
use or legal nonconforming use in that particular district. The
Board of Appeals is prohibited from issuing a variance for a new
use that is not permitted by this ordinance.
2.
In order to preserve the terms of this ordinance as much as
possible, the board may impose such conditions to a variance as
it deems necessary. Variances shall be the exception, not the rule.
Variances which are granted shall be the minimum necessary to
relieve hardship.
3.
Making an appeal.
An appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved by a decision of
the Building Inspector or Planning Board to the Board of Appeals
within 30 days of such decision, and not otherwise, except that the
Board, upon a showing of good cause, may waive the thirty-day
requirement.
1.
Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a
written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal.
2.
For a variance appeal the applicant shall submit:
A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing
building and other physical features pertinent to the variance
request.
(a)
A concise written statement stating what variance is
requested.
(b)
A written response to the five criteria which determine undue
hardship.
(c)
All documentary evidence shall be submitted at the time of
application. Such documentary evidence, along with oral
testimony, shall constitute the record of the board's hearing.
No documentary material submitted at the hearing shall be
reviewed by the board or made part of the record.
(d)
3.
A.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1132
Upon being notified of an appeal, the Building Inspector shall
forthwith transmit to the Board and Planning Board all the papers
specifying the record of the decision under appeal. Each appeal
shall be accompanied by a check for $50 to cover advertising and
administrative costs. If the actual cost of advertising exceeds $50,
the applicant shall pay the balance. The Board of Appeals shall hold
a public hearing on the appeal. For appeals involving the issuance
of a building permit, the Building Inspector shall issue a cease and
desist order.
4.
Procedure on appeal.
At least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing on such appeal, the
Board shall cause to be published in one issue in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City a notice which includes:
(a) The name of the person appealing.
(b) A brief description of the property involved.
A brief description of the decision under appeal, or the nature
of the variance appeal.
(c)
(d) The time and place of the Board's hearing.
1.
At least 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the Board shall
also cause the City Clerk to give similar written notice to:
All property owners of record whose properties lie within 200
feet of the affected property, and/or immediate abutters and
property owners across the street or stream;
(a)
(b) The person making the appeal; and
The Planning Board and any other parties of record.
The failure of a property owner to receive notice of the
hearing shall not invalidate the hearing or the decision of the
Board of Appeals.
(c)
2.
Hearings.
The Board may receive any oral or documentary evidence but
shall provide as a matter of policy for the exclusion of
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence or
hearsay evidence. Every party shall have the right to present
his case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, and to
submit rebuttal evidence.
(a)
The appellant's case shall be heard first. To maintain orderly
procedure, each side shall proceed without interruption. All
persons at the hearing shall abide by the order of the
Chairman.
(b)
3.
B.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:1133
Section 6. Decisions of the Board of Appeals. [Ord. No. 2002.68,
9-3-2002]
At any hearing, a party may be represented by agent or
attorney. Hearings shall not be continued to other times except
for good cause as determined by the Board. If a hearing is
tabled and rescheduled, proper notice shall be sent to the
appellant and abutters and/or property owners of record within
200 feet.
(c)
The Building Inspector or his designated assistant shall attend
all hearings and may present to the Board of Appeals all plans,
photographs, or other material he deems appropriate for an
understanding of the appeal.
(d)
The transcript of testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with
all papers and requests filed in the proceedings, shall
constitute the record. Proposed findings of fact may be
submitted by any party, but shall not be considered as
evidence.
(e)
The Board of Appeals may go into executive session only upon
a three-fifths vote of the members present and voting. A motion
to go into executive session shall indicate the precise nature of
the business of the executive session. No other matters may be
considered in that particular executive session. An executive
session may be held only for the following purposes. No other
matters may be considered in executive session.
Consultations between the Board of Appeals and its
attorney concerning the legal rights and duties of the
Board, pending or contemplated litigation, settlement
offers and matters where the duties of the Board's counsel
to his client pursuant to the code of professional
responsibility clearly conflict with the requirements of the
Public Right to Know Law, 1 M.R.S.A. §§ 401 through 410,
or where premature general public knowledge would
clearly place the board at a substantial disadvantage.
(1)
Discussions of information contained in records made,
maintained or received by a body or agency when access
by the general public to those records is prohibited by
statute.
(2)
(f)
The concurring vote of a majority of the membership of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of Building Inspector, or to decide in favor of the
applicant on any matter on which it is required to pass under this
ordinance, or to affect any variation in the application of this ordinance.
A.
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:1134
Section 7. Stay of proceedings. [Ord. No. 2002.68, 9-3-2002]
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer
from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown.
Section 8. Rehearing. [Ord. No. 2002.68, 9-3-2002]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not entertain a second application for
a variance, conditional use or administrative appeal concerning the same
property after the previous application was denied unless two years have
passed or there is substantial change in the relief requested. The board
shall determine if the requested relief in the second application is
substantially different from that requested in the first. The determination
shall be made by looking at the physical dimensions of the request only.
Article X
The Board shall decide all appeals within 30 days after the conclusion
of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals. A twoto-
two vote is a denial.
B.
All decisions shall become a part of the record. The decisions shall
include:
1. A statement of findings and conclusions;
The reasons or basis therefor, upon all the material issues of fact,
law or discretion presented; and
2.
3. The appropriate order, relief or denial thereof.
C.
Notice of any decision shall be mailed or hand delivered to the
petitioner, his representative or agent, the Planning Board, agency or
office and the municipal officers within seven days of the decision date.
D.
Upon notification of the granting of an appeal by the Board of Appeals,
the Building Inspector shall immediately issue a permit in accordance
with the conditions of the approval, unless the applicant needs a
conditional use permit.
E.
All decisions of the Board of Appeals are final. Appeals may be taken as
permitted by law from any decision of the Board of Appeals to superior
court.
F.
When a variance is granted, the recipient must apply within one month
for a building permit to carry out the terms of the variance, or the
variance becomes void.
G.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 8
CHCT:1135
PLANNING BOARD
Section 1. Planning Board. [Ord. No. 2002.67, 9-3-2002]
Authority. The City of Biddeford Planning Board (hereafter the "board"),
originally established under the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4326,
is hereby continued as provided by law, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4313 [now
repealed]. The powers and responsibilities of the board allowed under
the pre-1971 legislation (30 M.R.S.A. § 4964) are maintained.
A.
Duties and responsibilities. The board shall have the following duties
and responsibilities:
Prepare, and revise a comprehensive plan in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A.
1.
Review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
subdivision and other development plans that deal with specific
real estate. This includes site reviews and conditional uses.
2.
Review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove
development plans in the Shoreland Zone as required by Article
XIV of this ordinance. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
3.
Draft for approval by the municipal officers, ordinances and other
provisions to facilitate Subsections 1 through 3 above.
4.
B.
Membership.
The Board shall consist of seven members, five voting members
and two associate members. Each member shall be nominated by
the Mayor, confirmed by the City Council, for a three year-term.
Members may be reappointed at the end of their terms, not to
exceed three consecutive terms. All current appointments shall
have a term of office expiring no later than December 31, 2005.
The Mayor shall have the discretion of appointing members and
associate members to the Planning Board with terms expiring after
two years but less than three years for the purpose of staggering
appointments throughout a calendar year.
1.
Associate members may be made voting members of the Board
upon the retirement or nonappointment of a voting member.
2.
All members of the Board shall be registered voters and residents
of the City of Biddeford. No serving municipal officer or official of
the City of Biddeford shall serve as a member of the Board.
3.
Members of the Board shall reflect as much as possible several
geographic areas of the City, and shall have diverse professional
or employment backgrounds. This is to insure as much as possible
that the interests of the City and applicants are fairly and
4.
C.
Section 8 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 1
CHCT:1136
reasonably represented. In no case shall more than two members
be from the same ward.
Members of the Board are required to sign the Biddeford Planning
Board Rules of Procedure and Code of Ethics prior to taking the
oath of office. Any individual appointed to the Board shall not
be administered the oath of office and shall not be seated until
the Rules of Procedure and Code of Ethics have been signed.
Failure to sign will invalidate the appointment and shall require
a replacement appointment. [Added 2-21-2012 by Ord. No.
2012.8
5.
Term of office.
Members of the Board shall be appointed for a three-year term. No
member shall serve more than three consecutive terms, including
any term or part of a term served under any predecessor in this
section. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy for which more
than half of the unexpired term remains, for purposes of this
provision, shall be deemed to have served one full term.
1.
When there is a permanent vacancy, the Mayor shall nominate with
confirmation by the City Council a new member to serve for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
2.
D.
Removal from office.
Members of the Board may be removed from office by the
municipal officers for the following reasons:
a. A member is no longer a resident of the City of Biddeford; or
A member is absent from three consecutive regular Board
meetings without prior satisfactory explanation; or
b.
A member is absent from six meetings or workshops of the
Board without prior satisfactory explanation; or
c.
A member conducts himself/herself in a manner that is
inconsistent with the official position of the Planning Board,
i.e. consistent conflicts of interest or unprofessional behavior
toward applicants, City employees or members of the public.
d.
1.
Removal action may be initiated by the Mayor, the City Council or a
member of the Board. A letter shall be submitted to the municipal
officers stating the reasons for the removal request.
2.
The Board member in question shall be provided a copy of the
letter and shall be given the opportunity to reply to the municipal
officers.
3.
E.
F. Board officers.
Section 1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 1
CHCT:1137
A Chairperson shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
the Council each January. The Board shall elect from its voting
membership the following officers:
Vice Chairman;
Secretary.
1.
The terms of these officers shall be one year. The Chairperson
may not be reelected for more than two consecutive terms. The
Board shall hold elections during the January meeting, the results
of which shall be submitted to the municipal officers.
2.
Elected officers shall be responsible for the following:
Chairman: Conduct of meetings, scheduling and announcing
meetings, signing official correspondence for the Board. The
Chairman shall vote only in case of a tie.
a.
Vice Chairman: acts in place of the Chairman when he/she is
absent or required to leave the Chair because of conflict; acts
as Chair for special subcommittees of the Board as needed.
b.
Secretary: ensures that the records of meetings are accurate
and available for the Board's review and reference.
c.
3.
Staff. The Board shall empower the Planning Department to hire
professional staff to assist in planning matters and issues as needed.
This assistance shall include the hiring of independent engineering
and traffic consultants, and legal counsel. Opinions presented by the
Board's legal counsel shall not be binding upon the City of Biddeford.
G.
Meetings.
The Board shall conduct monthly meetings, or at least regular
meetings during a calendar year. Meetings shall convene on the
first Wednesday of each month, unless prior arrangement and
public (as described elsewhere in the Code) announcement has
been made by the Board. An annual schedule of regular meetings
shall be published in the local newspaper of general circulation
prior to the first meeting in January. Copies of this schedule shall
be kept on file in the offices of the City Clerk, Building Inspector,
and the City Planner. The City Planner shall provide copies to the
general public upon request.
1.
Upon motion by the Board the Chairman may call for special
meetings and workshops as needed.
2.
All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public and shall
be announced in a newspaper of general circulation within the
community at least seven days prior to the scheduled meeting.
Materials and records of the meetings shall be maintained and
available for public inspection.
3.
H.
Section 1 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 1
CHCT:1138
Section 2. City Planner.
The Board shall publish rules for the conduct of meetings to insure
orderly conduct and efficient processing of applications and
planning matters. The Board shall adopt Roberts Rules of Order.
4.
Board meetings shall be called to order when a quorum of the
voting members are present. For this purpose a quorum shall be
three voting members. When a regular member of the Board is
unable to serve because of conflict of interest, incapacity, absence
or lack of confirmed appointment to fill a permanent vacancy, an
associate member shall be designated to vote by the Chairman.
5.
The Board shall issue a written decision on matters when
determined by the Board to be necessary, appropriately signed by
the Chairman. The decisions shall include:
a. A statement of findings and conclusions.
Any conditional actions and the time-table for completion.
In addition to the normal established distribution, a copy of
the above shall be given to the Code Enforcement Officer for
use when issuing a building permit, or for documentation on
appeal or variance request.
b.
6.
The Board shall issue a written decision on all matters when
determined by the board to be necessary, appropriately signed by
the chairperson. The decisions shall include:
7.
Conflicts. Any questions raised by any interested party of whether a
particular issue involves a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a
member from voting shall be decided by a majority of the members
present except the member who is being challenged.
I.
Office of the City Planner. [Amended 6-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.41]
1. The office of the City Planner is hereby created.
2. (Reserved)
The City Planner, and his/her assistants as needed, shall be
appointed by the Economic Development Director, subject to
approval by the City Manager.
3.
A.
Duties and responsibilities.
The City Planner shall be the primary advisor to the Planning Board
and shall act as primary staff for the Board. He/she shall advise
the Board concerning the completeness of applications. He/she
shall prepare agendas and arrange meetings for the Board. He/she
will contact and coordinate between the various departments and
1.
B.
Section 1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:1139
Article XI
SITE PLAN REVIEW
applicants to ensure timely resolution of planning issues relating to
applications and planning proposals.
The City Planner shall advise the Mayor and Council concerning
land use and general planning issues affecting the City and
comprehensive development. He/she shall provide written position
papers and other documents needed to assist City officials in
making sound decisions concerning land use and planning issues.
2.
The City Planner shall develop a budget for the operation of the
Planning Department and Board.
3.
The City Planner shall respond to citizen inquiries concerning
planning issues and provide information relating to development
proposals as much as possible.
4.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:1140
I.
General
Section 1. Authority. [Ord. of 10-6-1998; Ord. No. 2003.5,
1-21-2003]
Section 2. Title.
This section shall be entitled "Multifamily and Nonresidential Site
Development Plan Review of the City of Biddeford, Maine"; and may be
cited as a short title as the "Site Review."
Section 3. Intent and purpose. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(3)]
These regulations are adopted by the municipal officers of the City
of Biddeford, Maine, pursuant to the authority granted under 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3001; and will provide guidelines for the Planning Board
and Staff Review Committee to review, approve, or disapprove site
plans for the development or change or expansion of use of tracts for
nonresidential uses, or for multifamily dwelling units which are defined
as any structures containing more than two units, whether or not such
development includes a subdivision or resubdivision of the site.107
A.
The intent and purpose of these regulations is to establish a process
to ensure responsible and reliable growth in the nonresidential, and
where applicable the multifamily dwelling, categories of development.
A.
Certain uses are, because of their nature, size, complexity, or other
qualities or probable impact, capable of adversely affecting the City of
Biddeford and its vested interests, and that of the general public unless
careful attention is given to the use of sound site utilization principles.
B.
These regulations in no way relieve an owner, developer, his agent, or
any individual from compliance with the zoning ordinance, subdivision
regulations, or any other laws, rules, regulations, codes, or ordinances,
whether state, federal or local, which may otherwise be applicable.
C.
The provisions set forth in this article are intended to protect the
public health and safety, promote the general welfare of the community,
and conserve the environment by assuring that nonresidential and
multifamily construction is designed and developed in a manner which
assures that adequate provisions are made for traffic safety and access;
emergency access; water supply; sewage disposal; management of
stormwater, erosion and sedimentation; protection of groundwater;
protection of the environment, wildlife habitat, fisheries, and unique
natural areas; protection of historic and archaeological resources;
D.
107. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, which immediately followed this subsection and
provided for consideration of recommendations made by the Coastal Area Committee, was
removed from the Code pursuant to Ord. No. 2011.38, adopted 9-20-2011. Said ordinance
disbanded the Coastal Area Committee.
Section 1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 3
CHCT:1141
Section 4. Applicability. [Ord. of 2-4-1997(2); Ord. No. 2003.5,
1-21-2003]
minimizing the adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and fitting the
project harmoniously into the fabric of the community.
These regulations shall apply to the development and/or proposed
development or expansion of use of tracts for nonresidential or
multifamily purposes.
Minor development review includes subdivision and site plan review,
and certain changes of use and other procedures as outlined in this
Code. No development shall be approved unless it complies with all
review criteria and findings indicated in this Code.
All time frames for minor development review expressed in this article
are maximums. The City's staff and reviewing entities shall make every
effort to conduct reviews as expeditiously as possible.
The following outlines the applicability for minor development review:
Development review does not apply to:
a. A single- or two-family dwelling.
Uses or structures that are accessory to a single- or two-family
dwelling.
b.
(1)
Activities not subject to development review still require
appropriate permits issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2)
Projects subject to site plan review shall be divided into two
classes, major and minor. Minor projects shall be reviewed by the
Staff Review Committee. Major projects shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board.
(3)
Thresholds for development review apply only to alterations or
additions to construction, except as indicated in this code.
(4)
If development is proposed on two or more lots and the City
Planner finds that the development functions as a single project,
thresholds for minor development review shall be applied to the
project as though the lots on which it is located were single lots.
(5)
A.
Development review classification and thresholds.
Activities subject to minor development review. The following
activities shall be subject to minor development review by the Staff
Review Committee:
Any development activity or combination of activities that,
within any five year period results in the construction of the
following:
A.
I.
B.
Section 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 4
CHCT:1142
In all zoning districts except for B-1, B-2 and all industrial
zones.
Between 1,000 and 4,999 square feet of new floor
area;
a.
Between 1,000 and 4,999 square feet of new
impervious surface; or
b.
A cumulative total of between 1,500 and 7,499 square
feet of floor area and impervious surface.
c.
1.
In the B-1, B-2, and all industrial zones:
Between 2,000 and 9,999 square feet of new floor
area;
a.
Between 2,000 and 9,999 square feet or more of new
impervious surface; or
b.
A cumulative total of between 3,000 and 14,999
square feet or more of floor area and impervious
surface.
c.
2.
B. Any use that involves the construction of one drive-up window.
Marine activities that involve the creation of less than 5,000
square feet of new impervious surface.
C.
Construction of a multifamily dwelling unit containing between
three and five units.
D.
Development subject to conditional use permit those results in
the creation of less than 5,000 square feet of new impervious
surface.
E.
Activities subject to major review. The following activities shall be
subject to major development review by the Planning Board:
The creation of a subdivision as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4401, as amended.
A.
Any development activity, or combination of activities that,
within any five-year period results in the construction of the
following:
In all zoning districts except for B-1, B-2 and all industrial
zones:
a. Five-thousand square feet or more of new floor area;
Five-thousand square feet or more of new impervious
surface; or
b.
1.
B.
II.
Section 4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:1143
A cumulative total of 7,500 square feet or more of
floor area and impervious surface.
c.
In the B-1, B-2 and all industrial zones:
a. Ten thousand square feet or more of new floor area;
10,000 square feet or more of new impervious surface;
or
b.
A cumulative total of 15,000 square feet or more of
floor area and impervious surface.
c.
2.
Any use that involves the construction of two or more drive-up
windows.
C.
Changes of use that affect 10,000 square feet or more of floor
area.
D.
Changes of use that involve conversion of a single- or twofamily
home to any other use in residential districts.
E.
The development or expansion of a mobile home park,
pursuant to Article VI, Section 45.
F.
Development subject to conditional use permit that involves
creation of 5,000 square feet or more of new impervious
surface.
G.
Amendments and cumulative development.
Development review thresholds shall be based upon
cumulative development totals over a five-year period. If any
threshold is exceeded during any five-year period, all
development within that time period shall be subject to review.
A.
Amendments to projects shall be subject to the level of review
that is commensurate with the scope of the amendment
proposed.
B.
III.
Delegation of Planning Board review authority.
The authority of the Planning Board to review certain minor
development projects is hereby delegated to the Staff Review
Committee in accordance with the provisions of this section. Whenever
such delegation occurs, the term "Planning Board" shall also refer to
the Staff Review Committee.
Planning Board responsibilities. The Planning Board is responsible
for the review of all major projects and of any minor project for
which Planning Board review is requested by the applicant. The
Planning Board may conduct minor development review if
recommended by either the City Planner or the Staff Review
Committee.
1.
C.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 4
CHCT:1144
Staff review committee responsibilities.
The Staff Review Committee shall consist of the City Planner,
City Engineer, Public Works Director, Code Enforcement
Officer, Economic Development Director, Recreation Director,
Fire Chief, Police Chief, Assessor, Superintendent of the
Biddeford Water District, and the Wastewater Department
head of the Biddeford Sewer District, or their official
designees.
a.
The Staff Review Committee, in its development review
capacity, shall exercise all of the powers exercised by the
Planning Board and the power to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny applications for site plan approval.
b.
Actions by the Staff Review Committee to approve an
application, with or without conditions, shall require the
approval of a majority of those members present and voting. A
quorum shall consist of three members.
c.
The Staff Review Committee shall set forth the reason for its
decisions and make findings of fact, in writing, within seven
days of the meeting. Such findings of fact shall be sufficient to
apprise the applicant and any interested member of the public
of the basis for the decision.
d.
All appeals to a Staff Review Committee decision shall be
heard by the Planning Board.
e.
The Staff Review Committee shall provide recommendations
to the Planning Board for any project undergoing major
development review. Individual members of the committee may
in addition submit letters of recommendations to the Planning
Board.
f.
2.
These regulations shall apply, as necessary, to alterations and/
or additions to structures existing on the effective date of these
regulations.
3.
Upon request by the applicant, all or specific standards and
considerations that are part of this site review process may be
waived or amended by the Planning Board.
4.
No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure
within the purview of these regulations until such approval has
been secured and presented to the Building Inspector.
5.
No certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be issued for any building
or structure or use of land within the purview of these regulations
unless or until the building, structure, development, land or use
is constructed, developed, altered, installed or used in conformity
6.
Section 4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:1145
Section 5. Interpretation.
with an approved site development plan or an amendment to any
such plan.
The standards and criteria contained in these regulations shall be
interpreted as minimum requirements, and compliance with said
minimum requirements shall in no instance obligate or require the
Planning Board to approve any particular application solely on that
basis.
1.
Only after the Planning Board is fully satisfied that a proposed
application is in the best interest of the City, the general public, and the
general welfare of its inhabitants shall the application be approved.
A. In respect to applications addressing expansion of use or structure,
the criteria contained in these regulations shall apply as follows:
1. Expansion of use or structure. Criteria or sections that pertain
to safety, such as parking, traffic flow, drainage, public utilities,
and fire protection, shall apply as would be required for new
construction for any addition to the existing structure. The
guiding rule shall be to improve given situations in the
immediate area of the site and the project's impact on
neighborhood and the community at large.
2. In some cases the applicant requesting consideration for a
change in use, or expansion of use or structure may qualify
for a waiver of full site review provided all special exceptions,
variances, and special licenses and/or special approvals have
been obtained prior to application for Planning Board action.
2.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1146
II.
Procedure for Site Development
Section 1. Presubmission or preliminary Planning Board site review
procedure. [Ord. No. 2003.5, 1-21-2003]
Preapplication meetings. Preapplication meetings are optional but are
strongly recommended prior to the expenditure of funds toward the design
of a development proposal.
Section 2. Formal site review submission procedure. [Ord. No.
2001.25, 4-17-2001; Ord. No. 2003.5, 1-21-2003]
Staff Review Committee. Prior to submitting an application for
development review, the applicant is advised to meet with the Staff
Review Committee to discuss application requirements, waivers of
information requirements, and applicable development criteria. At this
meeting, the Staff Review Committee and the applicant can discuss the
applicant's and the City's goals for the area proposed for development
to seek a common vision for the proposed project. Any question as to
whether the project is major or minor may also be resolved at this
meeting.
A.
Planning Board. Prior to filling an application to be reviewed by the
Planning Board, the applicant may appear before the Planning Board
for an informational discussion of the proposed development. The
applicant is encouraged to present information relevant to the property
that may assist the Planning Board and the planning department in
providing input to the applicant. At this meeting the Planning Board
may discuss which information may be waived in the formal application.
B.
Application procedure. An applicant desiring to develop a parcel of land
shall make a formal submission and application to the Planning Board
concerning a major review and the City Planner concerning a minor
review. The application shall:
(1) Be made on forms available at the planning office.
Include a written narrative description of the proposed
development or project addressing its scope of operation, purpose,
justification, and impact on the immediate area of influence and
the City in general (traffic generation, schools, population, utilities,
land use compatibility, esthetics, municipal services, environments,
etc.).
(2)
For major review and minor review, include 10 copies of the site
development plan as more fully described in these regulations.
The developer shall provide at least three paper sets including all
engineering and detail sheets as well as survey sheet and plot plans
and applicant shall provide two mylar copies of all signature sheets
and one mylar set of all other sheets to the Planning Board. Mylar
(3)
A.
Section 1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:1147
stock shall be of heavy quality and be acceptable to engineering for
archival purposes.
Where City sewer service is not available, the applicant shall
provide evidence that said parcel is of sufficient size to support a
sanitary waste disposal system.
(4)
Comply, as applicable, with all site design criteria as more fully
described in these regulations.
(5)
Be accompanied by a fee of an amount to be determined in
accordance with the fee schedule contained in these regulations.
(6)
Plans including the seal and signature of a Maine registered
licensed land surveyor and/or professional engineer on the plat
submitted, or as required by the board.
(7)
Evidence of financial and technical capacity to complete the
project. Such evidence shall include:
A letter from a recognized financial institution outlining the
projected costs and a statement that the institution will provide
a letter of credit to cover 150% of the cost of such
improvements; and
a.
A list of previous completed projects by the applicant, to
include a list of references.
b.
(8)
Applications for major review shall be received no later than 2:00
p.m. on the last Wednesday three weeks of the month preceding the
scheduled regular meeting of the Planning Board. Applications for
minor reviews will be received during regular business hours and
will be reviewed as expeditiously as possible by the Staff Review
Committee, or within two weeks of being received.
The Board shall consider site review applications in the same
manner as subdivisions.
(9)
Statute of limitations. Following the date of final approval, such
approval shall be valid for one year from date of said approval. If a
building permit has not been issued, then said approval shall become
automatically null and void.
B.
Reports and fees.
The applicant shall be responsible for providing any additional
report that may be required by the Planning Board. Any report
submitted shall be reviewed by City staff and may be reviewed
by the Southern Maine Regional Planning Commission or other
individual or firm deemed as expert by the Board. The cost for
the development and subsequent reviews of these reports shall be
borne by the applicant.
(1)
C.
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:1148
Section 3. Review procedures. [Ord. No. 2003.5, 1-21-2003]
Determination of completeness of application.
All application fees shall be paid as time of application. The
determination of the amount of fee shall be made using the
calculation sheets contained in this regulation. The City Planner
shall calculate the necessary fee at time of application. Fees shall
be paid by check to the order of "City of Biddeford."
(2)
Additional fees may be assessed as the application is reviewed.
These additional fees shall be based on a given project's off-site
impact, or impact on community facilities. Any additional fee shall
be paid prior to official approval of said plat. Any additional fees
shall be paid by check or money order from a local banking
institution to the order of the City of Biddeford.
(3)
An application is complete when an application form and all plan
requirements or waiver requests have been submitted to the City
Planner. Within five working days of receiving an application, the City
Planner shall determine whether the application is complete. If an item
is missing from the application and no waiver has been requested for it,
the City Planner shall notify the applicant in writing that the application
is not complete and request the additional information required. The
applicant shall submit the additional information as soon as possible
and the procedure in this paragraph shall be repeated until the
application is complete.
A.
With the exception of pre-application meetings, no application shall be
placed on the Planning Board or Staff Review Committee agenda until
the application is deemed complete.
B.
As used in this section, complete shall mean that:
All submission requirements established by this ordinance have
either been compiled with or a waiver has been requested;
1.
Any additional information requested by the Planning Board or
Staff Review Committee at any prior meeting has been provided;
and
2.
All conditions of any relevant prior approval for the property have
been fulfilled unless the application describes the manner in which
unfulfilled conditions will be addressed.
Procedure for minor project development review.
A. In reviewing the application, the Staff Review Committee
shall first determine whether or not to grant the requested
submission waivers, based upon the criteria in Section 9.
The City Planner shall make recommendations concerning
any requested waiver. If a waiver request is denied, the
application shall be deemed incomplete.
3.
C.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 3
CHCT:1149
B. When an application for a minor project is determined to
be complete, the City Planner shall so notify the applicant.
The City Planner shall also request the applicant to submit
10 additional copies of the complete application materials to
the planning department for distribution to the Staff Review
Committee members. Such materials shall be received at
least 15 working days prior to the Staff Review Committee
meeting.
C. Unless postponement of the decision is agreed to by the
applicant, the Staff Review Committee shall issue a decision
within 30 days after the City Planner has determined that
the application is complete.
D. In issuing its decision, the Staff Review Committee shall
make written findings of fact in accordance with the
standards found in this Code.
E. A written record of the Staff Review Committee decision
shall be maintained and shall be submitted to the Planning
Board members and made available for public inspection.
The Committee's written decision, in the form of minutes
from the Committee's meeting, shall be mailed to the
applicant within seven days of the meeting at which it is
made.
F. The applicant or abutter may appeal the decision of the Staff
Review Committee to the Planning Board by submitting an
appeal application to the City Planner within 30 days of the
date of the action.
G. All references to the Staff Review Committee in Subsections
B through D above shall be construed to as references to
the Planning Board if the Planning Board conducts the minor
development review.
Procedure for major project development review.
Major project review shall be conducted in two steps: Sketch plan
and final plan. An applicant may apply to have a project reviewed
for sketch and final concurrently; however for larger projects, it is
strongly encouraged that two separate processes be undertaken.
A. Sketch plan. When an application, on a form provided by
the City, is submitted to the Planning Board, that application
will have formal standing before the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall then consider the sketch plan and
provide planning direction to the applicant in accordance
with all pertinent provisions of the ordinance. After
completing its review of the application, the Planning Board
shall vote to deny, approve or approve with conditions. The
date of sketch plan approval, denial, or conditional approval
shall be the date that the Planning Board votes on a sketch
plan application.
Section 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 3
CHCT:1150
Section 4. Required improvements and agreements.
B. Final plan. Once the Planning Board votes to deem a final
plan application is complete, the Board shall undertake the
review of the proposal. Once review is complete, the
Planning Board shall vote to deny, approve, or approve with
conditions. For site plan applications, the date of final plan
approval, denial or approval with conditions shall be the date
that the Planning Board votes on a final plan application. In
the case of subdivisions, the date of approval and the date
of approval with conditions shall be the date that the chair
of the Planning Board signs the recordable subdivision plan;
if a subdivision application is denied, the date of denial shall
be the date in which the Planning Board votes to deny the
application.
Performance guarantee.
The Planning Board may require a performance bond before any
work commences on a site for all or each portion of the planned
development that, if not properly completed, will have an adverse
effect upon the development, adjoining properties, or will have a
potential for erosion or pollution. This guarantee shall be 150%
of the cost of the improvements, unless other arrangements, as
described below, have been agreed to by the applicant and the
Board.
1.
Where the Planning Board requires the posting of a performance
bond or an escrow agreement to secure for the City the satisfactory
construction and installation of required site improvements, said
surety shall be either in the form of a cashier's check, bond or
irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or other financial
institution licensed to operate in the State of Maine; the amount
shall be determined by the City Engineer based upon the plans
presented to the Board and approved by the Planning Board.
Another form of security shall be an agreement between the
applicant and the Board that no building/occupancy permits be
issued until such time that all required improvements have been
completed.
2.
Construction and installation of required improvements must be
satisfactorily executed within the imposed time constraints, or the
applicant shall forfeit said surety, and it shall be used to complete
or install said improvements in accordance with City specifications.
3.
The Board shall require that any bonding or other guarantee
submitted in accordance with this section, be transferable to any
new owners or others who shall obtain interests in the project,
prior to the completion of such project.
4.
A.
Section 3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:1151
Prior to the transfer of any unfinished project, approved under the
provisions of this article, the original applicant and the potential
purchaser shall appear before the board and submit such transfer
documents as may be necessary to continue the original guarantee.
The Board shall have these documents reviewed by the City
Solicitor for compliance with the City's standards.
5.
Failure to comply with this section may cause the City to revoke
any permits issued until such time as the provisions of this section
are met. Further legal actions, as may be necessitated, to foster
compliance with this section may be taken by the City. Costs of
these legal actions shall be charged to the persons/corporations
involved in the project subject to court action.
6.
Project phasing.
When a project is deemed to be large or complex or in the best
interest of the City, the Planning Board will suggest to the applicant
that the proposed project be phased.
1.
A phased project will be considered in terms of the impact of the
several phases on the City rather than as a single project. At the
same time the Planning Board will review the entire proposal and
grant conditional approval. This will allow the applicant to address
areas of concern over the period of the project rather than at one
time prior to final approval.
2.
The Planning Board and the applicant shall determine the phase
lines. This/these lines shall become part of the approved plat for
the project.
3.
The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with an anticipated
timetable for construction of roadways, water and sewer lines, and
other infrastructure components as necessary. This timetable will
become part of the final approval.
4.
Bonding arrangements will be based on the provided timetable,
and shall be released only upon completion, and acceptance of each
phase.
5.
The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board detailed plans
indicating the progress of the project prior to moving to the next
phase. The Planning Board shall review these plans for compliance.
6.
B.
Inspection of improvements.
All required site improvements shall be subject to inspection by,
and approval of, the Director of Public Works, City Engineer, the
Chief of the Fire Department, the Building Inspector, the Chief
of Police, and such other federal, state, or local officials, as may
have jurisdiction who shall be notified by the owner or applicant at
least 72 hours prior to the start of construction. Inspections will be
1.
C.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 4
CHCT:1152
Section 5. Site design and development criteria. [Ord. of 4-16-1996;
Ord. of 9-15-1998(3)]
conducted by said officials or their designee following requests by
the developer. No underground installation shall be covered until
inspected by the appropriate officials. Any improvements covered
without inspection will be considered unacceptable.
Site development plan. In considering applications within the purview
of these regulations, the Planning Board shall be guided by the
standards and criteria contained herein. The site development plan
shall embody or meet the following qualifications:
(1) Be on sheet size of 24 by 36 inches.
The scale of said plan shall be not less than one inch equals 50 feet
and indicated on plat by use of a bar scale.
(2)
The original of said plan shall be on Mylar, and there shall also be
submitted 10 paper prints of any such plan.
(3)
(4) The plan shall bear the date, title, North point.
The plan shall contain the name and address of the developer and
applicant.
(5)
The plan shall contain a location or vicinity sketch (suggested scale
one inch equals 800 feet).
(6)
The following items are required on the site plan showing existing
and proposed features as appropriate:
A sketch of the site showing existing natural and historic
features including:
1. Watercourses and water bodies, seasonal wet areas;
2. Soil type, location of test borings;
Topographic contours (every five feet for 0% to 3% slope;
or every two feet for steeper areas);
3.
Consideration shall include the preservation and
supplementation of existing dominant vegetation. Such
plan shall indicate which of such features are to be
retained and which are to be removed or altered;
4.
The location of stonewalls, graveyards, fences, stands of
trees, and other important or unique natural areas and
site features, including but not limited to floodplains, deer
wintering areas, significant wildlife habitats, fisheries,
scenic areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants and
animals, unique natural communities and natural areas,
sand and gravel aquifers, and historic and/or
5.
(a)
(7)
A.
Section 4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:1153
archaeological resources, together with a description of
such features.
Plan view of all buildings with their use, size, location, and
first-floor elevation in respect to grade.
(b)
A standard elevation view of existing and proposed buildings
or structures on-site.
(c)
Outline of any buildings located within 200 feet of such
existing or proposed buildings or structures indicating their
shape, size, location, heights, and volume.
(d)
Existing use of abutting properties shall be identified with
approximate location of any structures thereon including
access roads.
(e)
The location, width, curbing, and paving of accessways, egress
ways, and streets within the site for both pedestrian and
vehicular use.
(f)
The location of off-street parking and loading spaces with a
layout of the parking indicated.
(g)
The size and proposed location of water mains and sanitary
sewerage facilities will all necessary engineering data.
(h)
The size and location of all other existing and proposed public
service connections including, without limitation, gas lines,
power lines, telephone lines, and fire alarm connections and
locations, indicating whether above or below ground.
(i)
The type, nature, and composition of all solid, liquid, and
gaseous waste, industrial or otherwise, and the location, type,
and design criteria of the storage and disposal facilities dealing
with such waste.
(j)
The location, elevation, and layout of existing and proposed
catch basins and other surface drainage features.
(k)
Existing and proposed contours and finished grade elevations
as well as the type, extent, and location of existing and
proposed landscaping and open space areas which will be
retained.
(l)
The location, size, and design of proposed signs and other
advertising or instructional devices.
(m)
(n) The location and type of lighting for outdoor facilities.
(o) Lines of existing and proposed abutting streets showing width.
Surveyed property lines showing their bearing and distances
and monument locations.
(p)
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1154
If a subdivision is involved, the lines and names of all proposed
streets, lanes, ways, or easements intended to be dedicated for
public or private use.
(q)
A copy of any covenants or restrictions that are intended to
cover all or a part of the land area to be developed.
(r)
(s) Indicate the limits of wetland areas on the property.
Delineate existing zoning boundaries within 1,000 feet of the
site.
(t)
Have affixed thereto the stamp and signature of either a Maine
licensed land surveyor, professional engineer, or architect
responsible for said plan.
(u)
Any other exhibits or data that the Planning Board may require
in order to adequately evaluate the proposed development or
project; this would include:
1. Traffic study.
2. Community fiscal impact study.
3. Drainage study/calculations.
4. High-intensity soils study.
5. Photographs.
(v)
Site design criteria. The design standards presented here are minimum
in nature; the applicant may provide further details to the presented
plan. At the same time, some of these standards may not apply to a
specific project; the applicant may request in writing waivers from any
point following. All waivers must be added as notes to the approved
plan, and shall be considered conditions of approval.
Besides the following standards projects presented under this article
shall be subject to the performance standards specified in Article VI of
this ordinance.
Drainage.
The rate of post-development runoff shall not exceed that of
predevelopment. Details of catch basins, drainage pipes and
retention/detention ponds shall be provided as needed with the
application. All detail sheets shall bear the seal and signature
of a professional engineer, licensed in the State of Maine.
a.
A written engineering report describing the impacted
watershed area, projected runoff, and any projected
downstream impact shall be required.
b.
1.
B.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:1155
Drainage easements shall be established for any concentrated
off-site drainage. Such easement shall state who has the
responsibility to maintain the easement. Easement documents
shall be reviewed, at applicant expense, by the Director of
Public Works, City Engineer, and the City Solicitor, as to
exactness of content. Plans shall include the location of
easements.
c.
Where it is determined by the City Engineer or consultant
hired by the Board, that the additional runoff incident to the
development of the projected site will overload an existing
downstream drainage facility, the Board may require the
provision of water-retarding facilities or other improvements
to alleviate said problem.
d.
Development in specific areas of concern shall provide detailed
information and address specific issues in relation to drainage:
Parcels situated within the federally designated flood
hazard zone, as per Flood Hazard Boundary Map H01-18,
dated May, 1984, as amended, shall comply with all
applicable federal regulations relating thereto.
1.
One-hundred-year flood elevation line shall be included
where applicable.
2.
No slope shall be created which results in a slope of more
than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical unless proper
retaining walls are proposed.
3.
e.
Drainage improvements shall be scheduled to be constructed
as part of the first portion of any project where drainage
improvements are proposed.
f.
Special bonding of 1 1/2 times the anticipated cost of said
improvements shall be incorporated by the developer to insure
that improvements are placed and that they function as
planned. No portion of this special bond may be released until
the project, or that portion of the project for which the
drainage improvement is proposed has been constructed, and
until so released by the Planning Board, with the
recommendation from the Director of Public Works and the
City Engineer.
g.
Utilities.
All utilities, including electric, gas, water/sewer, shall be
shown on the plat, and separate detail sheets as needed.
a.
Accessways, storage, and parking areas shall be graded and
improved with pavements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm
drainage facilities, outdoor lighting, etc.
b.
2.
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1156
All accessways/drives and service ways shall be of sufficient
width and configuration to accommodate the prospective
traffic and to afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting
and other such service.
c.
Any proposal within 200 feet of a public water or sewer line(s)
must connect to system(s). Applicant must supply copies of
letters from the environmental specialist of the City of
Biddeford for sewer, and water company shall confirm details
of connection and/or concerns.
d.
Whether or not a municipal water system is proposed, the
following items must be specified in application narrative and
on plat:
Rated normal capacity and gallons per minute at prime use
time.
1.
Rated maximum capacity and gallons per minute at prime
use time.
2.
3. Residual pressure of proposed tap line.
e.
Where nondomestic sanitary discharge (any discharge into the
public sewer system containing other than normal household
wastes) is anticipated, such effluent shall be identified and
comply with any and all federal, state, and local laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations. Where any such laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations may overlap or may be
inconsistent, the more stringent shall apply.
f.
Where public sanitary service is available, or where developers
must extend such service, applicants must apply for and
receive a discharge permit from the City Council of the City of
Biddeford prior to approval by the Planning Board.
g.
Where practicable, all electrical and telephone utilities shall be
placed underground.
h.
Parking.
A parking plan shall delineate the number of parking and
delivery or loading spaces and the physical arrangement.
Details of parking plan shall conform to the provisions of the
off-street parking section of Article VI of this Zoning
Ordinance.
a.
No on-street parking, delivery or loading is permitted, except
where specifically allowed by the Planning Board.
b.
Whenever a use existing on the effective date of these
regulations is changed thereafter to a new use, parking
c.
3.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:1157
facilities and access shall be provided as required herein for
such new uses.
In the case of multifamily projects the number of required
parking spaces should be increased 5% to allow for visitor
parking.
d.
Parking lots shall be landscaped and/or screened to provide for
a pleasing visual effect and blending in with the surrounding
area.
e.
Lots shall be illuminated for security purposes. The lighting
shall be designed in such a way that off-site glare is minimized.
f.
Adequate space shall be allowed for the accumulation of snow
during the winter plowing months.
g.
Structural layout and design. All proposed structures or additions
to existing structures shall address the following items:
Design of buildings.
Buildings shall be designed to blend harmoniously with
the surrounding structures in the neighborhood. New
structures should be designed so as to complement the
style of the abutting older structures. A photograph,
architectural rendering or other representation of the
proposed structure must accompany the application for
site review.
1.
In the I-3 Zone structures shall have a facade sheath in
brick or other masonry finish. Other facade finishes may
be used when it can be clearly shown to the board that
such facing material will advance the City's intent to make
the I-3 area a more attractive gateway to the City.
2.
a.
Setbacks. Proposed structures shall be set back from
roadways, in conformance with requirements for the particular
zone; and shall be set in such a way as to blend in harmoniously
with buildings on abutting properties, and to allow for
adequate landscaping of the front yard.
b.
Fire protection.
All proposed structures and additions to existing buildings
must be designed to meet existing fire protection
standards.
1.
Fire hydrants and fire escapes must be clearly presented
on plats.
2.
Clear ways around buildings must be maintained to
provide for 360° access to structures.
3.
c.
4.
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1158
Areas in front of structures must be kept clear of parking
spaces to allow for emergency access.
4.
Buildings should be designed with internal sprinkler
systems. This is particularly the case in terms of
multifamily and industrial/warehousing structures, and
structures that will be located in areas that are far or
difficult to reach from fire stations.
5.
In residential developments of 24 units or more, or
buildings of 5,000 square feet or more, a central alarm
system to the central fire station shall be installed, unless
a negative recommendation, in writing, is received from
the Fire Marshal.
6.
In residential developments of 24 dwelling units or more,
or office buildings with more than two separate
establishments or places of business, a "knock box" shall
be provided and indicated on plat. This box shall be in
accordance with the specifications and standards as
prescribed by the Fire Department of the City of
Biddeford.
7.
Whenever gas, either natural or propane or other type, is
proposed to be used on-site, a separate external shutoff
valve shall be provided for each building on the site. The
valve location shall be indicated on the plat and approved
in writing by the fire chief/fire marshal.
8.
Landscaping.
All sites must be landscaped with vegetation that will act
to:
Reduce the impact of lighting, vehicular and
structural, on abutting properties;
(a)
Reduce the impact of proposed structures on the
privacy of abutters;
(b)
(c) Make the site more attractive to the average viewer.
1.
Landscaping measures will be indicated on the plat by
drawings and narrative note. The use of trees and shrubs
for fencing and shading is strongly encouraged. Care must
be taken to ensure that tree, etc., are placed in such a
fashion that in time they will cause minimum impact on
abutting properties and public roadways and travelways,
particularly as they grow.
2.
Whenever possible existing vegetation shall be preserved
and incorporated into the landscaping scheme of the
project.
3.
d.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:1159
Each proposal will include a detailed landscaping plan.
This plan will include the location, type and size of existing
mature trees (those trees over eight inches in diameter).
4.
Particular attention should be paid to offsetting the visual
impact of new structures in areas where there may be
a stark contrast with the existing design trend of the
neighborhood.
5.
Service, storage and utility areas.
All service, storage, and utility areas shall be designed to
the side or rear yard of a proposed or existing building or
structure, and such areas shall be appropriately screened/
buffered by walls, fences, earth berms, or vegetation.
1.
Proposed utility elements shall be adequately screened;
and, if producing sound, baffled upon Planning Board
request.
2.
Trash receptacles, dumpsters, storage sheds, etc., shall be
shown on plat.
3.
e.
Paving, parking, and storage areas.
No paving, parking, or storage shall be permitted within
the required setback of any side or rear property line;
1.
No paving, parking, or storage (except for entrances/exits)
shall be permitted within 25 feet of any front property line.
These unpaved nonparking or nonstorage areas shall be
maintained as landscaped areas or open spaces.
2.
f.
Handicapped accessibility.
Pedestrian walkways, entrances and exits designed for use
by the handicapped shall be provided as required by any
and all federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations or as requested by the Planning Board.
1.
Handicapped parking spaces and accessways shall be
indicated on plat whenever they are to be employed.
2.
g.
Loading facilities.
Loading facilities for new structures shall be designed to
the rear or side of any and all proposed or existing building
or structure.
1.
Loading facilities shall be designed in accordance with the
applicable federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, codes,
rules and regulations and shall be off-street or accessible
via a public street.
2.
h.
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1160
Parking, loading, and protective buffers.
All parking, loading and protective buffers shall be
situated on the same tract or parcel of land as the primary
use building or structure.
1.
The maximum nonvegetated area of the land area being
developed and reviewed shall be 75%.
2.
Any parking or paving, including all access ways, egress
ways, entrances and exits on streets for both pedestrian
and vehicular use, shall not cover or occupy more than
30% of the land area being developed and reviewed and
shall be included with the maximum nonvegetated area.
3.
In all applications, a minimum of 25% of the land area
being developed and reviewed shall remain in its natural
state or shall be maintained as appropriately landscaped
area.
4.
All buildings or structures shall be sited in conformance
with established setbacks of the particular zone. No
building or structure may be built within the required side
yard setback. The Planning Board may require greater
setbacks in areas such as turnpikes, water bodies,
railroads, etc.
5.
All buffered or screened areas shall be densely planted
with shrubs or trees which are respectively at least two or
three feet high at the time of planting and are of a type
which may be expected to form a year-round dense screen
of at least five feet high within three years, provided that
such screening shall not obstruct the view of oncoming
traffic when entering or exiting the site. An additional cash
bond to cover the cost of replacement of these plantings
may be required. The term of the bond shall be equal to
three years from the time of planting. At the end of the
three years any unused portion of this security will be
returned to the applicant along with accrued interest.
6.
i.
Open space.
In new residential developments: Open space shall be
provided in the ratio of 1,000 square feet for each dwelling
unit. This open space shall be identified as either a "green
space" or as "recreational space."
1.
Whenever practicable, open space in a residential
development shall include a mixture of active and passive
recreational opportunities to benefit the various residents
of the project. Such opportunities would include, but are
2.
j.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:1161
not limited to, ball and other playing fields, tennis courts,
etc.
In large-scale projects hiking trails or nature paths are
encouraged.
3.
In projects that abut rivers or streams a public easement
is encouraged, to provide access to a limited natural
resource.
4.
The plan shall reflect the natural capabilities of the site to
support development. Buildings, lots, and support facilities
will be clustered in those portions of the site that have
the most suitable conditions for development.
Environmentally sensitive areas, including but not limited
to wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains, significant wildlife
habitats, fisheries, scenic areas, habitat for rare and
endangered plants and animals, unique natural
communities and natural areas, and sand and gravel
aquifers will be maintained and preserved to the maximum
extent. The development shall include appropriate
measures for protecting these resources, including but
not limited to modification of the proposed design of the
site, timing of construction, and limiting the extent of
excavation.
5.
External lighting.
All existing/proposed external lighting must be included on
plat. Lighting will be described as needed.
1.
Lighting shall be designed to provide adequate
illumination on-site, especially in parking areas, walkways
and structural entrances, and site entrance from
roadways. At the same time all illumination will be
designed to mitigate adverse impact on abutting
properties and structures, and traffic.
2.
k.
Signs.
All proposed signs shall meet standards provided in Article
VI of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Biddeford.
1.
2. Signs shall be indicated on plat.
A detail of sign design shall be submitted as part of the
application for site review.
3.
l.
Historic and archaeological resources. If any portion of the
site has been identified as containing historic or archaeological
resources, the development shall include appropriate
measures for protecting these resources, including but not
m.
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1162
Section 6. (Reserved)
Section 7. Special flood hazard areas.
All site plan proposals governed by these regulations having lands identified
as special flood hazard areas in the "Flood Insurance Study for the City
of Biddeford, Maine," dated November 1983, together with the associated
flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps of the City
of Biddeford dated May, 1984, shall meet the following requirements:
Section 8. Schedule of fees.
limited to modification of the proposed design of the site,
timing of construction, and limiting the extent of construction.
Site plan proposals, including their utilities and drainage, shall be
located and designed to be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
a.
All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and
water systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
b.
Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
c.
New and replacement water systems (including on-site systems) shall
be located, designed and constructed to minimize infiltration and avoid
impairment.
d.
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
1.
e.
In riverine situations, prior to the alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, the applicant for such authorization shall notify the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) and receive approval;
copies of such notification shall be provided to the Planning Board.
Within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse, the
applicant shall submit to the Planning Board, certification provided by a
registered professional engineer, licensed in Maine, assuring the floodcarrying
capacity of the watercourse has been maintained.
f.
Site plan proposals abutting any waterway shall include one-hundredyear
flood elevation data.
The above requirements shall be not lessen the effect of requirements
outlined in Article XII of this ordinance. Additional requirements of
that article shall apply.
g.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 8
CHCT:1163
Section 9. Enforcement, waiver, validity, and amendment
provisions. [Ord. of 2-4-1997(2); Ord. No. 2003.5, 1-21-2003]
The board shall charge a fee to cover the cost of reviewing applications
in accordance with the provisions outlined in Appendix A of this
ordinance.
A.
Further, projects shall be subject to additional fees as established to
offset adverse impacts that are attributable to the development of such
project. Examples of this shall include, but are not limited to, sewer,
street, and other public service improvements.
B.
Enforcement.
If, within one year after a certificate of occupancy (temporary
or permanent) has been issued and the building or structure is
occupied or used, the Planning Board finds that any of the
conditions of an approved final site review application are in
violation:
The Planning Board shall give notice to the owner, through
the office of the Code Enforcement Officer, to make such
corrections as it deems necessary to bring the use and
operation into compliance with the conditions of such
approval.
a.
Such order shall be complied with within a period of time
extending not more than 60 days from the date of notice of the
original violation notice.
b.
Where the owner fails to conform with the notice and order of
the Planning Board, a fine not to exceed $1,000 per day may
be levied against the owner in addition to any other legal or
equitable remedy as may be afforded through appropriate legal
action.
c.
1.
A.
Waivers.
When special circumstance exists and strict conformity with any
specific requirement of these regulations would cause undue
hardship or injustice to the owner of the land to be developed
and being reviewed, and where the review procedures have been
in general conformity with these regulations, and provided the
general spirit, intent and purpose of these regulations will not be
adversely or substantially affected or harmed, and further provided
that the public convenience and welfare of the citizens of
Biddeford, Maine, will be substantially served and not adversely
affected, these regulations maybe waive or modified.
1.
Waiver of sections of this regulation, or of this regulation in its
entirety, must be requested in writing by the applicant or his
2.
B.
Section 8 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 9
CHCT:1164
designated agent, at the time of application. Specific reasons must
be given for requesting the waiver.
The applicant must provide a minimum of site plan material for the
Planning Board to consider the waiver and its impact on the site,
neighborhood, and the community in general. This includes, but is
not limited to: a site sketch; photographs; letter of request; and,
narrative of proposal.
3.
The Planning Board shall consider the request for waiver at a
regularly scheduled public hearing. The applicant shall present his
proposal and the public shall be allowed to present their comments.
The Planning Board shall consider the application and the request
for wavier. Following consideration, the Planning Board shall
decide whether a waiver is warranted and provide the applicant
with its decision in accordance with the rules of the board.
4.
If a request for waiver is denied, the applicant shall submit a site
plan that meets all conditions for full site review application, and
any special concerns addressed by the board.
5.
Interpretation and conflict. In matters of judgment or interpretation
of the requirements contained in these regulations, the opinion and
determination of the Planning Board shall prevail. In any particular
where these regulations are in conflict with any other rules,
regulations, or ordinances of the City of Biddeford the more restrictive
regulations or provisions shall prevail.
C.
Validity. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, or provision of this
article shall be adjudged invalid or shall be held unconstitutional, the
same shall not affect the validity of these regulations as a whole or any
part or provision thereof, other than such part so decided to be invalid
or unconstitutional.
D.
Future amendment. This article may be amended, changed, altered,
added to or rescinded in whole or in part in the same manner in which
amendments to subdivision regulations are made.
E.
Minor change of use. For changes of use that do not exceed the
thresholds required for site plan review and that do not constitute
a departmental review, the permit may be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer, provided that the application is in compliance with
all relevant provisions of this ordinance.
F.
Minor modifications. The Planning Board's review and approval is
based upon the application plans and materials submitted by the
applicant. The City Planner may find proposed changes to an approved
site plan, subdivision or conditional use permit or related materials to
be minor modification in which case approval by the Planning Board or
the Staff Review Committees shall not be necessary. The City Planner
will provide a note in the file approving the minor modification as it
relates to the Code.
G.
Section 9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 9
CHCT:1165
Article XII
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
Section 1. Purpose and establishment. [Ord. No. 2006.26,108
5-2-2006]
Certain areas of the City of Biddeford, Maine are subject to periodic
flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas. Relief is
available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the National Flood
Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the City of Biddeford, Maine has chosen to become a
participating community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and
agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the City of Biddeford, Maine to require the recognition and
evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the
floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The City of Biddeford has the legal authority to adopt land use and control
measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A M.R.S.A.
§§ 3001 through 3007, 4352 and 4401 through 4407, and Title 38 M.R.S.A.
§ 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act,
provides that areas of the City of Biddeford having a special flood hazard
be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and that
floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas.
This ordinance establishes a flood hazard development permit system and
review procedure for development activities in the designated flood hazard
areas of the City of Biddeford, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, A1 — 30, AO, and V1 — 30,
are identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report
entitled "Flood Insurance Study-City of Biddeford, Maine, York County,"
dated November 15, 1983 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map"
dated May 15, 1984, and "Flood Boundary and Floodway Map" dated May
15, 1984, which are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part
of this ordinance.
Section 2. Permit required. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Section 14),
including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas of
special flood hazard established in Section 1, a flood hazard development
108. Editor's Note: This ordinance amended former Art. XII, Floodplain Management
Ordinance, in its entirety. Said Art. XII was originally adopted as Ord. of 6-2-198(3), Arts. I
through XIV.
Section 9 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:1166
permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer except as
provided in Section 7. This permit shall be in addition to any other building
permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the
City of Biddeford, Maine.
Section 3. Application for permit. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted to
the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include:
The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and
contractor;
A.
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development,
including but not limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water
supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot dimensions;
C.
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and
labor;
E.
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or
development;
[Items H—K3 apply only to new construction and substantial
improvements.]
G.
The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
Base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved
structures, which is determined:
In Zones A1—30, AO, and V1—30, from data contained in
the "Flood Insurance Study-City of Biddeford, Maine," as
described in Section 1; or
a.
In Zone A:
From any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or
other technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model,
FEMA 265/July 1995), including information obtained
pursuant to Section 6K and 9D;
(1)
From the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit
analysis of the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto
a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a professional land surveyor or registered
professional engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a
(2)
b.
1.
H.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 3
CHCT:1167
significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or,
in the absence of all other data;
To be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of
the floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the
shoreline which passes along the ground through the site
of the proposed building.
(3)
Highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the
proposed building;
2.
Lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such
structures contain a basement; and,
3.
Level, in the case of nonresidential structures only, to which the
structure will be floodproofed;
4.
A description of an elevation reference point established on the site
of all developments for which elevation standards apply as required in
Section 6;
I.
A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect, that the base flood elevations and
grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
J.
The following certifications as required in Section 6 by a registered
professional engineer or architect:
A floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 01/03, as amended),
to verify that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of Section 3H4;
Section 6G; and other applicable standards in Section 6;
1.
A V-Zone certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high
hazard areas, Zones V1—30, will meet the criteria of Section 6P;
and other applicable standards in Section 6;
2.
A hydraulic openings certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic
openings in foundation walls will meet the standards of Section
6L2a;
3.
A certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of
Section 6M;
4.
A certified statement that containment walls will meet the
standards of Section 6N;
5.
K.
A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development; and
L.
A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each
applicable development standard in Section 6 will be met.
M.
Section 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 4
CHCT:1168
Section 4. Application fee and expert's fee. [Ord. No. 2006.26,
5-2-2006]
A nonrefundable application fee shall be paid to the City through the Code
Enforcement Office. This fee is separate from other required permit and
review fees.
Section 5. Review standards for flood hazard development permit
applications. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
a. The fee for development projects will be $100.
In cases where projects meet the definition for minor development the
fee shall be $50.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/
or Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer
or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to
pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds
for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by
the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has
either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity
to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a
decision to hire an expert may appeal that decision to the Board of
Appeals.
b.
Review all applications for the flood hazard development permit to
assure that proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding
and to determine that all pertinent requirements of Section 6
(development standards) have, or will be met;
A.
Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit
applications:
The base flood data and floodway data contained in the "Flood
Insurance Study—City of Biddeford, Maine," as described in
Section 1.
1.
In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data are not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources,
including information obtained pursuant to Section 3 H1b; Section
6K and Section 9D, in order to administer Section 6 of this
ordinance.
2.
B.
Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood
hazard areas shown on the maps described in Section 1 of this
ordinance;
C.
Section 4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 5
CHCT:1169
In the review of flood hazard development permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
D.
Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the
State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency;
E.
If the application satisfies the requirements of this ordinance, approve
the issuance of one of the following flood hazard development permits
based on the type of development:
A two-part flood hazard development permit for elevated
structures. Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure
to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base
flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code
Enforcement Officer with an elevation certificate completed by
a professional land surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect, based on the Part I permit construction, "as built," for
verifying compliance with the elevation requirements of Section
6, Paragraphs F, G, H, or P. Following review of the elevation
certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt
of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II
of the flood hazard development permit. Part II shall authorize the
applicant to complete the construction project; or
1.
Issue a flood hazard development permit for flood proofing of
nonresidential structures that are new construction or
substantially improved nonresidential structures that are not being
elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of Section
6G1a, b, and c. The application for this permit shall include a
floodproofing certificate signed by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
2.
A flood hazard development permit for minor development for
all development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, or renovations, whose
value is less than 50% of the assessed value of the structure.
Minor development also includes, but is not limited to: accessory
structures as provided for in Section 6J, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of
equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials,
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities
that do not involve structures; and nonstructural projects such as
bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
3.
F.
Section 5 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 5
CHCT:1170
Section 6. Development standards. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
All development in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following
applicable standards:
Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard
development permit applications, corresponding permits issued, and
data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of Section 10 of this ordinance,
and copies of elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates,
certificates of compliance and certifications of design standards
required under the provisions of Sections 3, 6, and 8 of this ordinance.
G.
All development. All development shall:
Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation (excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement
of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
1.
2. Use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and,
3.
Use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
4.
A.
Water supply. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
B.
Sanitary sewage systems. All new and replacement sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the
system into floodwaters.
C.
On-site waste disposal systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during floods.
D.
Watercourse carrying capacity. All development associated with altered
or relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and
maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the floodcarrying
capacity of any watercourse.
E.
Residential. New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure located within:
Zones A1—30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.
1.
F.
Section 5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6
CHCT:1171
Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
2.
Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
At least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's flood insurance rate map; or,
a.
b. At least three feet if no depth number is specified.
3.
Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to Section 3H1b; Section 5B; or Section 9D.
4.
5. Zones V1—30 shall meet the requirements of Section 6D.
Nonresidential. New construction or substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure located within:
Zones A1—30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or
together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
Be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation so that below that elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
a.
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
b.
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a flood hazard development
permit, as required by Section 3K and shall include a record
of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
c.
1.
Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
2.
Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
At least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's flood insurance rate map; or
a.
b. At least three feet if no depth number is specified; or
3.
G.
Section 6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:1172
Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
floodproofed to meet the elevation requirements of this section
and floodproofing standards of Section 6G1.
c.
Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least one foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to Section 3H1b; Section 5B; or Section 9D; or
Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the
floodproofing standards of Section 6G1.
a.
4.
5. Zones V1—30 shall meet the requirements of Section 6P.
Manufactured homes. New or substantially improved manufactured
homes located within:
Zone A1—30 shall:
Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest
floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
a.
Be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry
slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be
reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its
wheels and axles; and
b.
Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
Over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four
corners of the manufactured home, plus two additional ties
per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less
than 50 feet long require one additional tie per side); or by
(1)
Frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five additional
ties along each side at intermediate points (manufactured
homes less than 50 feet long require four additional ties
per side).
(2)
All components of the anchoring system described in
Section 6, Paragraph H1c(1) and (2) shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(3)
c.
1.
Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
2.
Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
At least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's flood insurance rate map; or
a.
3.
H.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6
CHCT:1173
b. At least three feet if no depth number is specified; and
c. Meet the anchoring requirements of Section 6H1c.
Zone A shall:
Be elevated on a permanent foundation as described in Section
6H1b, such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the
manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood
elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Section
3H1b; Section 5B; or Section 9D; and
a.
b. Meet the anchoring requirements of Section 6H1b.
4.
5. Zones V1—30 shall meet the requirements of Section 6P.
Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles located within:
Zones A1—30 shall either:
a. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions; or
b.
Be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in Section 6H1.
c.
1.
Zones V1—30 shall meet the requirements of either Section 6I1a or
b, or Section 6P.
2.
I.
Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as defined in Section 14,
located within Zones A1—30, AO, and A, shall be exempt from the
elevation criteria required in Section 6F and G above, if all other
requirements of Section 6 and all the following requirements are met.
Accessory structures shall:
1. Be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3,000;
2. Have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
Have hydraulic openings, as specified in Section 6L2, in at least
two different walls of the accessory structure;
3.
4. Be located outside the floodway;
When possible be constructed and placed on the building site so
as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and
be placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary
structure; and
5.
J.
Section 6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:1174
Have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric
service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation
and when possible outside the special flood hazard area.
6.
Floodways.
In Zones A1—30 riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development
shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which is
designated on the community's "flood boundary and floodway
map," unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
1.
In Zones A1—30 and A riverine areas for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development
shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Section 6K3
unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of
the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
Will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community; and
a.
Is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter
5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study
Guidelines and Specifications for Study Contractors, (FEMA
37/January 1995, as amended).
b.
2.
In Zones Al—30 and A riverine areas for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to
be the channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as
measured from the normal high-water mark to the upland limit of
the floodplain.
3.
K.
Enclosed areas below the lowest floor. New construction or substantial
improvement of any structure in Zones A1—30, AO, and A that meets
the development standards of Section 6, including the elevation
requirements of Section 6, Paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on
posts, columns, piers, piles, stilts, or crawl spaces may be enclosed
below the base flood elevation requirements, provided all the following
criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Section 14; and,
Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
2.
L.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6
CHCT:1175
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either:
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect;
or
a.
Meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of the
enclosed area;
(1)
The bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood
elevation and no higher than one foot above the lowest
grade; and
(2)
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the entry and exit of floodwaters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other nonautomatic
mechanical means;
(3)
b.
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and
The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of
vehicles, or storage.
4.
Bridges. New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in
Zones A1—30, AO, A, and V1—30 shall be designed such that:
When possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the
pilings, or columns) is elevated to at least one foot above the base
flood elevation; and
1.
A registered professional engineer shall certify that:
The structural design and methods of construction shall meet
the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway
standards of Section 6K; and
a.
The foundation and superstructure attached thereto are
designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due
to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
all structural components. Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood.
b.
2.
M.
Containment walls. New construction or substantial improvement of
any containment wall located within:
Zones A1—30, A, and V1—30 shall:
Have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation;
a.
1.
N.
Section 6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:1176
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
b.
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a flood hazard development permit, as required
by Section 3K.
c.
Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around containment
walls on slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed walls.
2.
Zone AO shall have the top of the containment wall elevated above
the highest adjacent grade:
At least one foot higher than the depth specified in feet on the
community's flood insurance rate map; or
a.
b. At least three feet if no depth number is specified; and
c. Shall meet the requirements of Section 6N1b and c.
3.
Wharves, piers and docks. New construction or substantial
improvement of wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones
A1—30, AO, A, and V1—30, in and over water and seaward of the mean
high tide if the following requirements are met:
Wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local,
state, and federal regulations; and
1.
For commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered
professional engineer shall develop or review the structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction.
2.
O.
Coastal floodplains.
All new construction located within Zones A1—30, A, and V1—30
shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide, except as
provided in Section 6PG.
1.
New construction or substantial improvement of any structure
located within Zones V1—30 shall:
Be elevated on posts or columns such that:
The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to one foot above the base flood level;
(1)
The pile or column foundation and the elevated portion
of the structure attached thereto is anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects
(2)
a.
2.
P.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6
CHCT:1177
of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components; and
Water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those
required by applicable state and local building standards.
(3)
Have the space below the lowest floor:
(1) Free of obstructions; or
Constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect
screening intended to collapse under wind and water
without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building
or supporting piles or columns; or
(2)
Constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls which
have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 or
more than 20 pounds per square foot.
(3)
b.
Require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
Develop or review the structural design, specifications,
and plans for the construction, which must meet or exceed
the technical criteria contained in the Coastal
Construction Manual, (FEMA-55/June, 2000); and
a.
Certify that the design and methods of construction to
be used are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the criteria of Section 6L2.
b.
c.
3. The use of fill for structural support in Zones V1—30 is prohibited.
Human alteration of sand dunes within Zones V1—30 is prohibited
unless it can be demonstrated that such alterations will not
increase potential flood damage.
4.
The area below the lowest floor, shall be used solely for parking
vehicles, building access, and storage.
5.
Conditional use. Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located
seaward of mean high tide and shall be exempt from the elevation
requirement in Section 6G, only if permitted as a conditional use
following review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided
in Section 7, and if all the following requirements and those of
Section 6A, 6K, and 6L are met:
The conditional use shall be limited to low-value structures
such as metal or wood sheds 200 square feet or less and shall
not exceed more than one story.
a.
The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the
b.
6.
Section 6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:1178
Section 7. Conditional use review. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional
uses provided for in this ordinance. The Planning Board shall hear and
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all applications for
conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer
that a conditional use permit is required shall file an application for the
permit with the Planning Board.
effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
building components.
The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris
impact forces affecting nearby buildings.
c.
The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be
used for human habitation.
d.
Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must
be anchored and either elevated or floodproofed to one foot
above the base flood elevation.
e.
All electrical outlets shall be ground fault interrupt type. The
electrical service disconnect shall be located on shore above
the base flood elevation and when possible outside the special
flood hazard area.
f.
Review procedure for a conditional use flood hazard development
permit.
The flood hazard development permit application with additional
information attached addressing how each of the conditional use
criteria specified in the ordinance will be satisfied, may serve as
the permit application for the conditional use permit.
1.
Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing on the application within 30 days of their receipt of
the application.
2.
If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant
requirements of the ordinance, the Planning Board must approve
the application or approve with conditions within 45 days of the
date of the public hearing.
3.
A conditional use permit issued under the provisions of this
ordinance shall expire if the work or change involved is not
commenced within 180 days of the issuance of the permit by the
Planning Board.
4.
The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing
over the signature of the Chairman of the Planning Board that flood
insurance is not available for structures located entirely over water
or seaward of mean high tide.
5.
A.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 7
CHCT:1179
Section 8. Certificate of compliance. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no
structure which is constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied
until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
subject to the following provisions:
Section 9. Review of subdivision and development proposals. [Ord.
No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law or local
ordinances or regulations and all projects on five or more disturbed acres,
or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots,
assure that:
Expansion of conditional uses.
No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or
enlarged without a permit issued under this section if that building
or use was established or constructed under a previously issued
conditional use permit or if it is a building or use which would
require a conditional use permit if being newly established or
constructed under this ordinance.
1.
B.
For new construction or substantial improvement of any elevated
structure the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer:
An elevation certificate completed by a professional land surveyor,
registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with
Section 6, paragraphs F, G, H, or P; and
1.
For structures in Zones V1—30, certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction used are in compliance with Section 6P2.
2.
A.
The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement
Officer that the development is complete and complies with the
provisions of this ordinance.
B.
Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
Review the required certificate(s) and the applicant's written
notification; and
1.
Upon determination that the development conforms with the
provisions of this ordinance, shall issue a certificate of compliance.
2.
C.
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
A.
Section 7 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 9
CHCT:1180
Section 10. Appeals and variances. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
The Board of Appeals of the City of Biddeford may, upon written application
of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there
is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made of
the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the administration or
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. The Board of Appeals may
grant a variance from the requirements of this ordinance consistent with
state law and the following criteria:
All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
B.
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
C.
All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in
a riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be
based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
D.
Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan
approval requiring that structures on any lot in the development having
any portion of its land within a special flood hazard area, are to be
constructed in accordance with Section 6 of this ordinance. Such
requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not
limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate
that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any
other document previously described. The construction requirement
shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by
the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval
process.
E.
Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
A.
Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
A determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood
occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
2.
B.
Section 9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 10
CHCT:1181
A showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with
other state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and,
3.
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
"undue hardship," which in this subsection means:
That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted; and
a.
That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances
of the property and not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood; and
b.
That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
c.
That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
d.
4.
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief,
and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions to a variance as
it deems necessary.
C.
Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that:
1. Other criteria of Section 10 and Section 6K are met; and
The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
2.
D.
Variances may be issued by a community for the repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, or restoration of historic structures upon the
determination that:
The development meets the criteria of Section 10, Paragraphs A
through D above; and
1.
The proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
2.
E.
Any applicant who meets the criteria of Section 10, Paragraphs A
through E shall be notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the
signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
1.
F.
Section 10 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 10
CHCT:1182
Section 11. Enforcement and penalties. [Ord. No. 2006.26,
5-2-2006]
Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property; and,
2.
The applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of
all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes
those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality
against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant
may have against the municipality that are related to the use of
land located in a floodplain.
3.
Appeal procedure for administrative and variance appeals.
An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board
of Appeals by an aggrieved party within 30 days after receipt of
a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
1.
Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision
appealed from.
2.
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
within 35 days of its receipt of an appeal request.
3.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within 35 days after
the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
5.
The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer
a report of all variance actions, including justification for the
granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a flood hazard development permit,
which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
6.
Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to
Superior Court in accordance with state laws within 45 days from
the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
7.
G.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A.
The penalties contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall apply to any
violation of this ordinance.
B.
Section 10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 11
CHCT:1183
Section 12. Validity and severability. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
If any section or provision of this ordinance is declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of
this ordinance.
Section 13. Conflict with other ordinances. [Ord. No. 2006.26,
5-2-2006]
This ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of
compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, by law,
permit, or provision of law. Where this ordinance imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of
this ordinance shall control.
Section 14. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this ordinance
shall have the same meaning as they have at common law and to give
is ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in the present
tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall"
is mandatory and not discretionary.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A small detached structure that is incidental
and subordinate to the principal structure.
ADJACENT GRADE — The natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO and AH Zone on a
community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater
In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a
denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of:
The name of the property owner and address or legal description
of the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
1.
A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation
of a cited state or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
2.
A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
3.
Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and,
4.
A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant
to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended.
5.
C.
Section 11 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 14
CHCT:1184
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain having a
one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically
identified in the flood insurance study cited in Section 1 of this ordinance.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year; commonly called the “one-hundred-year flood."
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A document signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the
provisions of this ordinance.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person certified under 30-A
M.R.S.A., § 4451 (including exceptions in Subsection 4451, Paragraph 1)
and employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable comprehensive
planning and land use laws and ordinances.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that because of its potential impact on
surrounding areas and structures, is permitted only upon review and
approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 7.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other
structures; the construction of additions or substantial improvements to
buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and
the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials, public or private sewage
disposal systems or water supply facilities.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1—30, A, or AO to have the
top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1—30,
to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns, post, piers, or stilts; and
a.
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the
base flood.
b.
Section 14 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 14
CHCT:1185
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 01/03, as
amended) that:
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community,
on which the administrator of the federal insurance administration has
delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See "flooding")
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
In the case of Zones A1—30, A, or AO, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of flood waters, as required in Section 6L. In the case of
Zones V1—30, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower
area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls
meet the standards of Section 6P2b(3).
Is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and
a.
b. Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
2.
a.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature,
such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Paragraph a1 of this definition.
b.
Section 14 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 14
CHCT:1186
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents.
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge
openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
selected size flood and floodway conditions.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship
building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or
related manufacturing facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
d.
Section 14 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 14
CHCT:1187
LOCALLY ESTABLISHED DATUM — For purposes of this ordinance, an
elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations at
the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum
and is used in areas where mean sea level data is too far from a specific site
to be practically used.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements described in Section 6 of this
ordinance.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — For purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood
insurance rate map are referenced.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — All development that is not new construction or
a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less that 50% of the market value of the structure.
It includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in
Section 6J, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction
of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and nonstructural projects such as
bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — The national vertical
datum, whose standard was established in 1929, which is used by the
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea
level in 1929 and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)".
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
Section 14 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 14
CHCT:1188
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY —
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See "area of special flood hazard."
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of pipes,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or modification
of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
a. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
b.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor
vehicle; and
c.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
d.
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot;
and
a.
When not designated on the community's flood boundary and floodway
map, it is considered to be the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas to a distance of 1/2 the width of the
floodplain, as measured from the normal high-water mark to the upland
limit of the floodplain.
b.
Section 14 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 14
CHCT:1189
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also
a structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the assessed value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the assessed value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or development to comply with a
community's floodplain management regulations.
Section 15. Abrogation. [Ord. No. 2006.26, 5-2-2006]
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously
enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L.
90-488, as amended).
Article XIII
AMENDMENTS
Section 1. Authority.
The municipal officers may from time to time amend the boundaries of the
zones established on the Official Zoning Map or the regulations set forth in
this ordinance.
Section 2. Procedure on amendments.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure, and a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
b.
Proposed amendment by the municipal officers, Planning Board or upon
petition.
A.
Section 14 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:1190
If either the municipal officers or the Planning Board desire to
propose any changes to this ordinance, or if a citizen petition as set
forth herein is brought, the following procedure shall be followed:
If the proposal is initiated by the municipal officers, they shall
formally request the Planning Board to hold a public hearing
as set forth below, and to carry out the other procedural
requirements of this section.
(a)
If the proposal is initiated by the Planning Board, it shall be by
majority vote of the Board.
(b)
If a petition requesting amendment of this ordinance, signed
by at least 300 registered voters of the City, is filed with the
Planning Board, the Board shall promptly (1) request the City
Clerk to verify the signatures, and (2) if the Clerk verifies that
at least 300 of the signatures are valid, the Board shall then
carry out the other procedural requirements of this section.
(c)
As soon as the amendment procedure is initiated by any of
the above methods, the Board shall cause the City Clerk to
give public notice of a public hearing on the proposed changes,
which notice shall be made in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City, and be published in one issue of such
paper, at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing. The notice
shall contain the time, date, and place of hearing, and
sufficient detail about the proposed changes as to give
adequate notice of their content and import. If the proposed
changes are extensive, a brief summary of the changes,
together with an indication that a full text is available at the
City Clerk's office, shall be adequate notice, provided that in
fact sufficient copies of the text are made available.
(d)
(e) The public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board.
As soon as possible after such public hearing and in any event
within 30 days, the Planning Board shall make a written
recommendation, for or against the proposed changes to the
municipal officers.
(f)
The municipal officers shall not act on a proposed change until
the recommendation of the Planning Board is before them. A
proposed change which has been disapproved by the Planning
Board may be enacted by a majority vote of the municipal
officers.
(g)
1.
Proposed amendment by individuals.
Any owner of property, or holder of a valid option or sales contract
for purchase of property, may propose the rezoning of that property
into another zone. In such case the following procedure shall be
followed:
1.
B.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 2
CHCT:1191
The applicant shall file with the City Clerk an application
signed by him which shall give an adequate description of
the property for which the rezoning is requested, and shall
indicate clearly what rezoning is requested. The applicant shall
also furnish the City Clerk with a plan showing this property in
relation to the present zone boundaries, with sufficient detail
to adequately identify it. The applicant shall also at this time
pay to the City Clerk a sum to cover notice and advertising
costs.
(a)
Immediately upon receipt of such an application, the City Clerk
shall forward a copy to the Planning Board, which shall
promptly schedule a public hearing on the application,
allowing sufficient time for the required notice. The Planning
Board shall promptly notify the City Clerk of the date, time and
place of the hearing, and the Clerk shall inform the applicant.
However, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to find
out from the Clerk the details of the hearing in order to post
the required sign as required by the following section.
(b)
At least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing, the applicant
shall, at his expense, cause to be erected on the property in
a conspicuous location a sign containing not less than nine
square feet of area, with a white background on which shall be
written in letters at least three inches high:
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC
An application has been filed with the City Clerk requesting
that this property be rezoned from (insert present zone name)
to (insert proposed zone). A public hearing will be held at
(insert place) on (date) at (time). All those having an interest
in this application should be present.
Signature:
Applicant
Address
The applicant shall also be responsible for maintaining this
sign continuously in the same location until the date of the
hearing.
(c)
Immediately upon receiving notification from the Planning
Board of the details of the hearing, the City Clerk shall:
Give written notice, with sufficient information to identify
the property, the zone change requested, and the applicant
to all property owners of record (as evidenced by the
City tax files) within 200 feet of the subject property. This
notice shall be sent by regular U.S. mail, first class,
(1)
(d)
Section 2 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:1192
Section 3. Contract and conditional zoning. [Ord. No. 2008.26,
5-6-2008]
postage prepaid, at least 10 days prior to the scheduled
hearing. Failure of any actual property owner to receive
such notice, for any reason, shall not invalidate the
amendment proceedings.
Publish a copy of such notice, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City, in one issue of such paper, at least
15 days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing.
(2)
(e) The public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board.
As soon as possible after such public hearing and in any event
within 30 days, the Planning Board shall make a written
recommendation, for or against the proposed changes to the
municipal officers.
(f)
The municipal officers shall not act on a proposed change until
the recommendation of the Planning Board is before them. A
proposed change which has been disapproved by the Planning
Board may be enacted by a two-thirds vote of the municipal
officers.
(g)
Any contract adopted or approved by the City Council under the terms
of these provisions shall be considered an amendment to this ordinance
and shall be attached hereto and indicated on the Official Zoning Map
of the City of Biddeford.
Contract Zone No. 1: Five Graham Street (Map 38, Lots 295 and 234).
Contract Zone No. 2. [Repealed 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.4]
Contract Zone No. 3. [Repealed 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.4]
Contract Zone No. 4: Lionel Desrochers (Map 2, Lot 3).
Contract Zone No. 5. [Repealed 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.4]
Contract Zone No. 6: Jim Bernard, Eastwood Retirement Community
(Map 82, Lot 31).
Contract Zone No. 7. [Repealed 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.97]
Contract Zone No. 10: McArthur Home for the Aged (Map 27, Lot
95-1).
Contract Zone No. 11: Mariner Tower II, LLC (Map 9, Lot 34).
[Added 4-21-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.16]
Contract Zone No. 12: Developers Collaborative Predevelopment, LLC
(Map 39, Lot 40). [Added 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2010.94]
Contract Zone No. 13: New Cingular Wireless PCS, LLC, dba AT&T
Mobility, LLC (Map 27, Lot 95-2). [Added 10-1-2013 by Ord. No.
2013.77]
A.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 3
CHCT:1193
Article XIV
SHORELAND ZONING ORDINANCE
Section 1. Purposes. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4)]
The purposes of this ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and
healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish
spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect
buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to protect
archaeological and historic resources; to protect commercial fishing and
maritime industries; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore
cover, and visual as well as actual points of access to inland and coastal
waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and
respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
Section 2. Authority. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4)]
This ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title
38, Sections 435 through 449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated
(M.R.S.A.).
Section 3. Applicability. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); Ord. No. 2002.103,
8-19-2003; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
This ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of any great pond, river or freshwater
wetland; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a coastal
or freshwater wetland; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of Swan Pond Brook, and its tributaries specifically depicted
on the Official Zoning Map; and within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of a stream. This ordinance also applies to any
structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure
extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or
within a wetland.
Section 4. Effective date of ordinance and ordinance amendments.
[Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98;
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
Contract Zone No. 14: VC Properties, LLC (d/b/a Mariner Tower, LLC)
(Map 3, Lot 66-1). [Added 7-1-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.49]
Contract Zone No. 15: Southern Maine Affordable Housing (Map 39,
Lots 130 and 130-2). [Added 10-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014.96]
Contract Zone No. 17: American Lighthouse Foundation d/b/a Friends
of Wood Island Lighthouse (Tax Map 10, Lot 27-2). [Added 7-5-2016
by Ord. No. 2016.51]
Section 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 4
CHCT:1194
Section 5. Availability. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4)]
A certified copy of this ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk
and shall be accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made
available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person
making the request. Notice of availability of this ordinance shall be posted.
Section 6. Severability. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4)]
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts
to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of the ordinance.
Section 7. Conflicts with other ordinances. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4);
amended 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with
another provision of this ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or
statute administered by the City of Biddeford, the more restrictive provision
shall control, except that where there are conflicts or inconsistencies
between Section 12 (Nonconformance) of this ordinance and any other
ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the City of Biddeford,
Section 12 (Nonconformance) of this ordinance shall prevail.
Section 8. Amendments. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); amended 2-2-2010
by Ord. No. 2009.98]
This ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the Biddeford City
Council. Copies of amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk,
shall be submitted to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection following adoption by the Biddeford City Council and shall not be
effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to
act on any amendment within 45 days of his/her receipt of the amendment,
the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted to the City of Biddeford within the forty-five-day period shall be
This ordinance, which was adopted by the Biddeford City Council on
October 18, 2016, shall not be effective unless approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A
certified copy of the ordinance, or ordinance amendment, attested and
signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Commissioner
for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this ordinance, or
ordinance amendment, within 45 days of his/her receipt of the
ordinance, or ordinance amendment, it shall be automatically
approved.
A.
Any application for a permit submitted to the City of Biddeford within
the forty-five-day period shall be governed by the terms of this
ordinance, or ordinance amendment, if the ordinance, or ordinance
amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
B.
Section 4 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 8
CHCT:1195
governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is approved
by the Commissioner.
Section 9. Overlay districts and Zoning Map. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4);
Ord. No. 2002.103, 8-19-2003]
Section 10. Interpretation of overlay boundaries. [Ord. of
9-15-1998(4); Ord. No. 2002.103, 8-19-2003; amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Zoning Map or in this ordinance
by written description, overlay boundary lines are property lines, the center
lines of streets, roads and rights-of-way, and the boundaries of the shoreland
area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact location of
Official Zoning Map. The areas to which this ordinance is applicable
are hereby divided into the following overlays as shown on the Official
Zoning Map which is made a part of this ordinance: [Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
1. Resource Protection (RP).
2. Resource Protection-1 (RP-1).
3. Limited Residential (LR).
4. Limited Commercial (LC).
5. General Development 1 (GD-1).
6. General Development 2 (GD-2).
7. Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities (CFMA).
8. Stream Protection (SP).
A.
Scale of Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of
not less than: 1 inch = 2,000 feet. Overlay boundaries shall be clearly
delineated and a legend indicating the symbols for each overlay shall
be placed on the Map. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98;
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
B.
Certification of Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map shall be
certified by the attested signature of the Municipal Clerk and shall
be located in Biddeford City Hall. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
C.
Changes to the Official Zoning Map. In amendments, in accordance
with Section 8, are made in the overlay boundaries or other matter
portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be made on
the Official Zoning Map within 30 days after the amendment has been
approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
D.
Section 8 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 10
CHCT:1196
overlay boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as
to location.
Section 11. Land use requirements. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); Ord. No.
2002.103, 8-19-2003]
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof
shall hereafter be erected, constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and
no new lot shall be created except in conformity with all of the regulations
herein specified for the overlay in which it is located, unless a variance is
granted.
Section 12. Nonconformance. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); Ord. No.
2002.103, 8-19-2003]
Purpose. It is the intent of this ordinance to promote land use
conformities, except that nonconforming conditions that existed before
the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, shall be
allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in Section
12. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, a nonconforming
condition shall not be permitted to become more nonconforming.
[Amended 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
A.
General.
Transfer of ownership: Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses
may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the
nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure
or lot, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.
1.
Repair and maintenance: This ordinance allows, without a permit,
the normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and
structures including repairs or renovations that do not involve
expansion of the nonconforming use or structure, and such other
changes in a nonconforming use or structure as federal, state, or
local building and safety codes may require. [Amended 2-2-2010
by Ord. No. 2009.98]
2.
B.
Nonconforming structures; effective date of amendments to Section
12C. The effective date of the amendments to Section 12C shall be
September 1, 2017. This effective date also applies to the definitions of
“expansion of structure” and “expansion of use” in Section 17 of this
ordinance. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016
by Ord. No. 2016.69]
Expansions. All new principal and accessory structures, excluding
functionally water-dependant uses, must meet the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements contained in
Section 15B1. A nonconforming structure may be added to or
1.
C.
Section 10 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 12
CHCT:1197
expanded after obtaining a permit from the same permitting
authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion
does not increase the nonconformity of the structure and is in
accordance with Subparagraphs a and b below.
Expansion of any portion of a structure within 25 feet of the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland is prohibited, even if the expansion
will not increase nonconformity with the water body, tributary
stream or wetland setback requirement. Expansion of an
accessory structure that is located closer to the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of
a wetland than the principal structure is prohibited, even if the
expansion will not increase nonconformity with the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland setback requirement.
a.
Notwithstanding Subparagraph a, above, if a legally existing
nonconforming principal structure is entirely located less than
25 feet from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, that structure
may be expanded as follows, as long as all other applicable
municipal land use standards are met and the expansion is not
prohibited by Section 12C1.
The maximum total footprint for the principal structure
may not be expanded to a size greater than 800 square
feet or 30% larger than the footprint that existed on
January 1, 1989, whichever is greater. The maximum
height of the principal structure may not be made greater
than 15 feet or the height of the existing structure,
whichever is greater.
i.
b.
All other legally existing nonconforming principal and
accessory structures that do not meet the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland setback requirements may be expanded or
altered as follows, as long as other applicable municipal land
use standards are met and the expansion is not prohibited by
Section 12C1, or Section 12C1a, above.
For structures located less than 100 feet from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or
upland edge of a wetland, the maximum combined total
footprint for all structures may not be expanded to a size
greater than 1,000 square feet or 30% larger than the
footprint that existed on January 1, 1989, whichever is
greater. For structures located less than 75 feet but
greater than 25 feet from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland the maximum height of any structure may not be
made greater than 20 feet or the height of the existing
structure, whichever is greater. For structures located less
i.
c.
Section 12 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 12
CHCT:1198
than 100 feet but greater than 75 feet from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland the maximum height of any
structure may not be made greater than 25 feet or the
height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
[Amended 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-17]
In addition to the limitations in Subparagraph i, for
structures that are legally nonconforming due to their
location within the Resource Protection District, the
maximum combined total footprint for all structures may
not be expanded to a size greater than 1,500 square feet
or 30% larger than the footprint that existed at the time
the Resource Protection District was established on the
lot, whichever is greater. The maximum height of any
structure may not be made greater than 25 feet or the
height of the existing structure, whichever is greater,
except that any portion of those structures located less
than 100 feet from the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland must
meet the footprint and height limits in Section 12C1bi, and
Section 12C1ci, above.
ii.
An approved plan for expansion of a nonconforming structure
must be recorded by the applicant with the Registry of Deeds
within 90 days of approval. The recorded plan must show
the existing and proposed footprint of the nonconforming
structure, the existing and proposed structure height, the
footprint of any other structures on the parcel, the Shoreland
Zone boundary and evidence of approval by the municipal
review authority.
d.
Foundations. Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement
foundation is constructed under a nonconforming structure, the
structure and new foundation must be placed such that the setback
requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined
by the Planning Board, basing its decision on the criteria specified
in Section 12C3 (Relocation) below.
2.
Relocation: A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the
boundaries of the parcel on which the structure is located, provided
that the site of relocation conforms to all setback requirements to
the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board,
and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present
subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of
state law and the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance
with the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be
relocated in a manner that causes the structure to be more
nonconforming.
3.
Section 12 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 12
CHCT:1199
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback
to the greatest practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider
the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil
erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on
adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other
on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type and amount
of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When
it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland
setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board
shall require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the
destroyed vegetation in accordance with Section 15S. In addition,
the area from which the relocated structure was removed must be
replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be
replanted with at least one native tree, three feet in height, for
every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one
species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of
trees planted. Replaced trees must be planted no further from
the water or wetland than the trees that were removed. Other
woody and herbaceous vegetation and ground cover that are
removed or destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be
reestablished. An area at least the same size as the area where
vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or
removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The
vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed
or removed.
a.
Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel,
the original location of the structure shall be replanted with
vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a
combination thereof.
b.
Reconstruction or replacement. Any nonconforming structure
which is located less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland which is removed,
or damaged or destroyed regardless of the cause, by more than
50% of the market value of the structure before such damage,
destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced provided
that a permit is obtained within 18 months of the date of said
damage, destruction, or removal, and provided that such
reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the water
body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board
in accordance with the purposes of this ordinance. If the
reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required
setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure, except
as allowed pursuant to Section 12C1 above, as determined by the
nonconforming footprint of the reconstructed or replaced structure
4.
Section 12 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 12
CHCT:1200
at its new location. If the total footprint of the original structure
can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback
area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be
replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a
new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation in order
to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be replanted
in accordance with Section 12C3 above.
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland
and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value, or
damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of
the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair, may be
reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained, from the Code
Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction,
or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or
replacement meets the setback to the greatest practical extent the
Planning Board shall consider in addition to the criteria in Section
12C3 above, the physical condition and type of foundation present,
if any.
Change of use of a nonconforming structure. The use of a
nonconforming structure may not be changed to another use unless
the Planning Board after receiving a written application determines
that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water
body tributary stream or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent
properties and resources than the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the
Planning Board shall require written documentation from the
applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife
habitat, vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access
to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological
and historic resources, and commercial fishing and maritime
activities, and other functionally water-dependent uses.
5.
Nonconforming uses.
Expansions: Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited,
except that nonconforming residential uses may, after obtaining
a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within existing
residential structures or within expansions of such structures as
permitted in Section 12C1 above. [Amended 9-17-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009.73; 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016.69]
1.
Resumption prohibited: A lot, building or structure in or on which
a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period exceeding one
year, or which is superseded by a conforming use, may not again
2.
D.
Section 12 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 12
CHCT:1201
be devoted to a nonconforming use except that the Planning Board
may, for good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a oneyear
extension to that time period. This provision shall not apply
to the resumption of a use of a residential structure, provided that
the structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes
during the preceding five-year period.
Change of use: An existing nonconforming use may be changed
to another nonconforming use provided that the proposed use has
no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent properties
and resources, including water dependent uses in the CFMA
(Commercial Fisheries-Maritime Activities) Overlay, than the
former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The
determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made
according to criteria listed in Section 12C5 above. [Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016.69]
3.
Nonconforming lots:
Nonconforming lots. A nonconforming lot of record as of the
effective date of this ordinance or amendment thereto may be
built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such
lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot
in the same ownership, and that all provisions of this ordinance
except lot area, lot width, and shore frontage can be met. Variances
relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot area or
shore frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
1.
Contiguous built lots. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are
in a single or joint ownership of record at the time of adoption of
this ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not meet the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance, and if a principal use or structure
exists on each lot, the nonconforming lots may be conveyed
separately or together, provided that the State Minimum Lot Size
Law (12 M.R.S.A. §§ 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single
lot of record on the effective date of this ordinance, each may
be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced law
and rules are complied with. When such lots are divided each lot
thus created must be as conforming as possible to the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance.
2.
Contiguous lots vacant or partially built. If two or more contiguous
lots or parcels are in single or joint ownership of record at the
time of or since adoption or amendment of this ordinance, if any of
these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements
3.
E.
Section 12 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 12
CHCT:1202
Section 13. Establishment of Overlay Districts. [Ord. of
9-15-1998(4); Ord. No. 2000.69, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 2002.6,
1-15-2002; Ord. No. 2002.103, 8-19-2003; amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98 and City Council motions]
of this ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or more
of the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure the lots
shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
requirements.
This provision shall not apply to two or more contiguous lots, at
least one of which is nonconforming, owned by the same person
or persons on December 20, 1990, and recorded in the Registry of
Deeds if the lot is served by a public sewer or can accommodate a
subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and: [Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016.69]
Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at
least 20,000 square feet of lot area; or
a.
Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size
requirements of Section 12E3a are reconfigured or combined
so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage
and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
b.
Resource Protection (RP) District. The Resource Protection District
includes areas in which development would adversely affect water
quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural
values. This district shall include the following areas when they occur
within the limits of the Shoreland Zone, exclusive of the Stream
Protection District, except that areas which are currently developed
and areas which meet the criteria for the Limited Commercial, General
Development 1, General Development 2 or Commercial Fisheries/
Maritime Activities Districts need not be included within the Resource
Protection District. For further clarification of those areas not included
in RP under this definition, refer to the Official Zoning Map and the
descriptions of other districts provided in this section.
Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands and wetlands associated with great ponds and
rivers, which are rated "moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and
wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the
MDIF&W that are depicted on a GIS layer maintained by either
MDIF&W or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
as of December 31, 2008. For the purposes of this paragraph
"wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers" shall mean areas
characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils
that are contiguous with a great pond or river, and have a surface
elevation at or below the water level of the great pond or river
1.
A.
Section 12 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 13
CHCT:1203
during the period of normal high water. "Wetlands associated with
great ponds or rivers" are considered to be part of that great pond
or river. [Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed
great ponds along rivers, defined by the one-hundred-year
floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these,
by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils. This district shall
also include one-hundred-year floodplains adjacent to tidal waters
as shown on FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps.
2.
Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of
20% or greater.
3.
Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland
vegetation and hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater or
coastal wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected
to a water body during the period of normal high water.
4.
Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion,
undercutting, or river bed movement and lands adjacent to tidal
waters which are subject to severe erosion or mass movement,
such as steep coastal bluffs.
5.
The land area located on the west side of Granite Point Road, as
depicted on the Official Zoning Map.
For clarification of the Granite Point area to the west side of
Granite Point Road, the RP District is as depicted on the Official
Zoning Map and in no case extends east of the center line of
Granite Point Road. The northern extent of the RP District in
Granite Point includes Biddeford Tax Map 67, Lot 2; Tax Map
67, Lot 2-2; Tax Map 5, Lot 5; and part of Tax Map 5, Lot 9-4,
extending west along the same bearing as the northern lot
boundary of Tax Map 5, Lot 5, to the Little River. The southern
extent of the RP District in Granite Point is to the southern tip of
Timber Point as depicted on the Official Zoning Map.
For clarification of the Fortunes Rocks area on the west side of
Fortunes Rocks Road, the RP District is as depicted on the Official
Zoning Map and in no case extends east of the center line of
Fortunes Rocks Road or north of the center line of Bridge Street.
For clarification of the Mile Stretch area on the west side of Mile
Stretch Road, the RP District is as depicted on the Official Zoning
Map and includes all lots northeast of, and including, Biddeford
Tax Map 62, Lot 26-1, and in no case extends east of the center
line of Mile Stretch Road.
6.
Section 13 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 13
CHCT:1204
Resource Protection-1 District (RP-1). The RP-1 District is specific to the
Swan Pond Brook corridor. The City of Biddeford recognizes the critical
nature of limiting development that would adversely affect water
quality, productive habitat and biological ecosystems in the Swan Pond
Brook corridor, due to its proximity to the intake pipe of the City's
public water supply. The RP-1 District shall include areas within 250
feet, horizontal distance of the normal high-water line (as determined
in the field) of Swan Pond Brook and tributaries as specifically depicted
on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Biddeford.
B.
General Development (GD-1) District. The General Development
District includes the following types of existing, intensively developed
areas:
Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial,
industrial or intensive recreational activities, or a mix of such
activities, including but not limited to the following:
Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial
activities;
a.
Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and
service activities, or other commercial activities; and
b.
Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and
activities, such as, but not limited to amusement parks, race
tracks and fairgrounds.
c.
1.
Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive
commercial, industrial or recreational uses.
2.
Portions of the General Development 1 District may also include
residential development. However, no area shall be designated as a
General Development District based solely on residential use.
3.
C.
General Development 2 (GD-2) District. The General Development 2
District includes the same types of areas as those listed for the General
Development 1 District. The General Development 2 District, however,
shall be applied to newly established General Development Districts
where the pattern of development at the time of adoption is
undeveloped or not as intensively developed as that of the General
Development 1 District.
Portions of the General Development 2 District may also include
residential development. However, no area shall be designated as a
General Development District based solely on residential use.
D.
Stream Protection (SP) District. The Stream Protection District includes
all land areas within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a stream (as determined in the field), exclusive of those
areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of a great pond, or river, or within 250 feet, horizontal distance,
E.
Section 13 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 13
CHCT:1205
of the upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland. Where a stream
and its associated shoreland area is located within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land area shall
be regulated under the terms of the Shoreland District associated with
that water body or wetland. The beginning (furthest upstream extent)
of a stream is as depicted on the Official Zoning Map of the City of
Biddeford, unless determined to be otherwise by the Zoning Board of
Appeals as per Article XIV, Section 10.
Limited Residential (LR) District. The Limited Residential District
includes those areas suitable for residential and recreational
development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource
Protection District, Stream Protection Districts, and areas which are
used less intensively than those in the Limited Commercial District, the
General Development Districts, or the Commercial Fisheries/Maritime
Activities District. The Limited Residential District includes the
following:
The land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of any great pond, river, or freshwater
wetland; and within 250 feet of the upland edge of a coastal or
freshwater wetland as depicted on the Official Zoning Map and
field verified, unless otherwise described below;
For clarification along the interior of "The Pool," the LR District
is as depicted on the Official Zoning Map and follows property
line boundaries away from "The Pool" except for the following:
"Hills Beach Area: For clarification around the northwest
coastal wetland associated with ''The Pool" starting and
including Tax Map 9, Lot 3-5, and running clockwise
around the coastal wetland, the LR District boundary is
the upland edge of the coastal wetland until Tax Map 54,
Lot 97. Starting at and including Tax Map 54, Lot 97, all
lots southwest of Hills Beach Road to Tax Map 54, Lot 85,
are designated within an LR District except Tax Map 54,
Lots 93, 98, and 99, and Tax Map 55, Lot 47-1 (which are
designated as RP).
i.
a.
b. (Reserved)
For clarification regarding the area located west of Granite
Point Road, the south boundary of the LR District meets the
north boundary of the RP District as depicted on the Official
Zoning Map.
c.
For clarification of the Granite Point Road area on the west
side of Granite Point Road in the vicinity of Heather Lane,
the LR District crosses Granite Point Road from the Atlantic
Ocean side as depicted on the Official Zoning Map and as field
determined.
d.
1.
F.
Section 13 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 13
CHCT:1206
Section 14. Table of Land Uses. [Ord. No. 2000.9, 3-7-2000; Ord.
No. 2000.69, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 2000.137, 1-2-2001; Ord. No.
2002.103, 8-19-2003; Ord. No. 2007.30, 6-5-2007]
All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland
Zone,109 shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in
Section 15. The overlay designation for a particular site shall be determined
from the Official Zoning Map.
Limited Commercial (LC) District. The Limited Commercial District
includes areas of mixed, light commercial and residential uses,
exclusive of the Stream Protection District, which should not be
developed as intensively as the General Development Districts. This
district may include commercial lots in existence prior to January 1,
1989, as defined below. Industrial uses are prohibited. For clarification
purposes, the LC Districts include the following commercial areas:
The Shoreland Zone (as determined in the field) that overlays the
W3 Zone.
1.
G.
Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities (CFMA) District.
The Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities District includes
areas where the existing predominant pattern of development is
consistent with the allowed uses for this district as indicated in the
Table of Land Uses, Section 14, and other areas which are suitable
for functionally water-dependent uses, taking into consideration
such factors as:
a. Shelter from prevailing winds and waves;
Slope of the land within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
shoreline;
b.
Depth of the water within 150 feet, horizontal distance, of the
shoreline;
c.
Available support facilities including utilities and
transportation facilities; and
d.
e. Compatibility with adjacent upland uses.
1.
For clarification purposes, the CFMA District includes the following
area:
The Shoreland Zone (as determined in the field) that overlays
Tax Map 47, Lot 1, (Marblehead Boat Launch).
a.
2.
H.
109. Editor's Note: Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone, is included at the end of this
article.
Section 13 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1207
Section 15. Land Use Standards. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); Ord. No.
2000.69, 2-20-2001; Ord. No. 2002.103, 8-19-2003; Ord. No.
2007.30, 6-5-2007]
All land use activities within the Shoreland Zone shall conform with the
following provisions, if applicable.
Minimum lot standards. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Shore
Frontage
(feet)
Residential per Dwelling Unit
A. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent
to tidal areas
30,000 150
B. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent
to nontidal areas
40,000 200
C. Within the General Development
District 1 (within existing structures
only)
None None
Governmental, Institutional, Commercial or Industrial per Principal
Structure
A. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent
to tidal areas exclusive of those areas
zoned for commercial fisheries and
maritime activities
40,000 200
B. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent
to tidal areas zoned for commercial
fisheries and maritime activities
None None
C. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent
to nontidal areas
60,000 300
D. Within the General Development
District 1 (within existing structures
only)
None None
Public and Private Recreational Facilities
A. Within the Shoreland Zone adjacent
to tidal and nontidal areas
40,000 200
B. Within the General Development
District 1
None None
Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland and land beneath roads serving more than two
lots shall not be included toward calculating minimum lot area.
1.
A.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1208
Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road
was established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after
September 22, 1971.
2.
The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body
or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the
shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
3.
If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure, or use, or
combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each
additional dwelling unit, principal structure, or use, except as
provided in the above Table in the General Development District.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
4.
Principal and accessory structures. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at
least 100 feet, horizontal distance from the normal high-water line
of great ponds classified GPA and rivers that flow to great ponds
classified GPA, and 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland, except that in the General Development
District the setback from the normal high-water line of the wetland
shall be at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, in the Commercial
Fisheries/Maritime Activities District there shall be no minimum
setback, and the setback for structures from the normal highwater
line of the wetland shall be at least 75 feet, horizontal
distance, in that portion of the Institutional (IN) Zone subject to the
Limited Residential (LR) Shoreland District described as follows:
[Amended 6-5-2018 by Ord. No. 2018.44]
A certain lot or parcel of land situated on the easterly side of
Hills Beach Road, in the City of Biddeford, County of York, State
of Maine, and being more specifically bounded and described as
follows:
BEGINNING at a point marking the intersection of the
northwesterly extension of the southwesterly sideline of the UNE
wastewater treatment plant and the upper edge of the coastal
wetland adjacent to the Saco River, thence southerly along a
line through the southwesterly sideline of the UNE wastewater
treatment plant a distance of 310 feet more or less to the
intersection of said line with the City of Biddeford Limited
Residential (LR) Zone boundary;
THENCE: northeasterly along said LR Zone boundary a distance
of 414 feet more or less to a point;
1.
B.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1209
THENCE: northerly 340 feet more or less to a point on the upland
edge of the coastal wetland adjacent to the Saco River.
Meaning and intending to encompass a portion of Lot 4, as shown
on City of Biddeford Official Tax Map 52.
Within that portion of the Institutional (IN) Zone subject to a
Shoreland Zoning District, existing buildings, structures, and
roads may be maintained, modified, or replaced, but no new
buildings shall be built or located and no existing buildings shall
be enlarged (including the replacement of existing buildings),
except as follows: The existing buildings and roads may be
modified to the extent necessary to meet the requirements of
applicable local, state, or federal codes or regulations, the existing
sewage treatment plant may be expanded or replaced, and the
existing Marine Science Center may be expanded through the
construction of one additional building, provided that such
changes meet all shoreland requirements and the performance
standards of Article XIV.
In addition:
The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision
shall neither apply to structures which require direct access
to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity, such
as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally
water-dependent uses.
a.
b. (Reserved)
For principal structures, water and wetland setback
measurements shall be taken from the top of a coastal bluff
that has been identified on coastal bluff maps as being "highly
unstable" or "unstable" by the Maine Geological Survey
pursuant to its "Classification of Coastal Bluffs" and published
on the most recent coastal bluff map. If the applicant and the
permitting official(s) are in disagreement as to the specific
location of a "highly unstable" or "unstable" bluff, or where
the top of the bluff is located, the applicant may, at his or her
expense, employ a Maine registered professional engineer, a
Maine certified soil scientist, a Maine state geologist, or other
qualified individual to make a determination. If agreement is
still not reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
c.
On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential
structure exists, and it is not possible to place an accessory
structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream or
wetland setbacks, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a
permit to place a single accessory structure, with no utilities,
for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment. Such
accessory structure shall not exceed 80 square feet in area
d.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1210
nor eight feet in height, and shall be located as far from
the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and shall meet
all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the structure
be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than the
principal structure.
Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing
structures which are permitted in the Resource Protection and
Limited Residential, Limited Commercial, and Stream Protection
Districts, shall not exceed 35 feet in height. This provision shall
not apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills,
antennas, and similar structures having no floor area. Further,
this provision shall not apply to cupolas, domes, widow’s walks
and other similar features added to a legally existing conforming
structure, provided that the provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. §439-A,
Subsection 9, are met as follows: [Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.69]
The legally existing conforming structure is not located in a
Resource Protection District or a Stream Protection District as
defined in guidelines adopted by the Board; and
a.
The cupola, dome, widow's walk or other similar feature:
Does not extend beyond the exterior walls of the existing
structure;
i.
ii. Has a floor area of 53 square feet or less; and
Does not increase the height of the existing structure, as
determined under 38 M.R.S.A. § 436-A, Subsection 7-A, by
more than seven feet.
For purposes of this provision "cupola, dome, widow's
walk or other similar feature" means a nonhabitable
building feature mounted on a building roof for
observation purposes.
iii.
b.
2.
The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and
structures including basements shall be elevated at least one foot
above the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood, the flood of
record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil
types identified as recent floodplain soils. In those municipalities
that participate in the National Flood Insurance Program and have
adopted the April 2005 version, or later version, of the Floodplain
Management Ordinance, accessory structures may be placed in
accordance with the standards of that ordinance and need not meet
the elevation requirements of this paragraph.
3.
Nonvegetated surfaces. [Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016.69]
4.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1211
With the exception of General Development Districts located
adjacent to coastal wetlands and rivers that do not flow to
great ponds, and Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities
Districts, nonvegetated surfaces shall not exceed a total of 20%
of the portion of the lot located within the Shoreland Zone.
This limitation does not apply to public boat launching facilities
regardless of the district in which the facility is located.
a.
In a General Development District located adjacent to coastal
wetlands, or rivers that do not flow to great ponds, or in
a Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities District,
nonvegetated surfaces shall not exceed a total of 70% of the
portion of the lot located within the Shoreland Zone.
b.
For the purposes of calculating lot coverage, nonvegetated
surfaces include, but are not limited to the following:
structures, driveways, parking areas, and other areas from
which vegetation has been removed. Naturally occurring ledge
and rock outcroppings are not counted as nonvegetated
surfaces when calculating lot coverage for lots of record on
March 24, 1990, and in continuous existence since that date.
c.
When calculating lot coverage for lots of record on March 24,
1990, and in continuous existence since that date, the area
of naturally occurring ledge and rock outcroppings not to be
counted as nonvegetated surfaces in a Shoreland Zone shall
be deducted from the total lot area before calculating the
allowable lot coverage. For example, a lot of 40,000 square feet
located entirely in a Limited Residential District with 10,000
square feet of ledge reduces the applicable lot area to 30,000
square feet to which the 20% maximum nonvegetated surface
would be applied being 30,000 square feet times 20% equaling
6,000 square feet.
d.
Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall
meet the structure setback requirement, except for low retaining
walls and associated fill, provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated
buffer does not exist;
a.
The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream,
or upland edge of a wetland;
b.
The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally
existing lawn or is a site eroding from lack of naturally
occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
c.
5.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1212
The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, is no more
than 24 inches;
d.
Retaining walls are located outside of the one-hundred-year
floodplain on rivers, streams, coastal wetlands, and tributary
streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain
soils.
e.
The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs,
trees, or a combination thereof, and no further structural
development will occur within the setback area, including
patios and decks; and
f.
A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a water
body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet
the following characteristics:
The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and
herbaceous vegetation. Where natural ground cover is
lacking, the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark
mulch;
i.
Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to
retard erosion and provide for effective infiltration of
stormwater runoff;
ii.
Only native species may be used to establish the buffer
area;
iii.
A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance,
is required, measured perpendicularly to the normal highwater
line or upland edge of a wetland;
iv.
A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15P2a,
may traverse the buffer.
v.
g.
Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or
similar structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils provided; that the structure is limited
to a maximum of four feet in width; that the structure does not
extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water body
or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department
of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C); and that the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the
property.
6.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1213
Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and uses extending
over or below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016.69]
Except as provided in Section 15C11 and Section 15X7, no more
than one pier, dock, wharf or similar structure extending or located
below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland is allowed on a single residential lot; except that when a
single lot contains at least twice the minimum shore frontage as
specified in Section 15A, a second structure may be allowed and
may remain as long as the lot is not further divided.
1.
Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such
use and constructed so as to control erosion.
2.
The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural
beach areas.
3.
The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on
fisheries.
4.
The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry
on the activity and be consistent with the surrounding character
and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock, or wharf in nontidal
waters shall not be wider that six feet for noncommercial uses.
5.
No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf,
dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water
line of a water body or within a wetland unless the structure
requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an
operational necessity.
6.
New permanent piers and docks on nontidal waters shall not be
permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board
that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit has
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection,
pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act.
7.
No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf
or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of
a water body or within a wetland shall be converted to residential
dwelling units in any district.
8.
Except in the General Development District, structures built on,
over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure extending
beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the pier, wharf,
dock or other structure.
9.
C.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1214
NOTE: Permanent structures projecting into or over water bodies
shall require a permit from the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, Title
38 M.R.S.A., Section 480-C.
Vegetation may be removed in excess of the standards in Section
15P of this ordinance in order to conduct shoreline stabilization of
an eroding shoreline, provided that a permit is obtained from the
Planning Board. Construction equipment must access the shoreline
by barge when feasible as determined by the Planning Board.
When necessary, the removal of trees and other vegetation to
allow for construction equipment access to the stabilization
site via land must be limited to no more than 12 feet in width.
When the stabilization project is complete, the construction
equipment accessway must be restored.
a.
Revegetation must occur in accordance with Section 15S.
NOTE: A permit pursuant to the Natural Resource Protection
Act is required from the Department of Environmental
Protection for shoreline stabilization activities.
b.
10.
A deck over a river may be exempted from the shoreland setback
requirements if it is part of a downtown revitalization project that
is defined in a project plan approved by the legislative body of
the municipality, and may include the revitalization of structures
formerly used as mills that do not meet the structure setback
requirements, if the deck meets the following requirements:
The total deck area attached to the structure does not exceed
700 square feet;
a.
The deck is cantilevered over a segment of a river that is
located within the boundaries of the downtown revitalization
project;
b.
The deck is attached to or accessory to an allowed commercial
use in a structure that was constructed prior to 1971 and is
located within the downtown revitalization project;
c.
The construction of the deck complies with all other applicable
standards, except the shoreline setback requirements in
Section 15B; and
d.
The construction of the deck complies with all other state and
federal laws.
e.
11.
Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum
requirements imposed under state licensing procedures and the
following:
D.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1215
Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land,
not including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting
wetland vegetation, and land below the normal high-water line of a
water body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
1.
The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent
or shelter, and utility and service buildings shall be set back a
minimum of 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a
great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland. [Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
2.
Individual private campsites. Individual, private campsites not
associated with campgrounds are allowed, provided the following
conditions are met: [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this
ordinance, or 30,000 square feet of lot area within the Shoreland
Zone, whichever is less, may be permitted.
1.
When an individual private campsite is proposed on a lot that
contains another principal use and/or structure, the lot must
contain the minimum lot dimensional requirements for the
principal structure and/or use and the individual private campsite
separately. Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69110]
2.
Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a
recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back 100 feet;
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great
pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great pond classified GPA,
and 100 feet from the normal high-water line of other water bodies,
tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
3.
Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The
recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of permanent
foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure except a
canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
4.
The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle,
tent or similar shelter in a resource protection district shall be
limited to 1,000 square feet.
5.
A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method
and location of sewage disposal shall be required for each campsite
and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing Inspector. Where
disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility
or landowner is required.
6.
E.
110. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections F2 through F6 as
Subsections F3 through F7, respectively.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1216
When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site
for more than 120 days per year, all requirements for residential
structures shall be met, including the installation of a subsurface
sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public
sewage facilities.
7.
Commercial and industrial uses. The following new commercial and
industrial uses are prohibited within the Shoreland Zone adjacent to
great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and streams which flow to great
ponds classified GPA: [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
1. Auto washing facilities.
Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including
body shops.
2.
3. Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers
other than amounts normally associated with individual households
or farms.
4.
5. Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping.
6. Dry cleaning establishments.
7. Electronic circuit assembly.
8. Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer.
9. Metal plating, finishing, or polishing.
Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage
on same property as use occurs and except for storage and sales
associated with marinas.
10.
11. Photographic processing.
12. Printing.
F.
Parking areas.
Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream
setback requirements for structures for the district in which such
areas are located, except that in the Commercial Fisheries/
Maritime Activities District parking areas shall be setback at least
25 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline. The setback
requirement for parking areas serving public boat launching
facilities, in districts other than the General Development 1 and
2 Districts and Commercial Fisheries/Maritime Activities District
shall be reduced to no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, from
the shoreline or tributary stream if the Planning Board finds that
1.
G.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1217
no other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or
tributary stream. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and
shall be designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing
directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and, where
feasible, to retain all runoff on site. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
2.
In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities,
the following shall apply:
Typical parking space: Approximately 10 feet wide and 20 feet
long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer
shall be 40 feet long.
a.
b. Internal travel aisles: Approximately 20 feet wide.
3.
Roads and driveways. The following standards shall apply to the
construction of roads and/or driveways and drainage systems, culverts
and other related features. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 100 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond classified
GPA or a river that flows to a great pond classified GPA, and
75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
other water bodies, tributary steams, or the upland edge of a
wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by
the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the
road and/or driveway setback requirement shall be no less than
50 feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by the applicant
that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation
of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques
may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts
and turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. On slopes of greater than 20%
the road and/or driveway setback shall be increased by 10 feet,
horizontal distance, for each five-percent increase in slope above
20%.
Section 15H1 does not apply to approaches to water crossings or
to roads or driveways that provide access to permitted structures
and facilities located nearer to the shoreline or tributary stream
due to an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for
recreational uses. Roads and driveways providing access to
permitted structures within the setback area shall comply fully
with the requirements of Section 15H1 except for that portion of
the road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
1.
H.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1218
Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road rightof-
way regardless of their setback from a water body, tributary
stream or wetland.
2.
New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection
District except that the Planning Board may grant a permit to
construct a road or driveway to provide access to permitted uses
within the district. A road or driveway may also be approved by
the Planning Board in a Resource Protection District upon a finding
that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside
the district. When a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource
Protection District, the road and/or driveway shall be set back as
far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
3.
Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of
two horizontal to one vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized
in accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation
control contained in Section 15T. [Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.69]
4.
Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than 10% except for
segments of less than 200 feet.
5.
In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from
directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands,
roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least 50
feet plus two times the average slope, in width between the outflow
point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a
water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface
drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be
diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to
minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
6.
Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water
turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing
drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To
accomplish this, the following shall apply:
Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water
turnouts shall be spaced along the road or driveway at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade
Spacing
(feet)
0% to 2% 250
3% to 5% 200 to 135
6% to 10% 100 to 80
a.
7.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1219
Grade
Spacing
(feet)
11% to 15% 80 to 60
16% to 20% 60 to 45
21% or more 40
Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only
where the grade is 10% or less.
b.
On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief
culverts shall be placed at approximately a thirty-degree angle
downslope from a line perpendicular to the center line of the
road or driveway.
c.
Ditches relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and their
inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
d.
Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
stormwater runoff control installations associated with roads and
driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective
functioning.
8.
Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the
Resource Protection Stream Protection, Limited Residential and
Limited Commercial Districts:
Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall
be allowed, provided that such signs shall not exceed six square
feet in area and shall not exceed two signs per premises. In the
Limited Commercial District, however, such signs shall not exceed
16 square feet in area. Signs relating to goods or services not sold
or rendered on the premises shall be prohibited.
1.
Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two
signs per premises, and shall not exceed 12 square feet in the
aggregate.
2.
Residential users may display a single sign not over three square
feet in area relating to the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
3.
Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without
restriction as to number provided that no such sign shall exceed
two square feet in area.
4.
5. Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
6. No sign shall extend higher than 20 feet above the ground.
7. Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, nonflashing lights.
I.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1220
Stormwater runoff.
All new construction and development shall be designed to
minimize stormwater runoff from the site in excess of the natural
predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff
control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas
shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage
infiltration of stormwaters.
1.
Stormwater runoff control systems shall be maintained as
necessary to ensure proper functioning.
2.
J.
Septic waste disposal. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in
conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules and the following: a) clearing or removal of woody
vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated
fill extensions, shall not extend closer than 75 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or the
upland edge of a wetland and b) a holding tank is not allowed for a
first-time residential use in the Shoreland Zone.
1.
K.
Essential services.
Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited
to existing public ways and existing service corridors.
1.
The installation of essential services, other than roadside
distribution lines, is not allowed in a Resource Protection or Stream
Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted use
within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates
that no reasonable alternative exists. Where allowed, such
structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any
adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including
visual impacts. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
2.
Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution
lines, towers and related equipment may be replaced or
reconstructed without a permit. [Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
3.
L.
Mineral exploration and extraction. Mineral exploration to determine
the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be accomplished by
hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral
exploration which exceeds the above limitation. All excavations,
including test pits and holes shall be immediately capped, filled or
secured by other equally effective measures, to restore disturbed areas
and to protect the public health and safety. Mineral extraction may
M.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1221
be permitted under the following conditions: [Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved by, the
Planning Board before a permit is granted. Such plan shall describe
in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the requirements
of Section 15M3 below. [Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No.
2016.69]
1.
No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff
control features shall be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified
GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and within 75
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any other
water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland.
Extraction operations shall not be permitted within 50 feet,
horizontal distance, of any property line, without written
permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
2.
Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations
at any extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete
when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are removed in any
consecutive twelve-month period, ground levels and grades shall
be established in accordance with the following:
All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for
disposal in an approved location, or shall be buried on-site.
Only materials generated on site may be buried or covered onsite.
a.
b. The final graded slope shall be a 2 1/2 to one slope or flatter.
Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land
areas, which shall be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation
native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained
from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization
project.
c.
3.
In keeping with the purposes of this ordinance, the Planning Board
may impose such conditions as are necessary to minimize the
adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction operations on
surrounding uses and resources.
4.
Agriculture. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance
with Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the former Maine
Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient
Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201 through 4209). [Amended
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
1.
N.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1222
Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a
great pond classified GPA, or within 75 feet, horizontal distance,
of other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure
storage areas within the Shoreland Zone must be constructed or
modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or
contaminated stormwater.
2.
Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000
square feet in surface area, within the Shoreland Zone, shall
require a conservation plan to be filed with the Planning Board.
Nonconformance with the provisions of said plan shall be
considered to be a violation of this ordinance.
3.
There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond classified
GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies;
nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and
freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date
of this ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may
be maintained.
4.
Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted
within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line
of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance
of other water bodies and coastal wetlands, nor within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of tributary streams, and freshwater wetlands.
Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities, and
which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions
may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in
accordance with a conservation plan.
5.
O. (Reserved)111
Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber
harvesting. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there
shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending
75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water
line, except to remove hazard trees as described in Subsection
Q. Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District, the cutting or
removal of vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for
uses expressly authorized in that District. [Amended 10-18-2016
by Ord. No. 2016.69]
1.
Except in areas as described in Subsection P1 above, within a strip
of land extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the
normal high-water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river
2.
P.
111. Editor's Note: Former Subsection O, Timber harvesting, as amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98, was repealed 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1223
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal
distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be
preserved as follows: [Amended 8-18-2015 by Ord. No.
2015.44; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square
feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation
if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the
outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a single
footpath not to exceed six feet in width as measured between
tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed for accessing the
shoreline, provided that a cleared line of sight to the water
through the buffer strip is not created.
a.
Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed,
provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other
natural vegetation is maintained.
For the purposes of Section 15P2b, a "well-distributed
stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA
or a river or stream flowing to a great pond classified
GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of 24
or more in each twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot rectangular
(1,250 square feet) area as determined by the following
rating system:
Diameter of Tree at 4 1/2 Feet
Above Ground Level
(inches) Points
2 to < 4 1
4 to < 8 2
8 to < 12 4
12 or greater 8
i.
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and
wetlands, a "well-distributed stand of trees" is defined as
maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per twenty-fivefoot
by fifty-foot rectangular area.
ii.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
The twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot rectangular plots
must be established where the landowner or lessee
proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(a)
Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not
overlap a previous plot;
(b)
iii.
b.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1224
Any plot not containing the required points must have
no vegetation removed except as otherwise allowed by
this ordinance;
(c)
Any plot containing the required points may have
vegetation removed down to the minimum points
required or as otherwise allowed by this ordinance;
(d)
Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the
points on any twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot rectangular
area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in
diameter.
(e)
For the purposes of Section 15P2b, "other natural
vegetation" is defined as retaining existing vegetation
under three feet in height and other ground cover and
retaining at least five saplings less than two inches in
diameter at 4 1/2 feet above ground level for each twentyfive-
foot by fifty-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not
exist, no woody stems less than two inches in diameter can
be removed until five saplings have been recruited into the
plot.
iv.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40%
of the total volume of trees four inches or more in
diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may
be removed in any ten-year period.
v.
In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing
vegetation under three feet in height and other ground cover,
including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be cut,
covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other
permitted uses as described in Section 15P, Paragraphs 2 and
2a, above.
c.
Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is
allowed.
d.
In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the
removal of storm-damaged, dead or hazard trees results in the
creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted
with native tree species in accordance with Subsection Q,
below, unless existing new tree growth is present. Amended
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
e.
In order to maintain the vegetation in the shoreline buffer,
clearing or removal of vegetation for allowed activities,
including associated construction and related equipment
operation, within or outside the shoreline buffer, must comply
with the requirements of Section 15P2. [Added 10-18-2016
by Ord. No. 2016.69]
f.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1225
Section 15P2. Does not apply to: (a) those portions of public
recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming areas as
long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area
necessary; and (b) airport vegetation removal projects within
an Aircraft Approach Zone where the Federal Aviation
Administration has certified, in writing, the need for safety
hazard compliance with protected airspace so long as any
such projects are designed, constructed, implemented,
operated, and maintained to avoid or, where avoidance is
not practicable, to minimize impacts to resource areas, as
evidenced by the acquisition of all required permits.
At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from a
great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the
upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in
any ten-year period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of
the volume of trees four inches or more in diameter, measured
4 1/2 feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with
the development of permitted uses shall be included in the fortypercent
calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume
may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including
but not limited to, principal and accessory structures, driveways,
lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate, 25% of
the lot area or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater, including
land previously cleared. This provision applies to the portion of a
lot within the Shoreland Zone, including the buffer area, but shall
not apply to the General Development or Commercial Fisheries/
Maritime Activities Districts. [Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.69]
3.
Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be
maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this
ordinance.
4.
Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily
shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under
the provisions of Section 15P.
5.
Hazard trees, storm-damaged trees, and dead tree removal. [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69112]
Hazard trees in the Shoreland Zone may be removed without a
permit after consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer if the
following requirements are met:
1.
Q.
112. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections Q through U as
Subsections T through X, respectively.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1226
Within the shoreline buffer, if the removal of a hazard tree
results in a cleared opening in the tree canopy greater than
250 square feet, replacement with native tree species is
required, unless there is new tree growth already present.
New tree growth must be as near as practicable to where
the hazard tree was removed and be at least two inches in
diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground level. If new
growth is not present, then replacement trees shall consist of
native species and be at least four feet in height, and be no less
than two inches in diameter. Stumps may not be removed.
a.
Outside of the shoreline buffer, when the removal of hazard
trees exceeds 40% of the volume of trees four inches or more
in diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above ground level, in any
ten-year period, and/or results in cleared openings exceeding
25% of the lot area within the Shoreland Zone, or 10,000
square feet, whichever is greater, replacement with native tree
species is required, unless there is new tree growth already
present. New tree growth must be as near as practicable to
where the hazard tree was removed and be at least two inches
in diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground level.
If new growth is not present, then replacement trees shall
consist of native species and be at least two inches in diameter,
measured at 4.5 feet above the ground level.
b.
The removal of standing dead trees, resulting from natural
causes, is permissible without the need for replanting or a
permit, as long as the removal does not result in the creation
of new lawn areas, or other permanently cleared areas, and
stumps are not removed. For the purposes of this provision,
dead trees are those trees that contain no foliage during the
growing season.
c.
The Code Enforcement Officer may require the property owner
to submit an evaluation from a licensed forester or arborist
before any hazard tree can be removed within the Shoreland
Zone.
d.
The Code Enforcement Officer may require more than a onefor-
one replacement for hazard trees removed that exceed
eight inches in diameter measured at 4.5 feet above the ground
level.
e.
Storm-damaged trees in the Shoreland Zone may be removed
without a permit after consultation with the Code Enforcement
Officer if the following requirements are met:
Within the shoreline buffer, when the removal of stormdamaged
trees results in a cleared opening in the tree canopy
greater than 250 square feet, replanting is not required, but
a.
2.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1227
the area shall be required to naturally revegetate, and the
following requirements must be met:
The area from which a storm-damaged tree is removed
does not result in new lawn areas, or other permanently
cleared areas;
i.
Stumps from the storm-damaged trees may not be
removed;
ii.
Limbs damaged from a storm event may be pruned even if
they extend beyond the bottom 1/3 of the tree; and
iii.
If after one growing season, no natural regeneration or
regrowth is present, replanting of native tree seedlings or
saplings is required at a density of one seedling per every
80 square feet of lost canopy
iv.
Outside of the shoreline buffer, if the removal of stormdamaged
trees exceeds 40% of the volume of trees four inches
or more in diameter, measured at 4.5 feet above the ground
level in any ten-year period, or results, in the aggregate, in
cleared openings exceeding 25% of the lot area within the
Shoreland Zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater,
and no natural regeneration occurs within one growing season,
then native tree seedlings or saplings shall be replanted on a
one-for-one basis.
b.
Exemptions to clearing and vegetation removal requirements. The
following activities are exempt from the clearing and vegetation
removal standards set forth in Section 15P, provided that all other
applicable requirements of this chapter are complied with, and the
removal of vegetation is limited to that which is necessary: [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
The removal of vegetation that occurs at least once every two years
for the maintenance of legally existing areas that do not comply
with the vegetation standards in this chapter, such as but not
limited to cleared openings in the canopy or fields. Such areas shall
not be enlarged, except as allowed by this section. If any of these
areas, due to lack of removal of vegetation every two years, reverts
back to primarily woody vegetation, the requirements of Section
15P apply;
1.
The removal of vegetation from the location of allowed structures
or allowed uses, when the shoreline setback requirements of
Section 15B are not applicable;
2.
The removal of vegetation from the location of public swimming
areas associated with an allowed public recreational facility;
3.
R.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1228
The removal of vegetation associated with allowed agricultural
uses, provided that best management practices are utilized, and
provided that all requirements of Section 15N are complied with;
4.
The removal of vegetation associated with brownfields or voluntary
response action program (VRAP) projects, provided that the
removal of vegetation is necessary for remediation activities to
clean up contamination on a site in a General Development District,
Commercial Fisheries and Maritime Activities District or other
equivalent zoning district approved by the Commissioner that is
part of a state or federal brownfields program or a voluntary
response action program pursuant 38 M.R.S.A § 343-E, and that is
located along:
a. A coastal wetland; or
A river that does not flow to a great pond classified as GPA
pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A § 465-A.
b.
5.
The removal of non-native invasive vegetation species, provided
that the following minimum requirements are met:
If removal of vegetation occurs via wheeled or tracked
motorized equipment, the wheeled or tracked motorized
equipment is operated and stored at least 25 feet, horizontal
distance, from the shoreline, except that wheeled or tracked
equipment may be operated or stored on existing structural
surfaces, such as pavement or gravel;
a.
Removal of vegetation within 25 feet, horizontal distance, from
the shoreline occurs via hand tools; and
b.
If applicable clearing and vegetation removal standards are
exceeded due to the removal of non-native invasive species
vegetation, the area shall be revegetated with native species to
achieve compliance.
c.
6.
The removal of vegetation associated with emergency response
activities conducted by the Department, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, the United States Coast Guard,
and their agents.
7.
Revegetation requirements. When revegetation is required in response
to violations of the vegetation standards set forth in Section 15P, to
address the removal of non-native invasive species of vegetation, or
as a mechanism to allow for development that may otherwise not
be permissible due to the vegetation standards, including removal of
vegetation in conjunction with a shoreline stabilization project, the
revegetation must comply with the following requirements: [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
S.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1229
The property owner must submit a revegetation plan, prepared
with and signed by a qualified professional, that describes
revegetation activities and maintenance. The plan must include
a scaled site plan depicting where vegetation was or is to be
removed, where existing vegetation is to remain, and where
vegetation is to be planted, including a list of all vegetation to be
planted.
1.
Revegetation must occur along the same segment of shoreline
and in the same area where vegetation was removed and at a
density comparable to the preexisting vegetation, except where a
shoreline stabilization activity does not allow revegetation to occur
in the same area and at a density comparable to the preexisting
vegetation, in which case revegetation must occur along the same
segment of shoreline and as close as possible to the area where
vegetation was removed.
2.
If part of a permitted activity, revegetation shall occur before the
expiration of the permit. If the activity or revegetation is not
completed before the expiration of the permit, a new revegetation
plan shall be submitted with any renewal or new permit
application.
3.
Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for
trees and saplings:
All trees and saplings removed must be replaced with native
noninvasive species;
a.
Replacement vegetation must, at a minimum, consist of
saplings;
b.
If more than three trees or saplings are planted, then at least
three different species shall be used;
c.
No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of
trees and saplings planted;
d.
If revegetation is required for a shoreline stabilization project,
and it is not possible to plant trees and saplings in the same
area where trees or saplings were removed, then trees or
sapling must be planted in a location that effectively
reestablishes the screening between the shoreline and
structures; and
e.
A survival rate of at least 80% of planted trees or saplings is
required for a minimum period of five years.
f.
4.
Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for
woody vegetation and other vegetation under three feet in height:
All woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height
must be replaced with native noninvasive species of woody
a.
5.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1230
vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height as
applicable;
Woody vegetation and vegetation under three feet in height
shall be planted in quantities and variety sufficient to prevent
erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater;
b.
If more than three woody vegetation plants are to be planted,
then at least three different species shall be planted;
c.
No one species shall make up 50% or more of the number of
planted woody vegetation plants; and
d.
Survival of planted woody vegetation and vegetation under
three feet in height must be sufficient to remain in compliance
with the standards contained within this chapter for minimum
of five years.
e.
Revegetation activities must meet the following requirements for
ground vegetation and ground cover:
All ground vegetation and ground cover removed must be
replaced with native herbaceous vegetation, in quantities and
variety sufficient to prevent erosion and provide for effective
infiltration of stormwater;
a.
Where necessary due to a lack of sufficient ground cover, an
area must be supplemented with a minimum four-inch depth of
leaf mulch and/or bark mulch to prevent erosion and provide
for effective infiltration of stormwater; and
b.
Survival and functionality of ground vegetation and ground
cover must be sufficient to remain in compliance with the
standards contained within this chapter for minimum of five
years.
c.
6.
Erosion and sedimentation control.
All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other
similar activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions and
which require a permit shall also require a written soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to
the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where
applicable, provisions for: [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
a. Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt
fencing or diversion ditches.
b.
Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or
riprap.
c.
1.
T.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1231
In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall
be designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas
of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be
avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed
as closely as possible.
2.
Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all
aspects of the proposed project involving land disturbance, and
shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The amount
of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to
reduce the potential for erosion.
3.
Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently
stabilized within one week from the time it was last actively
worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective
measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within
nine months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one
bale per 500 square feet and shall be maintained until a catch
of vegetation is established.
a.
Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other
suitable method may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
b.
Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order
to avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may include
the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
c.
4.
Natural and man-made drainageways and drainage outlets shall
be protected from erosion from water flowing through them.
Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order to carry
water from a twenty-five year storm or greater, and shall be
stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
5.
Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the
proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained without
causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe erosion, mass
soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during
or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste
disposal, and commercial or industrial development and other similar
intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified
persons may include Maine certified soil scientists, Maine registered
professional engineers, Maine state certified geologists and other
persons who have training and experience in the recognition and
evaluation of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the
analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land and
water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge,
drainage conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator
deems appropriate. The soils report shall include recommendations for
a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
U.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1232
Water quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or
discharge to the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself or in
combination with other activities or substances will impair designated
uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or
wetland. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
V.
Archaeological sites. Any proposed land use activity involving
structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed
on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
as determined by the permitting authority shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review
and comment, at least 20 days prior to action being taken by the
permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider comments
received from the commission prior to rendering a decision on the
application.
W.
Recreational trails. [Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
Standards applicable to recreational trails. [Amended
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
Recreational trails shall be designed and constructed
consistent with the Maine Trails Manual "Guidelines for
Recreational Trail Construction in Maine," published by the
Maine Department of Conservation, Bureau of Parks and
Lands, dated October 2002, or the American Association of
State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) "Guide
for the Development of Bicycle Facilities," 1999, except where
stricter standards are contained in this ordinance.
a.
Where a recreational trail is permitted within 100 feet of a
great pond or within 75 feet of another water body or wetland,
tree cutting associated with the recreational trail construction
shall be limited to the minimum amount necessary and, to
the extent practical, tree canopies over the trail shall be
preserved.
b.
All portions of a recreational trail, including any trail spurs,
shall be designed and constructed to shed water, avoid erosion,
and minimize channelized flow to surface waters.
c.
A trail that exceeds the limitations contained in this section
shall meet all of the standards for roads and driveways found
in Section 15H.
d.
1.
Standards applicable to primitive trails.
Primitive trails shall be set back at least 10 feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of a water body or
upland edge of a wetland, except for water body and wetland
crossings, and water access sites. Water access sites are
limited to one site per 500 feet of shore frontage, excluding
a.
2.
X.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1233
canoe portage locations and allowed footpaths pursuant to
Section 15P2a, and shall be limited to the width of the trail.
Private water access sites shall not be located closer than 200
linear feet from a footpath allowed by Section 15P2a.
Primitive trails shall be constructed using hand tools only,
including power hand tools.
b.
The trail must be designed and constructed such that soil
erosion will be prevented. Such prevention measures may
include steps, water bars, drainage dips, and minor sidesloping
of trails, in addition to lining of the trail with crushed
rock, pea stone, or other natural material.
c.
Where necessary, wooden walkways, bridges, and similar
installations no more than four feet in width, are allowed in
wet, rocky or unstable areas.
d.
Standards Applicable to Category 2 multiple-use nonmotorized
trails.
A Category 2 multiple-use nonmotorized trail, including its
base, shall set back at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high-water line of a water body or the upland
edge of a wetland, except for water and wetland access sites,
and except where an existing trail base or developed area
is present, including but not limited to a discontinued rail
bed, roadway, parking area or industrial site. The Planning
Board may waive the setback requirement when the applicant
demonstrates that there is no other reasonable alternative
for the location of the trail. Examples include, but are not
limited to, the avoidance of rail, road and wetland crossings,
the circumvention of bridge abutments, ledges and steep
slopes, and the need to meet required safety standards. Where
necessary, elevated walkways/platforms no more than seven
feet in width over a water body or wetland resource may be
permitted.
a.
Trail spurs, no more than five feet in width, may be constructed
to the water or wetland. No spur, however, shall be located less
than 500 linear feet from another spur. Clearing of vegetation
for a trail spur shall not exceed 200 square feet per 25 linear
feet of trail length.
b.
Where necessary to prevent erosion of surface materials, trail
surfaces shall be paved, graveled, mulched, or otherwise
stabilized.
c.
3.
Standards Applicable to Category 1 multiple-use nonmotorized
trails.
4.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1234
Category 1 multiple-use nonmotorized trails shall meet the
same shoreline or wetland setback requirement as that
required of structures in the applicable district, except as
follows:
A trail may be permitted over an existing base, such as a
discontinued rail bed, roadway, berm, dike, parking lot or
industrial site. The trail may be expanded within a road
or rail right-of-way existing on the effective date of this
ordinance, provided that no part of the expanded trail is
less than 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of a water body or the upland edge of a
wetland.
i.
The setback requirement of the trail may be reduced to no
less than 25 feet for up to 25% of the length of the trail,
upon demonstration by the applicant that: water quality
will not be degraded; there will be no unreasonable
impacts on natural beauty or wildlife populations,
including effects on habitat; and that the trail will be
designed and constructed in a manner consistent with the
purposes of this ordinance.
ii.
Notwithstanding the limitations in Paragraphs 1a and 1b
above, the Planning Board may waive the water or wetland
setback requirement when the applicant demonstrates
that there is no other reasonable alternative for the
location of the trail. Examples include, but are not limited
to, the avoidance of rail, road, and wetland crossings,
the avoidance of permanent structures, ledges, and steep
slopes, and the need to meet required safety standards.
When the applicant demonstrates the need, an elevated
walkway/platform over the water or wetland resource may
be permitted, provided that it is no larger than necessary.
NOTE: Elevated walkways must comply with local
floodplain management ordinances, and may require a
permit from the DEP pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act.
iii.
a.
When a trail is permitted within the structure setback area,
any significant areas of exposed mineral soil present between
the trail and the water body or wetland shall be planted with
native vegetation or be otherwise stabilized to prevent erosion
and protect water quality.
b.
Trail spurs, no greater than eight feet in width, may be
established at distances no less than 500 linear feet apart.
Clearing of vegetation for a trail spur shall not exceed 250
square feet per 25 feet of spur length. Trail spurs that extend
to the shoreline shall not include any structural development
except that necessary for shoreline stabilization or trail
c.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1235
hardening, and except for the placement of a bench or similar
object for sitting purposes. No trail spur shall be permitted on
sustained ground slopes of greater than 15%.
Trail surfaces must either be paved, graveled, mulched or
otherwise stabilized/surfaced to prevent erosion of surface
materials. Trail banks and side slopes steeper than a 50% slope
and retaining walls greater than four feet in height shall be
designed by a professional engineer and shall be stabilized in
accordance with the provisions for erosion and sedimentation
control contained in Subsection Q.
d.
Standards applicable to Category 2 multiple-use trails, including
motorized uses.
Category 2 multiple-use trails, including motorized uses, shall
meet the same shoreline or wetland setback requirement as
that required for structures in the district in which such trails
are located, except for water and wetland crossings, and
except as follows:
A trail may be permitted over a legally existing base, such
as a discontinued rail bed, roadway, berm, dike, parking
lot or industrial site. No portion of the base shall be
expanded closer to the normal high-water line of a water
body or upland edge of a wetland.
i.
The Planning Board may waive the setback requirement
when the applicant demonstrates that there is no other
reasonable alternative for the location of the trail.
Examples include the avoidance of road and wetland
crossings, ledges, and steep slopes. Any portion of the trail
that is less than 75 feet from a water body or wetland shall
be paved or similarly hardened to prevent erosion.
ii.
A trail that is limited exclusively for winter use need not
meet setback requirements, provided that the trail is
chained, gated or otherwise blocked to motorized access,
except during frozen ground conditions.
iii.
All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or
culvert, except in areas with low, hardened banks and
channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or
similar hard surface which will not be eroded or otherwise
damaged.
iv.
Trails are prohibited within the Shoreland Zone of a
significant river segment, except for water crossings, and
in a Resource Protection District so designated because of
wildlife habitat value or the presence of sustained slopes
greater than 20%.
v.
a.
5.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 15
CHCT:1236
When a trail is permitted within the setback area, any
exposed mineral soil between the trail and the water body
or wetland shall be planted with native vegetation or be
otherwise stabilized in order to prevent erosion and
protect water quality.
vi.
Where trail stability is of concern, the Planning Board
may require hardening or compacting of the trail tread to
prevent erosion. Examples include wet or steeply sloped
areas, and trail switchback sites.
vii.
Trail banks and side slopes steeper than a 50% slope and
retaining walls greater than four feet in height shall be
designed by a professional engineer and shall be stabilized
in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Subsection Q.
viii.
Standards applicable to Category 1 multiple-use trails, including
motorized uses.
Category 1 multiple-use trails, including motorized uses, shall
meet the same standards as those for a Category 2 multipleuse
trail, including motorized uses, except that the Planning
Board may waive the setback requirement only where existing
roads and similar obstructions require the trail to be located
within the setback area. In such case the trail shall not extend
into the setback area for more than 200 linear feet on each side
of the obstruction. All portions of the trail permitted within 75
feet of a water body or wetland shall be paved or otherwise
hardened or compacted to prevent erosion.
a.
6.
Exemption from setback requirements for walkways and trails over
rivers within a downtown revitalization project. [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
A pedestrian walkway or trail is exempt from the otherwise
applicable water or wetland setbacks if the following
requirements are met:
The walkway or trail is adjacent to a segment of a river
that is located within the boundaries of a downtown
revitalization project;
i.
If cantilevered over a segment of river, the walkway or trail
does not extend over the river more than 10 feet from the
normal high-water line;
ii.
If cantilevered over a segment of river, the walkway or
trail is attached to a structure that was constructed prior
to 1971 and is located within a downtown revitalization
project; and
iii.
a.
7.
Section 15 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 15
CHCT:1237
Section 16. Administration. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); Ord. No. 2000.9,
3-7-2000; Ord. No. 2000.137, 1-1-2001; Ord. No. 2002.103,
8-19-2003]
A walkway or trail may be cantilevered over a segment
of river, provided that the Planning Board has determined
there is no other practical means to construct the walkway
or trail without cantilevering over that segment of the
river. If there are no other practical means to construct the
walkway or trail, approaches to the cantilevered walkway
or trail may also cantilever off adjacent retaining walls
but no more than is necessary to access the cantilevered
walkway or trail.
iv.
A downtown revitalization project under this subsection must
be defined in a project plan approved by the legislative body of
the municipality and may include the revitalization of buildings
formerly used as mills that do not meet the water or wetland
setback requirements in Section 15.
b.
Except for the water and wetland setback requirements in
Section 15, a walkway or trail that meets the requirements
of this subsection must meet all other state and local permit
requirements and comply with all other applicable rules.
c.
A walkway or trail exempt under this subsection may be either
privately or publicly owned and maintained.
d.
Administering bodies and agents.
Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be
appointed or reappointed annually by July 1.
1.
Zoning Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created
in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
2.
Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance
with the provisions of state law.
3.
A.
Permits required. After the effective date of this ordinance no person
shall, without first obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use
of land or structure requiring a permit in the overlay in which such
activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing
use or structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person
who is issued a permit pursuant to the ordinance shall have a copy
of the permit on site while the work authorized by the permit is
performed. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road
culvert as long as:
1.
B.
Section 15 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:1238
The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the
culvert being replaced;
a.
b. The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent
sedimentation of the water, and the crossing does not block
fish passage in the watercourse.
c.
A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as
the excavation is conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State
Historic Preservation Officer's Level 1 or Level 2 approved list, and
unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means
of adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization
measures.
2.
Any permit required by this ordinance shall be in addition to any
other permit required by other laws and ordinances.
3.
Permit application.
Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application,
including a scaled site plan, on a form provided by the municipality,
to the appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
1.
All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who
can show evidence of right, title or interest in the property or
by an agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the owner
with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder,
certifying that the information in the application is complete and
correct. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
2.
All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Office, as appropriate, shall note upon each application
the date and time of its receipt. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
3.
If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing
permit or a completed application for a plumbing permit, including
the site evaluation approved by the plumbing inspector, shall be
submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure; or use
would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal
system. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
4.
When an excavation contractor will perform an activity that
requires or results in more than one cubic yard of soil disturbance,
the person responsible for management of erosion and
sedimentation control practices at the site must be certified in
erosion control practices by the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection. This person must be present at the site
each day earthmoving activity occurs for a duration that is
sufficient to ensure that proper erosion and sedimentation control
5.
C.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:1239
practices are followed. This is required until erosion and
sedimentation control measures have been installed which will
either stay in place permanently or stay in place until the area
is sufficiently covered with vegetation necessary to prevent soil
erosion. The name and certification number of the person who
will oversee the activity causing or resulting in soil disturbance
shall be included on the permit application. This requirement does
not apply to a person or firm engaged in agriculture or timber
harvesting if best management practices for erosion and
sedimentation control are used and municipal, state and federal
employees are engaged in projects associated with that
employment. [Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
Procedure for administering permits. Within 35 days of the date of
receiving a written application, the Planning Board or Code
Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, shall notify the applicant in
writing either that the application is a complete application, or, if the
application is incomplete, that specified additional material is needed
to make the application complete. The Planning Board or the Code
Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, shall approve, approve with
conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing within 35 days of
receiving a completed application. However, if the Planning Board has
a waiting list of applications, a decision on the application shall occur
within 35 days after the first available date on the Planning Board's
agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within 35
days of the public hearing, if the proposed use or structure is found to
be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this ordinance.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land
use activity is in conformity with the purposes and provisions of this
ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board,
the Board shall approve an application or approve it with conditions if
it makes a positive finding based on the information presented that the
proposed use:
1. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to
surface waters;
2.
3. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic
life, bird or other wildlife habitat;
4.
Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of
access to inland and coastal waters;
5.
D.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:1240
Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in
the comprehensive plan;
6.
Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime
activities in a commercial fisheries/maritime activities district;
7.
Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and
use; and
8.
Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use
Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the
reasons as well as conditions shall be stated in writing. No
approval shall be granted for an application involving a structure
if the structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or
would violate any other local ordinance or regulation or statute
administered by the municipality. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
9.
Expiration of permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of
issuance if a substantial start is not made in construction or in the use
of the property during that period. If a substantial start is made within
one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one
additional year to complete the project, at which time the permit shall
expire. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
E.
Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district,
sanitary district or any utility company of any kind may not install
services to any new structure located in the Shoreland Zone unless
written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local
permits required under this or any previous ordinance has been issued
by the appropriate municipal officials or other written arrangements
have been made between the municipal officials and the utility.
[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
F.
Appeals. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
Powers and duties of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
Administrative appeals. To hear and decide administrative
appeals, on an appellare basis, where it is alleged by an
aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure
to act by, the Planning Board in the administration of this
ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on
a de novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party
that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code
Enforcement Officer in his or her review of and action on
a permit application under this ordinance. Any order,
a.
1.
G.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:1241
requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act,
in the enforcement of this ordinance, is not appealable to the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
Variance appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within
the limitations set forth in this ordinance.
b.
Variance appeals. Variances may be granted only under the
following conditions:
Variances may be granted only from dimensional
requirements, including but not limited to, lot width, structure
height, percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
a.
Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses
otherwise prohibited by this ordinance.
b.
The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions
of Section 15 except for the specific provision which has
created the nonconformity and from which relief is sought;
and
1.
The strict application of the terms of this ordinance would
result in undue hardship. The term "undue hardship" shall
mean:
That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable
return unless a variance is granted;
i.
That the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood;
ii.
That the granting of a variance will not alter the
essential character of the locality; and
iii.
That the hardship is not the result of action taken by
the applicant or a prior owner.
iv.
2.
c.
Notwithstanding Section 16G2cii above, the Zoning Board of
Appeals, or the Code Enforcement Officer, if authorized in
accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4353-A, may grant a variance
to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making
that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability who
resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The Board shall
restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to
the installation of equipment or the construction of structures
necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the
person with the disability. The Board may impose conditions on
the variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of
the disability or to the time that the person with the disability
d.
2.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:1242
lives in the dwelling. The term "structures necessary for access
to or egress from the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or
roof systems necessary for the safety or effectiveness of the
structure. Any permit issued pursuant to this subsection is
subject to Section 16G2f and 16G4biv, below. [Amended
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted
as strictly as possible in order to ensure conformance with
the purposes and provisions of this ordinance to the greatest
extent possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions
to a variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the
variance shall comply with any conditions imposed.
e.
A copy of each variance request, including the application and
all supporting information supplied by the applicant, shall be
forwarded by the municipal officials to the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Protection at least 20 days
prior to action by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Any comments
received from the Commissioner prior to the action by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record
and shall be taken into consideration by the Zoning Board of
Appeals.
f.
Administrative appeals.
When the Zoning Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
hold a de novo hearing. At this time the Board may receive
and consider new evidence and testimony, be it oral or written.
When acting in a de novo capacity, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own
independent analysis of evidence and the law, and reaching its
own decision.
a.
When the Zoning Board of Appeals hears a decision of the
Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate hearing, and may
reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding
that the decision was contrary to specific provisions of the
ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the Planning
Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals may only review the
record of the proceedings before the Planning Board. The
Zoning Board Appeals shall not receive or consider any
evidence which was not presented to the Planning Board, but
the Zoning Board of Appeals may receive and consider written
or oral arguments. If the Zoning Board of Appeals determines
that the record of the Planning Board proceedings are
inadequate, the Zoning Board of Appeals may remand the
matter to the Planning Board for additional fact finding.
b.
3.
4. Appeal procedure.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:1243
Making an appeal.
An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the
Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party from any decision
of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board,
except for enforcement-related matters as described in
Section 16G1a above. Such an appeal shall be taken within
30 days of the date of the official written decision appealed
from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a
showing of good cause, may waive the thirty-day
requirement.
i.
Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the
Board of Appeals a written notice of appeal which
includes:
A concise written statement indicating what relief is
requested and why the appeal or variance should be
granted.
a.
A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of
existing buildings and structures and other physical
features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
b.
ii.
Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal
or a variance, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
iii.
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an
administrative appeal or a request for a variance within 35
days of its receipt of complete written application, unless
this time period is extended by the parties.
iv.
a.
Decision by the Board of Appeals.
A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall
constitute a quorum for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
i.
ii. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and
variance appeals within 35 days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
iii.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and
basis for its decision, including a statement of the facts
found and conclusions reached by the Board. The Board
shall cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or
hand-delivered to the applicant and to the Department of
Environmental Protection within seven days of the Board's
decision. Copies of written decisions of the Zoning Board
iv.
b.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 16
CHCT:1244
of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board, Code
Enforcement Officer, and the municipal officers.
Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2691(3)(F), any aggrieved party who participated as a party
during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an
appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within 45
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
5.
Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691(3)(F),
the Board of Appeals may reconsider any decision within 45 days of
its prior decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a decision
must be filed within 10 days of the decision that is being
reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action taken on that
reconsideration must occur and be completed within 45 days of
the date of the vote on the original decision. Reconsideration of a
decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board
members originally voting on the decision, and proper notification
to the landowner, petitioner, Planning Board, Code Enforcement
Officer, and other parties of interest, including abuttors and those
who testified at the original hearing(s). The Board may conduct
additional hearings and receive additional evidence and testimony.
6.
Enforcement.
Nuisances. Any violation of this ordinance shall be deemed to be a
nuisance.
1.
Code Enforcement Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce
the provisions of this ordinance. If the Code Enforcement
Officer shall find that any provision of this ordinance is being
violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it,
including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or
structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of
such notices shall be submitted to the municipal officers and
be maintained as a permanent record.
a.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site
inspections to insure compliance with all applicable laws and
conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints of
alleged violations of this ordinance.
b.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of
all essential transactions of the office, including applications
submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals,
c.
2.
H.
Section 16 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:1245
Section 17. Definitions. [Ord. of 9-15-1998(4); Ord. No. 2002.103,
8-19-2003; Ord. No. 2008.79, 10-21-2008]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or structure which is incidental
and subordinate to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when
aggregated shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck or
similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the
principal structure by a roof or a common wall is considered part of the
principal structure.
AGGRIEVED PARTY — An owner of land whose property is directly or
indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under
this ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or
variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who
have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of
such permit or variance.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale or
lease, of plants or animals, including, but not limited to, forages and sod
crops, grains and seed crops, dairy animals and dairy products, poultry and
court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and
fees collected. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98;
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
Legal actions. When the above action does not result in the
correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance condition,
the municipal officers, upon notice from the Code Enforcement
Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and
proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be
appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance in the name of the municipality. The municipal officers,
or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into
administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating
violations of this ordinance and recovering fines without court
action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use
to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the
illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct
result of erroneous advice given by an authorized municipal official
and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or
unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat
or hazard to public health and safety or will result in substantial
environmental damage.
3.
Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner's agent
or a contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this
ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452. [Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
4.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 17
CHCT:1246
poultry products, livestock, fruits and vegetables, and ornamental green
house products. Agriculture does not include forest management and
timber harvesting activities.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98;
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
AQUACULTURE — The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.
BASAL AREA — The area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above
ground level and inclusive of bark.
BASEMENT — Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of
six feet or more and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing
ground level.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY — A facility designed primarily for the
launching and landing of watercraft, and which may include an access
ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
BUREAU OF FORESTRY — State of Maine Department of Agriculture,
Conservation, and Forestry, Bureau of Forestry.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98; amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
CAMPGROUND — Any area or tract of land to accommodate two or more
parties in temporary living quarters for a fee, including, but not limited to
tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
CANOPY — The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a
wooded area.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
CATEGORY 1 MULTIPLE USE NONMOTORIZED TRAIL — A public trail
or a private trail open to the public, established for walking, hiking,
nonmotorized biking, snowshoeing, or cross-country skiing, with a tread
path no more than 12 feet in width (14 feet in an urban area) and an
overall width, including trail side-slopes, of 20 feet or less. No motorized
vehicles except electrically operated bicycles, wheelchairs, and similar
transportation-related equipment used only by persons with disabilities, and
vehicles necessary for maintenance and emergency purposes are permitted
(Planning Board permit required).[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
CATEGORY 2 MULTIPLE-USE NONMOTORIZED TRAILS — A public trail,
or a private trail open to the public, with a tread path no more than five
feet in width and an overall clearance of seven feet wide, established for
walking, hiking, nonmotorized biking, snowshoeing, or cross-country skiing.
Electrically operated bicycles, wheelchairs, and similar transportationrelated
equipment used only by persons with disabilities are permitted
(CEO, unless setback waiver is necessary, in which case a permit is required
from the Planning Board).[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
CATEGORY 1 MULTIPLE USE TRAIL, INCLUDING MOTORIZED USES —
A public trail or a private trail open to the public, with a tread path no
more than 12 feet wide (14 feet in an urban area), and an overall clearance
of 20 feet wide, established for recreational vehicles, equestrian activities,
mountain biking, hiking, ATVing, off-road motorcycling, snowmobiling,
Section 17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 17
CHCT:1247
snowshoeing, cross-country skiing (Planning Board permit
required).[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
CATEGORY 2 MULTIPLE USE TRAIL, INCLUDING MOTORIZED USES — A
public trail, or a private trail open to the public, with a tread path no more
than five feet wide, and an overall clearance of seven feet wide, established
for recreational vehicles, equestrian activities, mountain biking, hiking,
ATVing, off-road motorcycling, snowmobiling, snowshoeing, or crosscountry
skiing (Planning Board permit required).[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
COASTAL WETLAND — All tidal and subtidal lands all lands; with
vegetation present that is tolerant of salt water and occurs primarily in a
salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat or
other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest
tide level for the year in which an activity is proposed as identified in
tide tables generated by the National Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands may
include portions of coastal sand dunes and may consist of rocky ledges,
sand and cobble beach, mud flats, etc., in addition to salt marshes and
salt meadows. The Atlantic Ocean is a large coastal wetland.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than
a "home occupation," defined below, the intent and result of which activity
is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods and/or
services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
CROSS-SECTIONAL AREA — The cross-sectional area of a stream or
tributary stream channel is determined by multiplying the stream or
tributary stream channel width by the average stream or tributary stream
channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is the straight
line distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to
the normal high-water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average
stream or tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical
distances from a straight line between the normal high-water lines of the
stream or tributary stream channel to the bottom of the channel.[Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
DBH — The diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground
level.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
DEVELOPMENT — A change in land use involving alteration of the land,
water or vegetation, or the addition or alteration of structures or other
construction not naturally occurring.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS — Numerical standards relating to
spatial relationships including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore
frontage and height.
DISABILITY — Any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement,
congenital defect or mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident,
disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness; and also includes
the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
Section 17 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 17
CHCT:1248
handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap,
by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory
impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or
related services.
DISRUPTION OF SHORELINE INTEGRITY — The alteration of the physical
shape, properties, or condition of a shoreline at any location by timber
harvesting and related activities. A shoreline where shoreline integrity has
been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil,
an abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing
waters, a profile and character altered from natural conditions.[Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway less than 500 feet in length serving no
more than one lot.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS — Operations conducted for the public health,
safety or general welfare, such as protection of resources from immediate
destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human
beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Gas, electrical or communication facilities;
steam, fuel, electric power or water transmission or distribution lines,
towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and related
equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal
sewage lines, collection or supply systems; and associated storage tanks.
Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes,
conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants
and similar accessories, but shall not include service drops, buildings which
are necessary for the furnishing of essential services, telecommunications
facilities, or small wind energy systems.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
EXCAVATION CONTRACTOR — An individual or firm engaged in a business
that causes the disturbance of soil, including grading, filling and removal,
or in a business in which the disturbance of soil results from an activity that
the individual or firm is retained to perform.[Added 10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.69]
EXPANSION OF A STRUCTURE (FOR SHORELAND ZONING PURPOSES)
— An increase in the footprint of a structure, including all extensions,
such as, but not limited to attached: decks, garages, porches and
greenhouses.[Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
EXPANSION OF USE (FOR SHORELAND ZONING PURPOSES) — The
addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use
of more footprint of a structure or ground area devoted to a particular
use.[Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single
housekeeping unit.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the one-hundred-
Section 17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 17
CHCT:1249
year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot in height.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls.[Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
FOOTPRINT — The entire area of ground covered by the structure(s) on
a lot, including but not limited to cantilevered or similar overhanging
extensions, as well as unenclosed structures, such as patios and
decks.[Added 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
FOREST MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES — Timber cruising and other forest
resource evaluation activities, pesticide or fertilizer application,
management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning,
regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities,
exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or
maintenance of roads.
FORESTED WETLAND — A freshwater wetland dominated by woody
vegetation that is six meters tall (approximately 20 feet) or taller.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FOREST STAND — A contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age
class distribution, composition, and structure, and growing on a site of
sufficiently uniform quality, to be a distinguishable unit.[Added 2-2-2010
by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FOUNDATION — The supporting substructure of a building or other
structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but including
basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other bases consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
FRESHWATER WETLAND — Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas, other than forested wetlands, which are:
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Those uses that require,
for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require
Of 10 or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and
adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook,
such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of
10 acres; and
1.
Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency
and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soils.113
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions
of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition.
2.
113. Editor's Note: Former Subsection 3, which immediately followed this subsection and
included areas not considered part of a great pond, coastal wetland, river, stream or
brook, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 17 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 17
CHCT:1250
direct access to, or location in, coastal and inland waters and which cannot
be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited
to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, finfish and
shellfish processing, fish-related storage and retail and wholesale fish
marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and boat
building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, shoreline
structures necessary for erosion control purposes, industrial uses
dependent upon waterborne transportation or requiring large volumes of
cooling or processing water and which cannot reasonably be located or
operated at an inland site, and uses which primarily provide general public
access to coastal or inland waters. Recreational boat storage buildings
are not considered to be a functionally water-dependant use.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
GREAT POND — Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a
surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body of water artificially
formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of 30 acres except
for the purposes of this ordinance, where the artificially formed or
increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a
single owner.
GREAT POND CLASSIFIED GPA — Any great pond classified GPA, pursuant
to 38 M.R.S.A. Article 4-A, § 465-A. This classification includes some, but
not all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great ponds.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
GROUND COVER — Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the
partially decayed organic matter of the forest floor.[Added 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
HARVEST AREA — The area where timber harvesting and related activities,
including the cutting of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road
construction take place. The area affected by a harvest encompasses the
area within the outer boundaries of these activities, excepting unharvested
areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest.[Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
HAZARD TREE — A tree with a structural defect, combination of defects,
or disease resulting in a structural defect that under the normal range of
environmental conditions at the site exhibits a high probability of failure
and loss of a major structural component of the tree in a manner that
will strike a target. A normal range of environmental conditions does not
include meteorological anomalies, such as, but not limited to: hurricanes;
hurricane-force winds; tornados; microbursts; or significant ice storm
events. Hazard trees also include those trees that pose a serious and
imminent risk to bank stability. A target is the area where personal injury or
property damage could occur if the tree or a portion of the tree fails. Targets
include roads, driveways, parking areas, structures, campsites, and any
other developed area where people frequently gather and linger.[Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE — The vertical distance between the mean
original (prior to construction) grade at the downhill side of the structure
Section 17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 17
CHCT:1251
and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples,
antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation or profession which is customarily
conducted on or in a residential structure or property and which is 1)
clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the property
and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two
persons other than family members residing in the home.
INCREASE IN NONCONFORMITY OF A STRUCTURE AS RELATED TO
SHORELAND ZONING (SECTION 12 OF THIS ORDINANCE) — Any change
in a structure or property which causes further deviation from the
dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity, such as, but not limited
to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance,
increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property
changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional
standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of
nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to
increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity
with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary
streams if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area
than does any portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a
structure may be expanded laterally, provided that the expansion extends
no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest
portion of the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Included in this allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly
shaped structures.[Added 9-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2009.73; amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE CAMPSITE — An area of land which is not associated
with a campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only
one group not to exceed 10 individuals and which involves site
improvements which may include but not be limited to gravel pads, parking
areas, fire places, or tent platforms.
INDUSTRIAL — The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing,
packaging or processing of goods, or the extraction of minerals.
INSTITUTIONAL — A nonprofit or quasipublic use, or institution, such as
a church, library, public or private school, hospital, or municipally owned
or operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.[Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
LAND MANAGEMENT ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of
exposed mineral soil, gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or
created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber
harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not
including skid trails or skid roads.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
LICENSED FORESTER — A forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter
76.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
Section 17 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 17
CHCT:1252
LOT AREA — The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot,
minus land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
MARINA — A business establishment having frontage on navigable water
and, as its principal use, providing for hire offshore moorings or docking
facilities for boats, and which may also provide accessory services such as
boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine
fuel service facilities.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
MARKET VALUE — The estimated price a property will bring in the open
market and under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing
seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with
prevailing general price levels.114
MINERAL EXPLORATION — Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
of determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create
minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.
MINERAL EXTRACTION — Any operation within any twelve-month period
which removes more than 100 cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand,
gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location and
to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH — The closest distance between the side lot lines of
a lot. When only two lot lines extend into the Shoreland Zone, both lot lines
shall be considered to be side lot lines.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
MULTI-UNIT RESIDENTIAL — A residential structure containing three or
more residential dwelling units.
NATIVE — Indigenous to the local forests.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
NONCONFORMING CONDITION — A nonconforming lot, structure or use
which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this
ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.[Added 9-17-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009.73; amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
NONCONFORMING LOT — A single lot of record which, at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, does not meet the area,
frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure which does not meet any
one or more of the following dimensional requirements: setback, height,
lot coverage, or footprint, but which is allowed solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this ordinance or subsequent amendments took
effect.[Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
114. Editor's Note: The former definition of "maximum spring high-tide elevation of coastal
waters," which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98.
Section 17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 17
CHCT:1253
NONCONFORMING USE — Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or
parts thereof which is not allowed in the district in which it is situated,
but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in lawful existence at
the time this ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
NON-NATIVE INVASIVE SPECIES OF VEGETATION — A species of
vegetation listed by the Maine Department of Agriculture, Conservation and
Forestry as being invasive in Maine ecosystems and not native to Maine
ecosystems.[Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE (NONTIDAL WATERS) — That line which
is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils due
to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which
distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support
nonforested wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same
or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during
the period of normal high water are considered part of the river or great
pond.115[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
OUTLET STREAM — Any perennial or intermittent stream, as shown on the
most recent, highest resolution version of the national hydrography data
set available from the United States Geological Survey on the website of
the United States Geological Survey or the national map, that flows from a
freshwater wetland. [Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
PERSON — An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality,
trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint
or common interest, or other legal entity.
PIERS, DOCKS, WHARFS, BRIDGES AND OTHER STRUCTURES AND
USES EXTENDING OVER OR BEYOND THE NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE
OR WITHIN A WETLAND —
PRIMITIVE TRAIL — A public or private path or trail, with a tread path
no more than three feet in width and an overall clearance of four feet
in width, established for walking, hiking, nonmotorized biking purposes,
snowshoeing, or cross-country skiing (CEO permit required).[Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE — A structure other than one which is used for
purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another structure or
use on the same lot.[Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
TEMPORARY — Structures which remain in or over the water for less
than seven months in any period of 12 consecutive months.
1.
PERMANENT — Structures which remain in or over the water for
seven months or more in any period of 12 consecutive months. [Added
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
2.
115. Editor's Note: The former definition of "permanent," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 17 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 17
CHCT:1254
PRINCIPAL USE — A use other than one which is wholly incidental or
accessory to another use on the same lot.[Amended 10-18-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016.69]
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or
otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS — The following soil series as described
and identified by the National Cooperative Soil Survey: Fryeburg, Hadley,
Limerick, Lovewell, Medomak, Ondawa, Alluvial, Cornish, Charles, Podunk,
Rumney, Saco, Suncook, Sunday, Winooski.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2009.98]
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual
recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
RECREATIONAL TRAIL — A thoroughfare or way across land or snow,
used primarily for recreational purposes including, but not limited to, such
uses as bicycling, Nordic (cross-country) skiing, day hiking, equestrian
activities, jogging or similar fitness activities, trail biking, overnight and
long-distance backpacking, roller skating, in-line skating, dog sledding,
running, snowmobiling, canoe and kayak portaging, and vehicular travel by
motorcycle, four-wheel drive or all-terrain, off-road vehicles. Recreational
trail use may be limited to foot, horse, or other nonmotorized means of
transportation or motorized means of transportation or a combination of
any of them. Recreational trails include primitive trails, multiple-use
nonmotorized trails, and multiple-use trails, including motorized uses. A
recreational trail is not a structure.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle
designed to be towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living
quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be
considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its
tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division of Motor
Vehicles.
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM — A system intended to replace —
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed and
equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living
quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking, sleeping and
toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that
An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded
with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure; or
1.
2. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.116
116. Editor's Note: The former definition of "residential basal area," which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98.
Section 17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 17
CHCT:1255
contain cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period
rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
RESIDUAL BASAL AREA — The average of the basal area of trees remaining
on a harvested site.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
RESIDUAL STAND — A stand of trees remaining in the forest following
timber harvesting and related activities.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
RIPRAP — Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six inches in diameter,
used for erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground
slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.[Amended
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
RIVER — A free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain
wetlands from that point at which it provides drainage for a watershed of
25 square miles to its mouth.
ROAD — A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created
by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles, excluding a driveway as
defined.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SALT MARSH — Areas of coastal wetlands (most often along coastal bays)
that support salt tolerant species, and where at average high tide during
the growing season, the soil is irregularly inundated by tidal waters. The
predominant species is salt marsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora). More
open areas often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago
pondweed.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SALT MEADOW — Areas of a coastal wetland that support salt tolerant
plant species bordering the landward side of salt marshes or open coastal
water, where the soil is saturated during the growing season but which
is rarely inundated by tidal water. Indigenous plant species include salt
meadow cordgrass (Spartina patens) and black rush; common three square
occurs in fresher areas.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SAPLING — A tree species that is less than two inches in diameter at 4.5
feet above ground level. [Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
SEEDLING — A young tree species that is less than 4.5 feet in height above
ground level. [Added 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
SERVICE CORRIDORS — Rights-of-way, easements, or land in public or
private ownership, for the location of Essential Services.
SERVICE DROP — Any utility line extension which does not cross or run
beneath any portion of a water body provided that:
In the case of electric service:
The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is
located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting
service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
a.
1.
Section 17 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 17
CHCT:1256
SETBACK — The nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water
line of a water body or tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the
nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object or
area.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SHORE FRONTAGE — The length of a lot bordering on a water body or
wetland measured in a straight line between the intersections of the lot
lines with the shoreline.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SHORELAND ZONE — The land area located within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of any great pond or river; within
250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a coastal wetland,
including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet of the upland
edge of a freshwater wetland; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of Swan Pond Brook, and its tributaries specifically
depicted on the Official Zoning Map; or within 100 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of a stream.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98]
SHORELINE — The normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater
or coastal wetland.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SKID ROAD or SKID TRAIL — A route repeatedly used by forwarding
machinery or animal to haul or drag forest products from the stump to
the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal
excavation.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SLASH — The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after
a timber harvest.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
STORM-DAMAGED TREE — A tree that has been uprooted, blown down,
is lying on the ground, or that remains standing and is damaged beyond
the point of recovery as the result of a storm event.[Added 10-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016.69]
STREAM — A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond
or the confluence of two perennial streams as depicted on the most recent,
highest resolution version of the national hydrography data set available
from the United States Geological Survey on the website of the United
States Geological Survey or the national map to the point where the stream
becomes a river or where the stream meets the shoreland zone of another
water body or wetland. In addition, for the purposes of this ordinance, a
stream is also as depicted within an SP District on the Official Zoning Map
of the City of Biddeford. When a stream meets the shoreland zone of a water
body or wetland and a channel forms downstream of the water body or
b. The total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet.
In the case of telephone service:
The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation
of telephone wires to existing utility poles; or
a.
The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length.
b.
2.
Section 17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 17
CHCT:1257
wetland as an outlet, that channel is also a stream.[Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
STRUCTURE — Anything temporarily or permanently located, built,
constructed or erected for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, goods or property of any kind, or anything constructed or erected
with a fixed location on or in the ground. The term includes structures
temporarily or permanently located, such as decks, patios, and satellite
dishes. Structure does not include fences; poles and wiring and other aerial
equipment normally associated with service drops, including guy wires and
guy anchors; subsurface wastewater disposal systems as defined in 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4201, Subsection 5; geothermal heat exchange wells as defined
in 32 M.R.S.A. § 4700-E, Subsection 3-C; or wells or water wells as defined
in 32 M.R.S.A. § 4700-E, Subsection 8.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2009.98; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
SUBSTANTIAL START — Completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use
measured as a percentage of estimated total cost.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system designed to
dispose of waste or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth;
includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields; grandfathered
cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture,
mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any
discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. § 414, any surface wastewater
disposal system, or any municipal or quasimunicipal sewer or wastewater
treatment system.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
SUSTAINED SLOPE — A change in elevation where the referenced percent
grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured
area.
TIDAL WATERS — All waters affected by tidal action during the highest
annual tide.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; amended
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
TIMBER HARVESTING — The cutting and removal of timber for the primary
purpose of selling or processing forest products. Timber harvesting does
not include the cutting or removal of vegetation within the Shoreland Zone
when associated with any other land use activities. The cutting or removal
of trees in the Shoreland Zone on a lot that has less than two acres within
the Shoreland Zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting
or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 15P, Clearing or
removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting.[Amended
2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98; 10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
TIMBER HARVESTING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES — Timber harvesting,
the construction and maintenance of roads used primarily for timber
harvesting and other activities conducted to facilitate timber
harvesting.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
TRAIL SPUR — A pathway, extending toward the shoreline from a primary
nonmotorized trail. Such pathways shall extend, generally, perpendicular
Section 17 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 17
CHCT:1258
from the primary trail but shall be constructed as a winding
pathway.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
TREE — A woody perennial plant with a well-defined trunk(s) at least
two inches in diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground, with a more or less
definite crown, and reaching a height of at least 10 feet at maturity. [Added
10-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
TRIBUTARY STREAM — A channel between defined banks created by the
action of surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial
vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing
waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which
is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. "Tributary stream"
does not include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in
disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by
human activity. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined
elsewhere in this ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the tributary
stream located within the Shoreland Zone of the receiving water body or
wetland.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
UPLAND EDGE OF A WETLAND — The boundary between upland and
wetland. For purposes of a coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed
by the landward limits of the salt-tolerant vegetation and/or the highest
annual tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. In the event
that it is not possible to determine the upland edge in the above manner,
this elevation shall be measured relative to NAVD 88. Current tidal
benchmarks and tidal datum information shall be obtained from the data
developed by the National Ocean Service (NOS). As of 2016, the highest
annual tide elevation is 7.4 feet above NAVD 88, and will be the figure
used to determine setback. When used as a reference for setback, all
benchmark data, locations, calculations, delineation, and posting highest
annual tide elevation must be presented to the Code Enforcement Officer
for review and approval. For purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland
edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient
to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that
are six meters (approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.[Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.9810-18-2016 by Ord. No. 2016.69]
VEGETATION — All live trees, shrubs, and other plants, including without
limitation, trees both over and under four inches in diameter, measured at
4 1/2 above ground level.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
VELOCITY ZONE — An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore
to the inland limit of the primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources.
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE — The volume of all portions of a structure
enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior
faces of these walls and roof.
Section 17 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 17
CHCT:1259
WATER BODY — Any great pond, river, or stream.[Amended 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
WATER CROSSING — Any project extending from one bank to the opposite
bank of a river, stream, tributary stream, or wetland whether under,
through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include, but may
not be limited to, roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines,
and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber harvesting equipment and related
activities.[Amended 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98]
WETLAND — A freshwater or coastal wetland.
WINDFIRM — The ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and
resist windthrow, wind rocking, and major breakage.[Added 2-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 2009.98]
WOODY VEGETATION — Live trees or woody, nonherbaceous
shrubs.[Added 2-2-2010 by Ord. No. 2009.98117]
Article XV
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
Section 1. Authority.
This ordinance is adopted by the municipal officers of the City of Biddeford,
Maine, pursuant to the authority granted under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001 and
§ 3007.
Section 2. Purpose and intent.
Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the educational,
cultural, economic and general welfare of the City of Biddeford by
providing a legal framework within which the residents of the City can
protect the historic and architectural heritage of historically significant
areas, landmarks and sites while accepting compatible new
construction.
A.
Intent. The intent of this ordinance is to create a legal mechanism to
further the above-mentioned purpose and to:
Protect, preserve and enhance the outward appearance and
architectural features of structures within designated historic
districts and of designated historic landmarks.
1.
2. Protect and enhance neighborhood character.
B.
117. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed the definition of "wetlands associated with
great ponds and rivers," which immediately followed.
Section 17 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 2
CHCT:1260
Section 3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Any act or process requiring a building permit and any
other act or process not requiring a building permit but specifically listed in
this article as a reviewable action, including, without limitation, the repair,
reconstruction, demolition or relocation of any structure or object or any
part of a structure or object.
ALTERED — The word altered includes "rebuilt," "reconstructed,"
"rehabilitated," "restored," "removed" and "demolished."
APPLICANT — A person who submits an application for issuance of a
certificate of appropriateness.
APPLICATION — A form submitted for approval of alteration, construction,
demolition or removal that requires issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness.
Enhance the economic welfare of the City by stabilizing and
improving the values of structures and properties within
designated historic districts.
3.
Protect and enhance the attractiveness of the City to its home
buyers, home owners, residents, tourists, visitors, businesses and
shoppers.
4.
Foster civic pride in the City's history and development patterns as
represented in such designated historic districts and landmarks.
5.
Apply design standards in a reasonable and flexible manner to
prevent the unnecessary loss of the community's historical features
and to ensure compatible construction and rehabilitation in historic
districts while not stifling change and development or forcing
modern recreations of historic styles.
6.
Prevent the demolition or removal of significant historic buildings
or structures within designated historic districts or of designated
historic landmarks.
7.
Preserve, protect and enhance the essential character of
designated historic districts by protecting relationships of groups
of buildings and structures.
8.
Accept new buildings and structures in designated historic
districts, which are designed and built in a manner which is
compatible with the character of the district.
9.
Encourage the use of environmentally sustainable practices in
building construction and renovations while at the same time
supporting the overall purpose of this ordinance being historic
preservation.
10.
Section 2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 3
CHCT:1261
APPROPRIATE — Refers to those changes in historic properties, landmarks,
buildings, structures or sites within historic overlay zones, or sites or
landmarks, which are not incongruous with what is historically and
architecturally significant as determined by the Commission or its designee.
APPROVAL AUTHROITY — Either the Commission or its designee as
provided for in Section 8 of this ordinance.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A certificate issued by the
Commission or its designee evidencing approval of specific plans for
alteration of a structure or construction on a site in accordance with this
article.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP — A certificate issued by the
Commission or its designee evidencing a hardship variance approved by the
Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 11E of this ordinance.
CERTIFICATE OF NONAPPLICABILITY — A certificate issued by the
Commission or its designee evidencing a determination that specific plans
for alteration of a structure or construction on a site do not require approval
under this article.
COMMISSION — The Commission acting as the Historic Preservation
Commission established in Section 6 of this ordinance.
CONSTRUCTION — The adding to a structure by an addition, or the
erection or placement of any new structure on a lot or property.
CONTRIBUTING — A classification applied to a site, structure or object
within an historic district signifying that it contributes generally to the
qualities that give the historic district cultural, historic, architectural or
archeological significance as embodied in the criteria for designating an
historic district, but without being itself a landmark. See Section 17 of this
ordinance.
CONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE — A structure located within a designated
historic district and identified as contributing to the historical or
architectural significance of said district. See Section 17 of this ordinance.
DEMOLITION —
DEPARTMENT — The Planning Department.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — The architectural style and
general arrangement of the exterior of a building or structure, including but
not limited to:
Any act or process that partially or totally destroys a structure or
object.
A.
The razing of a building or a structure or the removal of any exterior
architectural feature or structure or object.
B.
A. The kind, type, and texture of the building materials;
The type and style of all windows, doors, lights, dormers, roofs, gable
cornices, porches, decorative trim, etc.;
B.
Section 3 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 3
CHCT:1262
HISTORIC (aDJ.) — Important in or contributing to history.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — Any place or area which includes or encompasses
such historic landmarks, buildings, signs, appurtenances, structures or
objects as may be designated within this ordinance in Section 5 as
appropriate for historic preservation.
HISTORIC LANDMARK — Any improvement, building or structure of
particular historic or architectural significance to the City relating to its
heritage or cultural, social, economic or political history or which
exemplifies historic personages or important events in local, state or
national history, as may be designated in accordance with this chapter. An
historic landmark does not necessarily need to be located within an historic
district.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE — Any building, structure or site identified in
Section 17 as contributing. Any building, structure, or site not identified in
Section 17 is not considered to possess historical significance.
LANDMARK — A property, site, structure or object designated as a
"landmark" by the City Council.
NONCONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE — Any structure which is neither a
contributing structure within a district nor a landmark and is not identified
as contributing in Section 17 of this ordinance.
OBJECT — Anything constructed, fabricated or created the use of which
does not require permanent or semipermanent location on or in the ground.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Acts of maintenance or repair which do not
include a change in the design, material or outer appearance of a structure,
including, without limitation, repainting, replacement of materials or
windows of the same scale, texture and color, and landscaping other than
within an historic landscape district.
OWNER — The person or persons holding record title to the building, site
or property; provided, however, the last previous tax roll in the records of
the City Assessor's office may be relied upon as showing record ownership
in the absence of substantial evidence to the contrary.
PROPERTY — Land and improvements identified as a separate lot for
purposes of subdivision, site plan, or zoning regulation.
RELOCATION — Any removal or relocation of a structure on its site or to
another site.
RESTORATION — Any act which returns a structure or a feature of a
structure to a prior state of historic significance.
RHYTHM — Characterized by the regular recurrence of strong and weak
elements.
C. The location and treatment of any vehicle access or parking space;
D. The design of any sign; and
E. The arrangement of any fencing.
Section 3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 4
CHCT:1263
Section 4. Applicability.
This ordinance shall apply to all lands, building, structures, and exterior
building features which require a building permit, including but not limited
to sign and demolition permits, from the Code Enforcement Office, either
located within a designated Historic District or designated as an historic
landmark in Section 5 of this ordinance.
Section 5. Historic districts and historic landmarks designated.
The following described lands, buildings, structures, or areas of the City of
Biddeford are designated as historic districts or historic landmarks:
Section 6. Historic Preservation Commission membership;
meetings.
Districts:
1. Downtown Historic District, as defined by the MSRD-1 Zone.
Mill Area Historic District, as defined by the MSRD-3 Zone, except
for those lands located northwest of Elm Street.
2.
Mixed Residential Historic District, as defined by the MSRD-2
Zone.
3.
A.
Landmarks:
All such structures/places, not including districts, identified on the
National Register of Historic Places.
1.
B.
Membership.
The Board shall consist of seven members, five voting members and
two associate members, each a resident of the City of Biddeford.
Each member shall be nominated by the Mayor, confirmed by the
City Council, for a three year-term. The Mayor shall have the
discretion of appointing members and associate members to the
Commission with terms expiring after two years but less than three
years for the purpose of staggering appointments throughout a
calendar year.
1.
Associate members may be made voting members of the Board
upon the retirement or no appointment of a voting member.
Associate members are expected to participate in all hearings and
discussions. They shall vote only if the Chair appoints an associate
to act in place of a regular member who is absent or has been
disqualified because of conflict of interest.
2.
When there is a permanent vacancy, the Mayor shall nominate, with
confirmation by the City Council, a new member to serve for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
3.
A.
Section 4 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 6
CHCT:1264
No serving municipal officer or official of the City of Biddeford shall
serve as a member or associate member of the Board.
4.
Member qualifications.
All members of the Commission shall be residents of the City of
Biddeford.
1.
Appointments shall be made on the basis of demonstrated interest,
knowledge, ability, experience and desire to promote historic
preservation in the City of Biddeford. To the extent possible,
members should have a background in architecture, historic
preservation, planning, engineering, building construction, or a
combination thereof.
2.
Ideally a member of the Biddeford Historical Society would be
a member, as well as a resident of one of the Historic Districts
designated by this ordinance.
3.
B.
Removal of an Historic Preservation Commission member.
Members of the Commission may be removed for cause by the City
Council. Cause may include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following reasons:
a. A member is no longer a resident of the City of Biddeford;
b. A member is absent from meetings without good cause; or
A member conducts himself/herself in a manner that is
inconsistent with the official position of the Historic
Preservation Commission, such as consistently having conflicts
of interest or displaying unprofessional behavior toward
applicants, City employees, or members of the public.
c.
1.
Removal action may be initiated by the Mayor or the City Council;
however, any member proposed for removal shall be given written
notice and shall have an opportunity to be heard prior to final
action.
2.
C.
Commission officers.
The Commission shall elect from its voting membership a Chair,
Vice Chair, and Secretary. Each officer shall be elected each
January and shall serve a term of one year.
1.
Elected officers shall be responsible for the following:
The Chair shall preside at all meetings and shall be responsible
for the scheduling of special meetings of the Commission as
needed. The Chair shall vote only in case of a tie.
a.
In the event the Chair is absent or has been recused due to
conflict of interest, the Vice Chair shall act as the Chair.
b.
2.
D.
Section 6 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 6
CHCT:1265
Secretary: ensures that the records of meetings are accurate
and available for the Commission's review and reference.
c.
E. Staff. The Commission shall be staffed by the Planning Department.
Meetings.
The Commission shall conduct monthly meetings. Meetings shall
convene on the second Wednesday of each month, unless prior
arrangement and announcement has been made by the
Commission.
1.
In coordination with the Planning Department, the Chair may call
special meetings and workshops as needed.
2.
All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public. All
meeting agendas shall be posted at the same location in City Hall
as Planning Board agendas no less than seven days prior to the
hearing. Other than where hearings are to be conducted (see
Section 10), ordinary meetings of the Commission need not be
posted in a newspaper. Materials and records of the meetings shall
be maintained and available for public inspection in the Planning
Department.
3.
The Commission shall adopt Roberts Rules of Order and may adopt
rules of procedure for the conduct of its business not inconsistent
with this article. The Commission shall allow for public comment
at all meetings on all applications, with a reasonable amount of
time provided to all who wish to speak. In cases where there
are applications and a number of those present wish to speak,
the Commission may by motion establish a time limit for public
comment.
4.
Commission meetings shall be called to order when a quorum of
the voting members is present. For this purpose a quorum shall be
three voting members. When a regular member of the Commission
is unable to serve because of conflict of interest, incapacity,
absence or lack of confirmed appointment to fill a permanent
vacancy, an associate member shall be designated to vote by the
Chairman.
5.
The Commission shall issue a written decision, appropriately
signed by the Chairman, on matters when determined by the
Commission to be necessary. The decisions shall include:
a. A statement of findings and conclusions.
b. Any conditional actions and the timetable for completion.
6.
F.
Conflicts. Any questions raised by any interested party of whether a
particular issue involves a conflict of interest sufficient to disqualify a
member from voting shall be decided by a majority of the members
present except the member who is being challenged.
G.
Section 6 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 7
CHCT:1266
Section 7. Responsibilities.
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the following
responsibilities:
Section 8. Certificate of appropriateness required.
Issue certificates of appropriateness for eligible activities identified in
Section 8 of this ordinance.
A.
Conduct or administer an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant areas, sites, structures, and landmarks.
B.
Make recommendations for designation of landmarks or new or
expanded districts to the Planning Board.
C.
Advise the City Council, Planning Board, and City Departments, as
necessary, regarding the protection of historic landmarks and districts.
D.
Review and make recommendations regarding all national register
proposals for properties and districts within the City.
E.
Assist in the development of relevant sections of the City's
Comprehensive Plan pertaining to historic resources and historic
preservation.
F.
Educate and inform the citizens and property owners in Biddeford
concerning the historic and architectural heritage of the City.
G.
To engage in other activities in furtherance of the purposes of this
ordinance.
H.
Historic Preservation Commission review. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall protect historic districts and historic landmarks by
the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for certain activities
in historic districts and involving historic landmarks. Certificates of
appropriateness from the Commission are required for:
Any change to the exterior appearance of any building or structure
in an historic district that requires a building permit or a sign
permit from the Code Enforcement Office and for any change to the
exterior appearance of an historic landmark that requires either a
building permit or a sign permit from the Code Enforcement Office;
1.
New construction of a principal or accessory building or structure
visible from a public street where such a building or structure will
be located in an historic district;
2.
Demolition of an historic landmark or any building in an historic
district;
3.
Moving of an historic landmark or any building in an historic
district; and/or
4.
A.
Section 7 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 8
CHCT:1267
Any change, except for minor repair, in siding materials, roofing
materials, door and window sash and integral decorative elements,
such as, but not limited to, cornices, brackets, window architraves,
doorway pediments, railings, balusters, columns, cupolas and
cresting and roof decorations.
5.
Subcommittee review. In order to process certificates of
appropriateness more efficiently, applications for minor alterations,
temporary alterations, and the installation or alteration of any exterior
sign shall be reviewed by a subcommittee consisting of the City Planner
and the Chair of the Historic Preservation Commission, or their
respective designees, rather than the Historic Preservation
Commission, as follows:
The subcommittee shall review the application under the standards
of Section 11 and approve the application, approve it with
modifications or deny it within 10 working days of receiving a
complete application.
1.
No public hearings, meeting agenda postings, or abutter notices
are required for applications reviewed under this section.
2.
If the subcommittee has not acted on an application within 10
working days the applicant may seek approval from the
Commission instead. Inaction by the subcommittee under this
section does not constitute approval or disapproval of the plan.
3.
If the applicant is not satisfied with the determination of the
subcommittee, the applicant shall be permitted to have the entire
application reviewed by the Commission. The subcommittee can,
for any reason, forward any application received under these
provisions to the Commission for review.
4.
For purposes of this section only, "temporary" is defined as either a
one-time occurrence that does not exceed 30 days or as an annual
occurrence that does not exceed one thirty-day period each year.
5.
The City Planner or Commission Chair shall report back to the
Commission at the next meeting of the Commission any decisions
made by the subcommittee since the last meeting.
6.
"Minor alterations" are defined as incidental changes or additions
to a building or site features which will neither result in substantial
changes to any significant historic features nor obscure such
features. In no event shall any change be deemed minor when, in
the determination of the subcommittee, such change shall alter the
historic character of the building or site.
7.
B.
When a certificate of appropriateness is required in any historic district
or for any historic landmark, no building or sign permit shall be issued
by the Code Enforcement Office until a corresponding certificate of
appropriateness has been issued by the authorities described above.
C.
Section 8 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 9
CHCT:1268
Section 9. Application for certificate of appropriateness.
Section 10. Hearings and action on applications for certificates of
appropriateness.
Applications for certificates of appropriateness can be obtained either
in the Code Enforcement Office or the Planning Department.
A.
Completed applications shall be submitted to the Biddeford Planning
Department, which shall date and time stamp said applications upon
receipt. Completed applications are due 14 days prior to the
Commission's regularly scheduled meetings, which are the second
Wednesday of every month.
B.
The Commission shall review and make a decision on all complete
applications within 35 days of submission. If after 35 days no decision
has been made, the certificate of appropriateness shall be deemed as
approved.
C.
Applications shall be on a form developed by the Planning Department,
and all applications shall include the following:
The applicant's name and address and his or her interest in the
property;
1.
2. The owner's name and address, if different from the applicant's;
3. If applicable, the contractor's and/or architect's name and address;
4. The address or location of the subject property;
5. The existing use and zoning of the property;
A brief description of the proposed activity for which a certificate
of appropriateness is sought.
6.
D.
The applicant may wish to also provide, or the Planning Department
may also request, on behalf of the Commission, additional information
to better enable the Commission to reach a timely decision on an
application under review, which may include:
Drawings (i.e., exterior elevations) and/or plans to better illustrate
the proposed activity for which the certificate is being applied for;
1.
2. Samples of materials proposed for use in the activity;
Photographs of other recently completed projects by the applicant
in a similar fashion to which the certificate is being applied for; and
3.
4. Photographs of the building involved as well as adjacent buildings.
E.
Hearing required. Where applications under Section 8A are reviewed
by the Commission, the Commission shall conduct a public hearing
prior to rendering a decision.
A.
Section 9 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 10
CHCT:1269
Section 11. Evaluation standards for certificate of appropriateness.
Notice requirements.
Notice requirements for all items scheduled for a public hearing
shall include posting the meeting agenda at the same location in
City Hall as Planning Board agendas are posted no less than seven
days prior to the hearing; and
1.
Notice via United States Postal Service shall also be sent to the
applicant, owner, and all property owners within 100 feet of the
subject property no less than seven days prior; and
2.
All meetings within which a hearing is to be held shall be
announced in a newspaper of general circulation within the
community at least seven days prior to the scheduled meeting.
3.
B.
Hearing and notice not required. Where applications are reviewed
under Section 8B, no public hearing or notice is required. If the
applicant requests a public hearing, the application shall be forwarded
to the Commission, which shall then review and make a decision
regarding a certificate of appropriateness for said application under its
normal procedure of review.
C.
Approval. If the approval authority determines that the proposed
activity is appropriate, it shall approve the certificate of
appropriateness and forward it to the Planning Department, which
shall subsequently forward it to the Code Enforcement Office for the
issuance of necessary permits.
D.
Disapproval. If the approval authority determines that the proposed
activity is not appropriate, it shall make findings as to why it is not
appropriate and shall forward said decision to the Planning
Department, which shall notify the applicant of said determination and
provide, as applicable, guidance regarding the opportunity to resubmit
the application with revisions or to appeal the determination as outlined
in Section 15 of this ordinance.
E.
Reconstruction and alterations.
A building or structure classified as an historic landmark or located
within an historic district, or any part thereof, or any appurtenance
related to such structures, including but not limited to walls,
fences, light fixtures, steps, paving and signs, shall not be
reconstructed or altered unless a certificate of appropriateness has
been issued for such activity. No certificate of appropriateness for
a structure or building identified as contributing to the district
shall be issued unless the proposed activity is found to preserve
or enhance a building's or structure's historical or architectural
character. No certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a
noncontributing structure or building unless the proposed activity
1.
A.
Section 10 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 11
CHCT:1270
is complementary to the historic character of surrounding
structures and buildings and meets the intent of this ordinance.
The standards and requirements in the United States Secretary of
the Interior's Standards of Rehabilitation as well as the following
factors shall be considered when reviewing applications for
reconstruction or alteration of buildings or structures subject to
review under this ordinance:
Every reasonable effort shall be made to use a property for
its historic purpose and in a way which will require minimum
alteration to the structure and its environment;
a.
Rehabilitation work shall not destroy the distinguishing
qualities nor character of the structure and its environment.
The removal or alteration of any historic material or
architectural features should be avoided;
b.
Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather
than replaced, wherever possible. In the event that
replacement is necessary, the new material should match the
material being replaced in composition, design, texture and
other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing
architectural features should be based on physical or pictorial
evidence rather than on conjectural designs or the availability
of different architectural features from other buildings;
c.
Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship which characterize historic structures and often
predate the mass production of building materials shall be
treated with sensitivity;
d.
Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of the structure and
its environment, and these changes shall be recognized and
respected;
e.
All structures shall be recognized as products of their own
time. Alterations to create an earlier appearance shall be
discouraged;
f.
Contemporary design for additions to existing structures shall
be encouraged if such design is compatible with the size, scale,
material and character of the neighborhood, the structure or
its environment; and
g.
Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures
shall be done in such a manner that if they were to be removed
in the future the essential form and integrity of the original
structure would be unimpaired.
h.
2.
B. Demolition or removal: See Section 12 of this ordinance.
Section 11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 11
CHCT:1271
Construction of new buildings or structures. The construction of a new
building or structure within an historic district shall be generally of
such a design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material,
texture, color and location on a lot as will be compatible with buildings,
structures and open spaces where it is visually related and in keeping
with the area. The following factors shall be considered:
Height. The height of proposed buildings shall be compatible with
adjacent buildings;
1.
Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings, structures and open spaces where it is
visually related;
2.
Proportion of openings within the facade. The relationship of the
width of the windows to the height of windows and doors in a
building shall be visually compatible with that of windows and
doors of buildings to which the building is visually related;
3.
Rhythm of solids to voids in front facades. The relationship of
solids to voids in the front facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the buildings to which it is visually related;
4.
Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with that prevailing in the area to which it is
visually related;
5.
Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projection. The relationship of
entrances and porch projections to sidewalks of a building shall
be visually compatible with that of buildings to which it is visually
related;
6.
Relationship of materials and textures. The relationship of the
materials and textures of the facade of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the predominant materials used in the
buildings to which it is visually related;
7.
Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the buildings to which it is visually related;
8.
Scale of building. The size of the building and the building mass of
a building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings,
porches and balconies shall be visually compatible with those
characteristics of buildings and spaces to which it is visually
related; and
9.
Directional expression of front elevation. A building shall be
visually compatible with the building, squares and places to which
it is visually related in its directional character, whether this shall
10.
C.
Section 11 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 11
CHCT:1272
Section 12. Demolition.
be vertical character, horizontal character or nondirectional
character.
Signs. Signs shall be reviewed based on the standards contained in
Article VI (Performance Standards), Section 59 (Signs). When a
certificate of appropriateness is required for a new or altered sign, the
following factors shall be considered:
1. See Article VI (Performance Standards), Section 59 (Signs).
Sign size should be contextually compatible with the building or
storefront facade. Signs should be placed so as to not obscure
architectural details related to the building.
2.
3. Sign placement should respect adjacent signs and structures.
D.
Exceptional circumstances.
The approval authority may issue a certificate of hardship in lieu of
a certificate of appropriateness where the standards otherwise set
forth in this section are not met but where the approval authority
determines that failure to issue a certificate would result in undue
hardship to the owner of the property. Before the approval
authority may issue a certificate under this subsection, the records
must show the following:
The property cannot yield a reasonable economic return or the
owner cannot make any reasonable use of the property;
a.
The plight of the owner is due to exceptional or unique
circumstances and not due to the general applicability of this
ordinance; and
b.
The conditions or circumstances which constitute the hardship
were not caused or created by the property owner after this
ordinance became applicable to that property.
c.
1.
For the purposes of Subsection E1a, "reasonable economic return"
shall not be construed to mean a maximum return, and "any
reasonable use" shall not be construed to mean the highest and
best use.
2.
E.
An historic landmark, or any building or structure identified as
contributing, shall not be demolished or removed and a certificate of
appropriateness to do so shall not be issued unless one of the following
conditions is met:
The building or structure has been identified by the Historic
Preservation Commission (hereafter referred to as "the
Commission") as noncontributing or incompatible with the MSRD
District in which it is located; or
1.
A.
Section 11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 12
CHCT:1273
The property owner can demonstrate to the Commission that it
cannot be renovated or reconstructed so as to earn an economic
return on its value in its present location as determined by a
qualified real estate appraiser; or
2.
The property owner can demonstrate to the Commission that he/
she has offered the property for sale through a real estate broker
for at least 180 days and that there has been no bona fide offer
to buy the property from any person or entity that is willing to
preserve and restore the property.
3.
Applicants applying for the demolition or removal of designated historic
landmarks or contributing structures or buildings, or important
portions and features thereof, shall clearly demonstrate that their
application meets one or more of the following demolition or removal
criteria before the Commission will approve the application for
demolition or removal:
The physical condition of the building makes the continued upkeep
of the building, or important portions or features thereof,
uneconomical; or
1.
The building or structure, or important portions and features
thereof, has been determined by the Division of Code Enforcement
to represent an immediate hazard to the public health or safety,
which hazard cannot be abated by reasonable measures.
2.
B.
Demolition delay. Before the issuance of a demolition permit by the
Code Enforcement Office, a delay period of 90 days shall apply to any
building or structure and portion thereof that is:
1. An historic landmark or is designated as contributing.
Listed and eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places, but not designated significant locally.
2.
C.
Demolition delay procedures. At the hearing on an application to
relocate or demolish a contributing building in an historic preservation
district, or an historic landmark, the Commission may, in the interest of
exploring reasonable alternatives, delay issuance of a permit for up to
120 days from the date of the hearing. If, 10 days prior to the expiration
of the delay period, the Commission finds that there are still reasonable
alternatives to explore, the Commission may continue the delay for
an additional period of up to 60 days. The purpose of the delay is to
find alternatives to demolition, such as assisting in securing funding
to preserve in place the building, structure, or important portions and
features thereof; or finding other ways to preserve the building or
structure, such as outright purchase of the property, when feasible,
or relocation; or proper recordation of buildings, structures and sites,
including photography and narrative report; or preservation of historic
artifacts.
D.
Section 12 BIDDEFORD CODE Section 12
CHCT:1274
Section 13. Exceptions to requirement for certificate of
appropriateness.
A certificate of appropriateness is not required and the City Planner shall
issue a certificate of nonapplicability for the following:
Section 14. Certificate validity.
All certificates of appropriateness, nonapplicability, and hardship shall be
valid for no more than 12 months from the date of issuance.
Section 15. Appeals.
Appeals of the issuance of any certificate under this ordinance or denial of
any certificate under this ordinance may be appealed within 30 days of such
a decision as follows:
This section shall not apply to any structure which has been ordered
demolished by the City Council or the court in accordance with 17
M.R.S.A. §§ 2851 through 2959 and amendments thereto, or to any
structure which has been partially destroyed and is determined by the
Division of Code Enforcement to represent an immediate hazard to the
public health or safety, which hazard cannot be abated by reasonable
measures, specified by the Division of Code Enforcement, including
securing apertures and/or erecting fences.
E.
Where a certificate of hardship has been issued within the previous 12
months.
A.
Where the activity involves ordinary maintenance, or the repair of
exterior features of an historic landmark or of a building or structure in
an historic district is permitted, so long as it does not alter the design,
materials, or outer appearance thereof.
B.
The construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or demolition
of any feature which the Code Enforcement Office has certified as
required to maintain public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition.
C.
D. Where the activity involves emergency repairs of a temporary nature.
Where the activity proposed results in exterior alterations not readily
visible at pedestrian heights, when viewed at any height between four
and six feet from any open space or street.
E.
Appeals of decisions made by the Commission shall be to the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
A.
Appeals of any decision made by the City Planner and Chair of the
Commission under Section 8B of this ordinance shall be to the Historic
Preservation Commission. Appeals of this nature shall be appellate
reviews by the Commission and not de novo.
B.
Section 12 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE Section 16
CHCT:1275
Section 16. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this ordinance shall be as per Part III (Land Development
Regulations), Article VIII (Administration, Enforcement, and Penalties).
Section 17. Parcels with structures or buildings identified as
historically contributing.
Parcels identified as "contributing" are contained in the "Official Listing of
Historically Contributing Buildings or Structures" which has been certified
by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk together with the date of
adoption of this ordinance. Identified parcels/structures/buildings may only
be added to the list through a zoning amendment that approves such
an amended list. Parcels/structures/buildings may be removed from the
list upon recommendation by the Historic Preservation Commission and
approval of the Planning Board, at which time it shall be recertified by the
Mayor and reattested by the City Clerk.
LDR Attachment A
FEES AND CHARGES
1. Zoning Ordinance.
2. Zoning Map.
Copies of the Zoning Ordinance shall be available from the City Clerk's
office. The cost of this ordinance shall be $50, which shall include any
amendments made to the ordinance to date. "To date," means the date
of purchase.
A.
B. (Reserved)
Blueprint copies of the Zoning Map (one inch equals 1,000 feet) shall be
obtained from the City's Engineering Office. The cost for the map shall
be $15.
A.
Colored copies of the Zoning Map (one inch equals 1,000 feet) shall be
obtained from the City's Engineering Offices. The cost for the map shall
be $35.
B.
Black-and-white copies of the reduced map (11 inches by 17 inches)
shall be obtained from the Building Inspector's office. Cost for these
maps shall be $1 each.
C.
Colored copies of the reduced map (11 inches by 17 inches) shall be
obtained from the City's Engineering Office. Cost for these maps shall
be $5 each.
D.
Colored copies of the reduced map (24 inches by 36 inches) shall be
obtained from the City's Engineering Office. Cost for these maps shall
be $15 each.
E.
Section 16 BIDDEFORD CODE 2
CHCT:1276
3. Engineering review and inspection draw accounts.
Fees collected for all color copies of the Zoning Map shall be used to
further develop the City's geographical information system.
F.
A draw account shall be set up for engineering review costs for all
projects. The engineering review amount is due at the conceptual
review stage. The minimum deposit is based on the following
spreadsheet. If a project's costs exceed the minimum amounts shown,
the applicant shall be required to submit additional funds to cover the
review costs.
Schedule for Engineering Review Draw Accounts
Project Types Minimum Deposit
Private ways (based on number of lots
serviced, with no subdivision involved):
1 lot $400
2 lots $500
3 to 4 lots $1,000
5 to 10 lots $1,500
More than 10 lots, per lot +$100
Minor subdivisions $500
Major subdivisions:
Fewer than 5 lots $1,000
5 to 10 lots $1,500
11 to 15 lots $2,000
16 to 25 lots $2,500
More than 25 lots $3,000
Amendments to subdivisions:
Minor $500
Major $750
Site plan review (based on square feet of
new footprint of structures and parking/
paving):
Less than 2,000 square feet $500
2,000 to 9,999 square feet $1,000
10,000 to 19,999 square feet $1,200
20,000 to 39,999 square feet $1,600
40,000 to 59,999 square feet $2,000
More than 59,999 square feet $3,000
A.
2 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 3
CHCT:1277
Schedule for Engineering Review Draw Accounts
Project Types Minimum Deposit
Amendments to approved site plans (no
increase in square feet of footprint of
structure and parking/paving)
$500
Extraction review $1,000
Conditional use permits $500
Miscellaneous review $400
A draw account shall be set up for engineering inspection costs for all
applicable projects. The amount is due before final project approval.
The minimum deposit is based on the following spreadsheet. If a
project's costs exceed the minimum amounts shown, the applicant shall
be required to submit additional funds to cover the inspection costs,
and occupancy permits may be withheld until these additional fees
funds are paid.
Schedule for Engineering Inspection Draw Account
Project Types Minimum Deposit
Private way (based on number of lots
serviced, with no subdivision involved):
1 lot $500
2 lots $750
3 to 4 lots $1,000
5 to 10 lots $1,500
More than 10 lots, per lot +$100
Subdivisions:
Fewer than 5 lots $2,000
5 to 15 lots $2,500
More than 15 lots $3,000
Site plan review (based on square feet of
new footprint of structures and parking/
paving):
Less than 2,000 square feet $500
2,000 to 9,999 square feet $1,000
10,000 to 39,999 square feet $1,500
40,000 to 79,999 square feet $2,000
More than 80,000 square feet $3,000
Miscellaneous inspection $400
B.
At the end of the review process, any remaining funds shall be returned
to the applicant. The City of Biddeford will have 45 days from the
C.
3 BIDDEFORD CODE 3
CHCT:1278
4. Subdivision review.
date of the notice of decision for review draw accounts to process
and forward the remaining funds to the applicant. For inspection draw
accounts, the City of Biddeford shall have 45 days from when the
engineering department submits its final report approving the project.
Charges for subdivision review are nonrefundable. The fees shall be as
follows:
Minor subdivisions.
a. No more than four lots;
All lots having required street frontage on existing accepted
streets or roads.
$500 plus $100 per lot or dwelling unit (40% is due at
concept application submission, with the remaining 60%
due at preliminary application submission); or
(1)
$100 for minor revision to approved plans (100% due at
time of application).
(2)
b.
1.
Major subdivisions.
a. Five or more lots; and/or
b. Construction of new street or roadway, either public or private;
Extension of water and sewer lines to service the several lots.
$500 plus $100 per lot or dwelling unit (40% is due at
concept application submission, with the remaining 60%
due at preliminary application submission);
(1)
$500 for final (100% due at time of final application); and/
or
(2)
$100 for minor revision to approved plans (100% due at
time of application).
(3)
c.
2.
These charges shall be paid at time of application. No project
shall be presented to the Planning Board for preliminary approval
without having paid these charges.
3.
A.
Further, in the event that a given project may require more detailed
review and analysis, which would include any additional review of
preliminary and final review of subdivision plans, excluding the
concept, and initial preliminary and final reviews, the Planning Board
when determining the level of review needed, will require that a draw
account be established to cover the additional costs.
B.
3 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 4
CHCT:1279
5. Site review.
The Board shall require an estimate of costs for review from the
Planning Department and the City Engineer. This cost shall be
based on the estimated amount of time needed to review the
project and the hourly pay rate for the given department. Work
orders for reviews shall be maintained by the Planning/Engineering
departments and shall be made part of the project file.
1.
A minimum of $1,500 shall be deposited with the City through
the Planning Department. This sum shall be deposited into a noninterest-
bearing draw account. Once authorization is given from
the Engineering Department in the form of an invoice, the Finance
Department shall make drafts from the draw account, payable
to the City of Biddeford. When this account is drawn down to a
level of $500 or less, the applicant shall be required to deposit an
additional $1,500.
2.
At the end of the review process, any remaining funds shall be
returned to the applicant. The City of Biddeford will have 45 days
from the date of the notice of decision to process and forward the
remaining draw account to the applicant.
3.
All applications shall include a nonrefundable administrative fee of $20
to be submitted at the time of application.
C.
Charges for site review such as for multifamily, commercial, industrial
or nonprofit, and other development, are due at the time of application.
No project shall be presented to the Planning Board for final approval
without having paid these charges. All fees are nonrefundable and are
as follows:
Site plan review:
$250 for up to 1,999 square feet footprint of structures and
paving/parking;
a.
$500 for 2,000 to 9,999 square feet footprint of structures and
paving/parking;
b.
$1,000 for 10,000 to 14,999 square feet footprint of structures
and paving/parking;
c.
$1,500 for 15,000 to 19,999 square feet footprint of structures
and paving/parking;
d.
$2,000 for 20,000 to 29,999 square feet footprint of structures
and paving/parking;
e.
For projects with more than 29,999 square feet footprint of
structures and paving/parking, $2,000 plus an additional $15
for each additional 1,000 square feet footprint of structures
and paving/parking (rounded to the nearest 1,000 square feet).
f.
(1)
A.
4 BIDDEFORD CODE 5
CHCT:1280
6. Conditional use.
7. Other reviews.
(2) Any conversion with no new construction: $100.
All applications shall include a nonrefundable administrative fee of $40
to be submitted at the time of application.
B.
Further, in the event that a given project may require more detailed
review and analysis, which would include any additional review of final
review of site plans, excluding the pre-conference review, the Planning
Board when determining the level of review needed, will require that a
draw account be established to cover the additional costs.
The Board shall require an estimate of costs for review from the
Planning Department and the City Engineer. This cost shall be
based on the estimated amount of time needed to review the
project and the hourly pay rate for the given department. Work
orders for reviews shall be maintained by the Planning/Engineering
Department shall be made part of the project file.
1.
A minimum of $1,500 shall be deposited with the City through
the Planning Department. This sum shall be deposited into a noninterest-
bearing draw account. Once authorization is given from
the Engineering Department in the form of an invoice, the Finance
Department shall make drafts from the draw account, payable
to the City of Biddeford. When this account is drawn down to a
level of $500 or less, the applicant shall be required to deposit an
additional $1,500.
2.
At the end of the review process, any remaining funds shall be
returned to the applicant. The City of Biddeford will have 45 days
from the date of the notice of decision to process and forward the
remaining draw account to the applicant.
3.
C.
Charges for these reviews shall be the same as either subdivision or site
review. Basic application fee is $200.
A.
The applicant shall pay for legal expenses and engineering expenses
incurred by the City in reviewing plans.
B.
All applications shall include a nonrefundable administrative fee of $40
to be submitted at the time of application.
C.
Any proposed amendments to the Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map
shall be charged a $1,000 nonrefundable fee, plus the applicant shall
pay for legal expenses and engineering expenses incurred by the City
in reviewing plans.
A.
Basic application fees for other reviews such as home occupations,
private right-of-way, minor lot line revision, and change of use is $200.
B.
5 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 7
CHCT:1281
8. Contract and conditional zones.
9. Administrative appeals and variance requests.
10. Shoreland Zoning review.
Review fee: $100, due at time of application. All applications shall include
a nonrefundable administrative fee of $40 to be submitted at the time of
application.
11. Extraction review.
All applications shall include a nonrefundable administrative fee of $40
to be submitted at the time of application.
C.
$1,000 per application (this includes contract and conditional zoning,
and would not be proposed until passed the concept stage at Council).
A.
The applicant shall pay for legal expenses and engineering expenses
incurred by the City in reviewing plans, contract documents and
developing the agreement.
B.
All applications shall include a nonrefundable administrative fee of $40
to be submitted at the time of application.
C.
A fee of $50 shall be charged to cover administrative costs for
administrative appeals and variance requests. Such fee shall be paid by
check to the City of Biddeford at time of application.
A.
The applicant may be charged additional costs for photocopying and
legal reviews. Such costs shall be substantiated by invoice from the
legal firm involved or a listing of copies made (photocopying costs shall
not exceed $50).
B.
Applicants shall pay for first class postage for notification of abutters.
This cost shall be billed to the applicant prior to final approval of plans.
C.
Review fee: $100, due at time of application. All applications shall
include a nonrefundable administrative fee of $40 to be submitted at
the time of application.
A.
Further, in the event that a given project may require more detailed
review and analysis, the Planning Board when determining the level of
review needed, will require that a draw account be established to cover
the additional costs.
The Board shall require an estimate of costs for review from the
Planning Department and the City Engineer. This cost shall be
based on the estimated amount of time needed to review the
project and the hourly pay rate for the given department. Work
orders for reviews shall be maintained by the Planning/Engineering
Departments and shall be made part of the project file.
1.
B.
7 BIDDEFORD CODE 11
CHCT:1282
12. Historic preservation certificates of appropriateness. [Added
4-16-2013 by Ord. No. 2013.25]
LDR Attachment B
GIS DATA SETS, MAPS, AND OTHER PRODUCTS, FEES AND
CHARGES
1. Geographic Information System Data Sets, Maps, and Other
Products.
A minimum of $1,500 shall be deposited with the City through
the Planning Department. This sum shall be deposited into a noninterest-
bearing draw account. Once authorization is given from
the Engineering Department in the form of an invoice, the Finance
Department shall make drafts from the draw account, payable
to the City of Biddeford. When this account is drawn down to a
level of $500 or less, the applicant shall be required to deposit an
additional $1,500.
2.
At the end of the review process, any remaining funds shall be
returned to the applicant. The City of Biddeford will have 45 days
from the date of the notice of decision to process and forward the
remaining draw account to the applicant.
3.
Commission review: application fee of $100, plus administration fee of
$40.
A.
B. Subcommittee review of minor applications: no fee.
Fees for Geographic Information System (GIS) data sets, maps, and
other products shall be charged as shown in "Table A, Chart of Fees for
GIS Data Sets, Maps, and Other Products."
A.
Fees for GIS data sets shall be used to further develop the City's
Geographical Information System except as noted in Table A.
Table A
Chart of Fees for GIS Data Sets, Maps, and Other Products
Photos Fee
Aerial Photo—GeoTiff—Individual panel $15
Aerial Photo—MrSid—Individual panel $10
Aerial Photo—MrSid—Citywide $250
Data Sets
B.
11 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 1
CHCT:1283
Chapter CCT
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
Table A
Chart of Fees for GIS Data Sets, Maps, and Other Products
Photos Fee
Shapefiles—Parcels, Zoning, Zoning Overlays,
Contract Zones
Sewers and Drains and datasets with over 100
items.
$20
Shapefiles—Datasets with less than 100 items $10
Shapefile—Vision Parcels
(Assessing Department to receive $50)
$120
Geodatabases, with assessing data
(Assessing Department to receive $50)
$300
Geodatabases, without assessing data $200
Table Data—Vision
(Assessing Department to receive $50)
$100
Table Data—Less than 100 items $10
Table Data—100 or more items $20
Maps (excluding the Official Zoning Map)
Existing Plans 11 inches by 17 inches $4
Existing Plans 24 inches by 36 inches $12
Existing Plans—Other sizes, per square foot $2
Special Order TBD
Reports
Existing $10
Special Order TBD
1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1284
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009.11 4-7-2009 Shellfish conservation
amendment
Ch. 74, Art. II, Div.
5
2009.12 4-7-2009 Recreation
Commission
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. II
2009.16 4-21-2009 Land development
regulations:
Amendments
amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2009.21 5-5-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.22 5-5-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.23 5-5-2009 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2009.24 5-5-2009 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2009.25 5-5-2009 Procurement
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2
2009.39 6-2-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.40 6-2-2009 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2009.41 6-16-2009 Land development
regulations
amendment:
Performance standards
amendment
LDR, Art. VI
2009.42 9-1-2009 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
2009.46 7-21-2009 Utilities/industrial
sewer use
Ch. 71
2009.47 7-7-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.48 7-7-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.49 7-7-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1285
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009.54 8-4-2009 Post-construction
stormwater
management
Ch. 34, Art. VI
2009.61 9-15-2009 Emergency medical
services amendment
Ch. 30, Art. II
2009.73 9-17-2009 Land development
regulations:
Definitions amendment
LDR, Art. II
2009.83 11-17-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.84 11-17-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.85 11-17-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.86 11-17-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.87 11-17-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.88 11-17-2009 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2009.98 2-2-2010 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment; Official
Zoning Map
amendment;
nonconformance
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment;
performance standards
amendment;
conditional uses
amendment; Planning
Board amendment;
Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance amendment
LDR, Arts. II, III, IV,
V, VI, VII, X, and
XIV
2010.4 2-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.5 2-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.6 2-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1286
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010.7 2-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.15 3-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.16 3-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.17 3-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.18 3-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.19 3-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.20 3-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.21 3-16-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.23 3-16-2010 Land development
regulations:
establishment of zones
amendment (medical
marijuana dispensary
moratorium)
LDR, Art. V
2010.25 4-6-2010 Finance amendment Ch. 2, Art. V
2010.26 4-6-2010 Emergency
Management staff
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2
2010.27 4-6-2010 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
2010.33 5-4-2010 Air toxics control
regulations
amendment
Ch. 34, Art. IV
2010.44 6-1-2010 Buildings amendment;
electrical code
amendment
Ch. 18, Arts. I and
II
2010.48 8-3-2010 Boards, committees
and commissions
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 1
2010.62 9-6-2011 Open burning Ch. 38, Art. III
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1287
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010.63 7-20-2010 Solid waste collection
amendment; solid
waste flow control;
facility amendment
Ch. 58, Arts. I; VI
2010.64 7-20-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.65 8-3-2010 Coastal Area
Committee amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 9
2010.70 8-3-2010 Land development
regulations:
Definitions
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Arts. II, V and
VI
2010.73 8-3-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.83 8-17-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.89 8-17-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.91 9-21-2010 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.93 9-7-2010 Land development
regulations:
establishment of zones
amendment
LDR, Art. V
2010.94 9-7-2010 Land development
regulations:
amendments
amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2010.100 10-5-2010 Wastewater system
amendment
Ch. 70, Art. II
2010.101 10-5-2010 Utilities/industrial
sewer use amendment
Ch. 71
2010.102 10-5-2010 Property assessed
clean energy
Ch. 51
2010.103 10-5-2010 Cultural Affairs
Commission repealer
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div.
7, reference only
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1288
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010.104 10-5-2010 Community Center
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. VI
2010.105 4-19-2011 Recreation
Commission
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. II
2010.118 11-4-2010 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2010.124 12-7-2010 Buildings and building
regulations: standards
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. IV
2010.132 1-4-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.133 1-4-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.135 1-4-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.136 1-4-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2010.137 1-4-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.3 2-1-2011 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
2011.5 3-1-2011 Cemeteries
amendment
Ch. 26
2011.6 3-1-2011 Beaches amendment Ch. 46, Art. V
2011.9 3-15-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.10 3-15-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.13 4-19-2011 Emergency medical
services amendment
Ch. 30, Art. II
2011.14 4-19-2011 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
2011.21 5-3-2011 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2011.22 5-3-2011 Collection of Solid
Waste
Ch. 58, Art. II
2011.23 5-3-2011 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1289
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011.24 5-3-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.25 4-19-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.26 4-19-2011 Special events Ch. 6, Art. IV
2011.31 5-3-2011 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2011.32 7-5-2011 Buildings and building
regulations: buildings
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II
2011.33 6-7-2011 Domesticated chickens Ch. 10, Art. III
2011.36 6-21-2011 Land development
regulations:
establishment of zones
amendment
LDR, Art. V
2011.37 6-21-2011 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Arts. II, V, VI
2011.38 9-20-2011 Coastal Area
Committee
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 9
2011.42 7-5-2011 Air toxics control
regulations
amendment
Ch. 34, Art. IV
2011.49 8-16-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.50 8-2-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.56 8-16-2011 Buildings and building
regulations: buildings
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II
2011.57 10-4-2011 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 58
2011.64 9-20-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.69 11-1-2011 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1290
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2011.70 11-1-2011 Conservation
Commission
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4
2011.71 11-1-2011 Procurement
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2
2011.78 11-15-2011 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2011.81 12-7-2011 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2012.8 2-21-2012 Planning Board
amendment
LDR, Art. X
2012.14 2-21-2012 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2012.24 4-3-2012 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Arts. II, V, VI
2012.25 4-3-2012 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2012.26 4-3-2012 Offenses against public
safety
Ch. 40, Art. VI
2012.28 4-3-2012 Streets amendment Ch. 62, Art. IV
2012.32 5-1-2012 Parks and recreation
facilities
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2012.33 5-1-2012 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
2012.54 7-3-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2012.64 8-21-2012 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2012.65 10-16-2012 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2012.92 9-4-2012 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
9-4-2012 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1291
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012.97 10-2-2012 Administration:
finance amendment
Ch. 2, Art. V
2012.102 10-16-2012 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2012.103 10-16-2012 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2012.104 10-16-2012 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2012.105 10-16-2012 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
11-6-2012 Charter amendments Art. II, § 4; Art. III,
§§ 2, 4; Art. V, §§ 1,
3l Art. VIII, §§ 6, 8,
9; Art. IX, §§ 5, 6;
Art. XII, §§ 1, 6, 9
2012.111 11-20-2012 Domesticated chickens
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. III
2012.119 1-15-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.7 2-19-2013 Waterways: harbor
amendment
Ch. 74, Art. II
2013.8 2-19-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.13 3-21-2013 Downtown
Development
Commission
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 6
2013.17 4-2-2013 Streets amendment Ch. 62, Art. IV, Div.
1
2013.18 4-2-2013 Recreation
Commission
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. II
2013.19 4-2-2013 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
2013.20 4-16-2013 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1292
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013.24 4-16-2013 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Arts. II, V, VI
2013.25 4-16-2013 Land development
regulations:
establishment of zones
amendment; historic
preservation
LDR, Arts. V, XV
2013.26 4-16-2013 Streets amendment;
land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
Ch. 62, Art. IV, Div.
1; LDR, Arts. II, VI
2013.27 5-7-2013 Streets amendment Ch. 62, Art. IV, Div.
1
2013.28 4-16-2013 Businesses
amendment
Ch. 22
2013.29 5-7-2013 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 58
2013.34 5-21-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.35 5-21-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.36 5-21-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.37 5-21-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.38 5-21-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.39 5-21-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.41 6-4-2013 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2013.42 6-18-2013 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1293
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2013.43 6-18-2013 Parks and recreation
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2013.48 6-4-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.49 6-4-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.50 6-4-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.51 6-4-2013 Beaches amendment Ch. 46, Art. V
2013.56 6-4-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.73 9-3-2013 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 58
2013.77 10-1-2013 Land development
regulations:
amendments
amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2013.78 10-1-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.81 10-1-2013 Streets amendment Ch. 62, Art. IV
2013.83 10-15-2013 Cable Television
Committee amendment
Ch. 2, Art. VI
2013.92 11-19-2013 Buildings and building
regulations
amendment
Ch. 18, Art. I
2013.93 11-19-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2013.94 11-19-2013 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.8 2-4-2014 Aviation amendment Ch. 14
2014.10 2-4-2014 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2014.12 3-4-2014 Beaches amendment Ch. 46, Art. V
2014.14 3-4-2014 Buildings amendment Ch. 18, Art. II
2014.15 3-3-2014 Election wards
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. I
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1294
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014.16 3-18-2014 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment
LDR, Arts. II and V
2014.18 3-18-2014 Recreation
Commission
amendment
Ch. 46, Art. II
2014.24 4-1-2014 Unrestricted fund
balance policy
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 5
2014.25 4-1-2014 Waste flow control and
transfer station
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. III
2014.26 4-1-2014 Project Canopy
Committee amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div.
10
2014.27 4-1-2014 Solid waste
administration
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. VI
2014.40 6-3-2014 Buildings amendment Ch. 18, Art. II
2014.41 6-3-2014 Solid waste: collection
amendment
Ch. 58, Art. II
2014.42 6-3-2014 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2014.44 6-17-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.48 7-1-2014 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2014.49 7-1-2014 Land development
regulations:
amendments
amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2014.59 7-15-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.60 7-15-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.61 7-15-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.62 7-15-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1295
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014.70 8-5-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.71 8-19-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.72 8-19-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.73 8-5-2014 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 46
2014.78 8-19-2014 Public safety; fire
prevention and
protection repealer
Chs. 30; 38
(reference only)
2014.79 8-19-2014 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2014.85 9-2-2014 Waterways amendment Ch. 74
2014.86 9-2-2014 Waterways amendment Ch. 74
2014.96 10-7-2014 Land development
regulations:
amendments
amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2014.97 10-7-2014 Land development
regulations:
amendments
amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2014.109 11-18-2014 Animals: dogs
amendment; parks and
recreation: facilities
and beaches
amendment
Chs. 10, Art. II; 46,
Arts. IV and V
2014.110 11-18-2014 Parks and recreation:
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2014.114 12-2-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.115 12-2-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.116 11-18-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.117 11-18-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.118 11-18-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1296
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014.119 11-18-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.120 11-18-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.121 12-2-2014 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.128 1-6-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.129 1-6-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.130 4-21-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.131 1-6-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2014.132 1-6-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.3 2-3-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2015.7 3-3-2015 Parks and recreation:
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2015.8 3-3-2015 Parks and recreation:
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2015.9 3-3-2015 Streets, sidewalks and
other public places: in
general amendment
Ch. 62, Art. I
2015.10 3-3-2015 Solid waste: in general
amendment; collection
Ch. 58, Art. I; Ch.
58, Art. II
2015.11 4-7-2015 Land development
regulations:
establishment of zones
amendment
LDR, Art. V
2015.12 4-7-2015 Utilities: fats, oils and
grease control
Ch. 70, Art. V
2015.14 4-7-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.15 4-7-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.16 4-7-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1297
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015.17 4-21-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.18 4-21-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.19 4-21-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.28 5-19-2015 Public safety
amendment
Ch. 30
2015.44 8-18-2015 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment; Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance
amendment
LDR, Art. II; LDR,
Art. XIV
2015.57 9-15-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.58 9-15-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.59 9-15-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.62 10-6-2015 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2015.75 11-17-2015 Waterways amendment Ch. 74
2015.76 11-17-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2015.77 11-17-2015 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2016.2 1-5-2016 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2016.11 2-2-2016 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2016.12 2-2-2016 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2016.13 2-2-2016 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2016.14 2-2-2016 Confirmation of
Lamothe Avenue as
correct spelling in
Code
Ch. 42, footnote
only
2016.27 5-3-2016 Parks and recreation:
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1298
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016.28 5-3-2016 Administration:
officers and employees
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 1
2016.29 5-3-2016 Social services:
General Assistance
Program
Ch. 54, Art. III
2016.40 6-7-2016 Parks and recreation:
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2016.41 6-7-2016 Reorganization of City
government
Ch. 2, Art. III, Div.
4; Ch. 14, Art. I; Ch.
14, Art. II, Div. 3;
Ch. 34, Art. IV; Ch.
62, Art. III; LDR,
Art. X
2016.51 7-5-2016 Land development
regulations:
amendments
amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2016.69 10-18-2016 Land development
regulations: shoreland
zoning ordinance
amendment
LDR, Art. XIV
2016.74 9-6-2016 Land development
regulations:
establishment of zones
amendment
LDR, Art. V
2016.75 9-6-2016 Shellfish conservation
ordinance amendment
Ch. 74, Art. II, Div.
5
2016.84 9-20-2016 Parks and recreation:
facilities amendment
Ch. 46, Art. IV
2016.85 9-20-2016 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2016.87 1-17-2017 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment
LDR, Art. II; LDR,
Art. V
2016.88 1-17-2017 Land development
regulations:
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Art. VI
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1299
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016.96 11-1-2016 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
11-8-2016 Charter amendments Art. I, § 2; Art. II,
§§ 1, 2a, 6; Art. III,
§§ 2, 8; Art. IV, §§ 2,
3; Art. V, §§ 3, 4, 5;
Art. VI; Art. VII; Art.
IX, § 2; Art. X, §§ 1,
2, 5; Art. XI, §§ 2, 3,
9; Art. XII, §§ 1, 4,
10
2016.110 12-20-2016 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2016.113 1-3-2017 Land development
regulations:
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Art. VI
2016.114 1-3-2017 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Art. II; LDR,
Art. VI
2016.118 1-3-2017 Fire Advisory
Committee
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div.
11
2016.119 1-3-2017 Police Advisory
Committee
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div.
12
2017.3 1-17-2017 Recreation
Commission; parks
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div.
9; Ch. 46
2017.7 2-7-2017 Businesses: criteria
amendment
Ch. 22, Art. III
2017.8 1-17-2017 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2017.9 4-4-2017 Military personnel tax
exemption
Ch. 2, Art. V, Div.
1A
2017.12 2-21-2017 Environment:
downtown anti-blight
Ch. 34, Art. VII
2017.16 3-7-2017 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Art. II; LDR,
Art. VI
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1300
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017.17 3-7-2017 Land development
regulations: shoreland
zoning ordinance
amendment
LDR, Art. XIV
2017.21 3-21-2017 Downtown
Development
Commission
amendment
Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 6
2017.27 3-21-2017 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2017.28 4-4-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.29 4-18-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.35 5-16-2017 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 46
2017.36 5-16-2017 Amusements: sales,
possession and
consumption of liquor
at and during special
events on City public
property
Ch. 6, Art. V
2017.37 5-16-2017 Animals: dogs
amendment
Ch. 10, Art. II
2017.38 5-16-2017 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 46
2017.39 6-6-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.50 6-6-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.51 6-6-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.52 6-6-2017 Buildings and building
regulations: buildings
amendment; electrical
code amendment
Ch. 18, Art. II; Ch.
18, Art. III
2017.53 6-6-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.54 6-6-2017 Amusements: special
events amendment
Ch. 6, Art. IV
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1301
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2017.56 6-20-2017 Administration: in
general amendment
Ch. 2, Art. I
2017.57 6-20-2017 Land development
regulations: definitions
amendment;
nonconformance
amendment;
establishment of zones
amendment;
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Art. II; LDR,
Art. IV; LDR, Art. V;
LDR, Art. VI
2017.58 6-20-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.59 6-20-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.60 6-20-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.61 6-20-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.66 7-11-2017 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2017.73 7-18-2017 Solid waste
amendment
Ch. 58
2017.95 9-19-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.96 9-19-2017 Motor vehicles and
traffic amendment
Ch. 42
2017.101 10-3-2017 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2017.103 10-3-2017 Delivery of unsolicited
printed or written
materials
Ch. 34, Art. IIA
2017.113 10-17-2017 Land development
regulations:
performance standards
amendment
LDR, Art. VI
2017.130 12-12-2017 Rules of City Council
amendment
Appendix A
2018.1 1-2-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1302
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018.2 1-16-2018 Land Development
Regulations:
Establishment of
Zones Amendment
LDR, Art. V
2018.3 1-16-2018 Land Development
Regulations:
Definitions
Amendment;
Establishment of
Zones Amendment;
Performance
Standards Amendment
LDR, Art. II; LDR,
Art. V; LDR, Art. VI
2018.4 1-16-2018 Land Development
Regulations:
Amendments
Amendment
LDR, Art. XIII
2018.5 1-16-2018 Land Development
Regulations:
Establishment of
Zones Amendment
LDR, Art. V
2018.6 1-16-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.16 3-6-2018 Businesses: Criteria
Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. III
2018.17 3-20-2018 Businesses: Criteria
Amendment
Ch. 22, Art. III
2018.35 5-1-2018 Streets, Sidewalks and
Other Public Places:
Sidewalks Amendment
Ch. 62, Art. III
2018.44 6-5-2018 Land Development
Regulations:
Establishment of
Zones Amendment;
Shoreland Zoning
Ordinance Amendment
LDR, Art. V; Art.
XIV
2018.45 6-5-2018 Administration:
Finance Amendment
Ch. 2, Art. V
2018.75 8-7-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.76 8-7-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1303
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018.91 9-4-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.100 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.101 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.102 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.103 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.104 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.105 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.106 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.107 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.109 10-2-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
2018.110 10-2-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment; Land
Development
Regulations:
Establishment of
Zones Amendment;
Performance
Standards Amendment
NCM; LDR, Art. V;
LDR, Art. VI
2018.111 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.112 10-2-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.113 9-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.120 10-2-2018 Rules of City Council
Amendment
Appendix A
Downtown
Committee
10-26-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
Downtown
Committee
10-26-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
§ DL-1 BIDDEFORD CODE § DL-1
CHCT:1304
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018.123 11-8-2018 Land Development
Regulations
Amendment;
Establishment of
Zones Amendment
Ch. LDR; V
Downtown
Committee
11-26-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.145 1-3-2019 Buildings and Building
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 18
2018.146 1-3-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.147 1-3-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.148 1-3-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2018.149 12-18-2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
Downtown
Committee
1-10-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
Downtown
Committee
1-10-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2019.2 1-15-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2019.5 2-19-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 42
2019.12 3-19-2019 Solid Waste
Amendment
Ch. 58
2019.21 4-2-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
2019.22 4-2-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE § DL-1
CHCT:1305