Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 8-13-2002 as Ord. No. 2002-3]
The Town of Bar Harbor hereby ordains:
§ 1-1. Legislative intent.
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3004, the ordinances of the Town of
Bar Harbor, as codified by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting
of Chapters 1 through 201, shall be known collectively as the "Town of Bar
Harbor Code," hereafter termed the "Code." Wherever reference is made
in any of the ordinances contained in the Town of Bar Harbor Code to any
other ordinances appearing in said Code, such reference shall be changed
to the appropriate chapter title, chapter number, article number or section
number appearing in the Code as if such ordinances had been formally
amended to so read.
§ 1-2. Continuation of existing provisions.
The provisions of the Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of the ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of the
Code by this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall
date from the date of adoption of the prior ordinances. All such provisions
are hereby continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to
their adoption by the Town of Bar Harbor, and it is the intention of said Town
that each such provision contained within the Code is hereby reaffirmed as
it appears in said Code. Only such provisions of former pieces of ordinances
as are omitted from this Code shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the
provisions of § 1-3 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Town of Bar Harbor which is
not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in
full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Enactments saved from repeal; matters not affected.
The repeal of ordinances provided for in § 1-3 of this ordinance shall not
affect the following classes of ordinances, rights and obligations, which are
hereby expressly saved from repeal:
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Town of Bar Harbor prior to the effective
date of this ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the
enforcement of such right or liability.
A.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part of
this ordinance or of any ordinances included in this Code now or through
supplementation shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the
remainder thereof but shall be confined in its operation to the clause,
sentence, paragraph, section, article, chapter or part thereof directly
involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been
rendered.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Town of
Bar Harbor or any penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result
therefrom.
B.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Town of Bar Harbor.
C.
Any agreement entered into or any franchise, license, right, easement
or privilege heretofore granted or conferred by the Town of Bar Harbor.
D.
Any ordinance of the Town of Bar Harbor providing for the laying
out, opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, park or other public place
within the Town of Bar Harbor or any portion thereof.
E.
Any ordinance of the Town of Bar Harbor appropriating money or
transferring funds, promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or
authorizing the issuance and delivery of any bond of the Town of Bar
Harbor or other instruments or evidence of the Town's indebtedness.
F.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract or obligation.
G.
H. The levy or imposition of special assessments or charges.
I. The annexation or dedication of property.
J. Any ordinances relating to salaries.
Any previously adopted zoning ordinance or maps of the Town of Bar
Harbor, including but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance of the Town
of Bar Harbor adopted June 12, 1990, and any amendments thereto.
K.
L. Personnel policies of the Town.
M. Any ordinances adopted subsequent to September 12, 2002.
§ 1-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code, in loose-leaf form, has been filed in the office of the
Town Clerk of the Town of Bar Harbor and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and,
if this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified by the Town
Clerk of the Town of Bar Harbor by impressing thereon the Seal of the Town,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of said Town Clerk
to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all
times while said Code is in effect. The enactment and publication of this
ordinance, coupled with the availability of a copy of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to any of
the ordinances known collectively as the "Town of Bar Harbor Code" or
any new ordinances or resolutions, when enacted or adopted in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Town Council or Town Meeting to be
a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such Code so
that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include
such additions, deletions, amendments or supplements. Whenever such
additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall be
enacted or adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as
amendments and supplements thereto. Nothing contained in this ordinance
shall affect the status of any ordinances contained herein, and such
ordinances may be amended, deleted or changed from time to time as the
Town deems desirable.
§ 1-8. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy
of the book containing the Town of Bar Harbor Code required to be filed
in the office of the Town Clerk for use by the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted by the Town subsequent to the enactment
of this ordinance in such form as to indicate the intention of said Town to
be a part of said Code shall, when finally enacted or adopted, be included
therein by temporary attachment of copies of such changes or ordinances
until such changes or ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-9. Sale of Code book; supplementation.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Town Clerk or an authorized agent of the Clerk upon the payment
of a fee to be set by the Town Council. The Clerk may also arrange for
procedures for the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:5
§ 1-10. Penalties for tampering with Code.
Any person who, without authorization from the Town Clerk, changes or
amends, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the Town of Bar
Harbor Code or who alters or tampers with such Code in any manner
whatsoever which will cause the ordinances of the Town of Bar Harbor
to be misrepresented thereby or who violates any other provision of this
ordinance shall be guilty of an offense and shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-18, General
penalty.
§ 1-11. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for publication as the Town of
Bar Harbor Code, no changes in the meaning or intent of such ordinances
have been made. Certain grammatical changes and other minor
nonsubstantive changes were made in one or more of said pieces of
ordinances. It is the intention of the Town that all such changes be adopted
as part of the Code as if the ordinances had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
§ 1-12. Incorporation of provisions into Code.
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby made Article I of Chapter 1
of the Town of Bar Harbor Code, such ordinance to be entitled "General
Provisions, Article I, Adoption of Code," and the sections of this ordinance
shall be numbered §§ 1-1 to 1-13, inclusive.
§ 1-13. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect at the expiration of 30 days after adoption.
§ 1-10 BAR HARBOR CODE § 1-13
1:6
ARTICLE II
Use and Construction
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as §§ 01.02, 01.05, 01.06, 01.08, 01.12, 01.13
and 01.14 of the 1990 Code]
§ 1-14. Rules of construction; general definitions.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions
of the Town, the following rules shall be observed, unless otherwise
specifically provided or unless such construction would be inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the Town Council:
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common
and approved usage of the language, but technical words and
phrases and others that have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to
such meaning.
(1)
Definitions given within a chapter or article apply only to words or
phrases used in such chapter or article unless otherwise provided.
(2)
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations
as well as to males.
(3)
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future,
past and present where applicable unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
(4)
Time means an hour of the day according to the official time of the
Town.
(5)
And; or. "And" may be read "or," and "or" may be read "and," if the
sense requires it.
(6)
May; shall. The word "may" is permissive, and the word "shall" is
mandatory.
(7)
A.
As used in this Code, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE or THIS CODE — The Town of Bar Harbor Code.
COUNCIL — The Bar Harbor Town Council.
COUNTY — Hancock County, Maine.
MONTH — A calendar month.
M.R.S.A — Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS — The municipal officers of the Town of Bar
Harbor, Maine.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in
which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath.
B.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-15. References.
§ 1-16. Catch lines of sections.
The catch lines of the sections appearing in this Code are only intended as
guide words or phrases to indicate the contents of the sections and shall
OWNER — Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant
by the entirety of the whole or a part of such property.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Whenever the word "person" is used in any section of this Code
prescribing a penalty or fine as applied to partnerships or associations,
the word shall include the partners or members thereof, and such
word as applied to corporations shall include the officers, agents or
employees thereof who are responsible for any violation of said section.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
STATE — The State of Maine.
STATUTES or REVISED STATUTES — The latest published edition of
the Statutes or Revised Statutes of Maine.
STREET — Includes public avenues, boulevards, highways, roads,
alleys, lanes, viaducts, bridges and approaches thereto and all other
public thoroughfares in the Town, and shall mean the entire width
thereof between abutting property lines; it shall be construed to include
a sidewalk or footpath, unless the contrary is expressed or unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town
Council.
TENANT — Any person occupying the premises, building or land of
another in subordination to such other person's title and with his
express or implied assent, whether he occupies the whole or a part of
those premises, building or land, whether alone or with others.
TOWN and THIS TOWN — The Town of Bar Harbor, Maine.
WEEK — Seven days.
WRITING and WRITTEN — Any representation or words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise, capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means.
YEAR — A calendar year.
Any reference in this Code to an ordinance or provision of this Code
shall mean such ordinance or provision as may now exist or is hereafter
amended.
A.
Any references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions or sections
shall be to the chapters, articles, divisions and sections of this Code
unless otherwise specified.
B.
§ 1-14 BAR HARBOR CODE § 1-16
1:8
not be deemed to be a part of or affect the application or substance of such
sections unless expressly so provided.
§ 1-17. Conflicting provisions.
§ 1-18. General penalty.
Whenever in this Code, or in material adopted by reference in this Code,
any act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful, or whenever in
this Code, or in material adopted by reference by this Code, the doing of
any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such
provision shall be punishable by fine of not more than $500 plus costs. This
penalty shall not be deemed to be exclusive of any other appropriate legal
or equitable action. Each day any violation of this Code occurs or continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 1-19. Causing or permitting a prohibited act also unlawful.
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include
causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, suffering or concealing the fact of
such act or omission.
§ 1-20. Same offense created under different sections.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different sections of this Code, the Town's Attorney may elect under which
to proceed, but not more than one recovery shall be had against the same
person for the same offense.
If the provisions of different chapters, articles, divisions or sections of
this Code conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each
chapter, article, division or section shall prevail as to all matters and
questions growing out of the subject matter of that chapter, article,
division or section.
A.
If clearly conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the
same chapter, the provisions of the section last enacted shall prevail
unless the construction is inconsistent with the meaning of that chapter.
B.
Where any conflict exists between a provision of this Code and any
provision of the Town Charter or Maine Revised Statutes, the latter
shall prevail.
C.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:9

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
[Adopted 8-6-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-06]
§ 1-21. Representation of Town of Bar Harbor in State District
Court.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2671, Subsection 3, a law enforcement officer
of the Bar Harbor Police Department who is certified by the Maine Criminal
Justice Academy, under 25 M.R.S.A. § 2803-A, Subsection 1, and approved
in writing by the Chief of Police, may represent the Town of Bar Harbor in
District Court in the prosecution of alleged violations of ordinances which
the officer may enforce.
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:11
Chapter 7
ADULT BUSINESSES
§ 7-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate nudity as a form of commercial
exploitation and to regulate dress as a form of conduct and not to impede
the free exchange and expression of ideas. The conduct regulated is that
which the community and Town Council have clearly found to be offensive
to the general welfare, public safety, order and morals of the Town of Bar
Harbor and its citizens.
§ 7-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Includes any activity engaged in or caused to be engaged in
by any person or persons, natural or corporate, with the object and purpose
of economic gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect.
EXPOSE or EXPOSED — Unclothed or uncostumed or not covered by a fully
opaque material.
SALES PERSON — A person shall be deemed a sales person, waiter,
waitress or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard
to whether or not such person is paid any compensation by the management
of the establishment in which the activity is performed.
THEATER —
§ 7-3. Prohibited acts.
A building, playhouse, hall, or other place having a permanent stage
upon which movable scenery and theatrical or vaudeville or similar
performances are given and permanently affixed seats so arranged that
a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage;
A.
A building, room, hall, or other place whose primary function is to
present movies or motion pictures and which has a permanent movie
screen and permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of
spectators can have an unobstructed view of said screen; or
B.
An open-air or drive-in movie having a permanently affixed movie
screen and permanently affixed devices for broadcasting the
soundtracks of movies or motion pictures inside of the patrons'
vehicles.
C.
It shall be unlawful for a person, while acting as a sales person, waiter,
waitress, entertainer or in any other capacity as an owner, manager, or
employee in a business conducted and/or operated anywhere within the
Town of Bar Harbor:
A.
§ 1-21 BAR HARBOR CODE § 7-3
7:12
§ 7-4. Exceptions.
§ 7-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 14
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dances and dance halls — See Ch. 54. Noise — See Ch. 139.
To expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, or
anus; or
(1)
To expose any portion of the female breasts at or below the areola
thereof.
(2)
It shall be unlawful for a person to cause, permit, procure, counsel,
or assist any person to expose himself or herself as prohibited by
Subsection A of this section.
B.
It shall be unlawful for a person operating a business anywhere within
the Town of Bar Harbor to, at said place of business, display or cause
or permit the display of photographs, covers of magazines, newspapers
or other printed matter which exposes or shows genitals, pubic hair,
buttocks, perineum, anus, or female breasts at or below the areola
thereof, in such manner that such photographs, covers of magazines,
newspapers, or other printed matter is visible to children or unwilling
adults using the sidewalks, streets, or highways.
C.
Section 7-3A and B of this chapter do not apply to a theater or similar
establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances or
the presentation of movies.
A.
This chapter does not apply to any act authorized or prohibited by any
statute of the State of Maine.
B.
Any act made unlawful by this chapter and any violation of this chapter
shall be punishable pursuant to the provisions of the Town of Bar
Harbor Code, § 1-18, General penalty. Each day that such unlawful act
or violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
A.
In addition to any other penalty provided by the law, the commission
of acts prohibited by this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may
be abated by the Town seeking an injunction to prohibit further and
continued violation thereof.
B.
§ 7-3 ADULT BUSINESSES § 7-5
7:13

ARTICLE I
Special Amusement Permits
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 08.04 of the 1990 Code; amended
5-21-1996; 10-5-1999; 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
§ 14-1. Title and purpose.
§ 14-2. Definitions.
The following definitions apply to this article and do not affect the meanings
of words or terms in any other article of this Code. As used in this article,
the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COMPLAINT — A verbal or written notice received by the Police
Department from a member of the public or from a police officer that, in the
opinion of the complainant, the licensee violated this article.
DECIBEL — The practical unit of measurement for sound-pressure level.
The number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured
sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals),
abbreviated dB. The abbreviation dB(A) shall refer to readings taken on the
A-weighted scale.
ENTERTAINMENT — Any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion
for patrons or customers of the licensed premises, whether provided by
professional entertainers or by full-time or part-time employees of the
licensed premises whose incidental duties include activities with an
entertainment value.
LICENSED PREMISES — The physical location described in the special
amusement permit application.
LICENSEE — The holder of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of
28-A M.R.S.A., Liquors, as amended, or any person, individual, partnership,
firm, association, corporation or other legal entity acting as agent or
employee of any holder of said license.
LICENSEE'S MANAGER — Person in charge of the licensed premises,
including, by way of example and without limitation, manager, partner,
agent, employee or person otherwise authorized to oversee the operation of
the licensed premises in the absence of the licensee.
LOUD AND UNREASONABLE NOISE — Any sound, the intensity of which
exceeds the standards set forth in § 14-6 or § 14-7 of this article.
MUSICIAN — One who performs music, whether instrumental or vocal.
Title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Special
Amusement Permit Ordinance of the Town of Bar Harbor."
A.
Purpose. The purpose of this article is to control, as required by 28-A
M.R.S.A. § 1054, the issuance of special permits for music, dancing or
entertainment in facilities licensed by the State of Maine to sell liquor
or malt liquor in the Town of Bar Harbor.
B.
§ 14-1 ADULT BUSINESSES § 14-2
7:15
OWNER — The person or persons having the right of legal title to or
the beneficial interest in a building or parcel of land, as their interest is
recorded in the tax records of the Town of Bar Harbor.
VIOLATION, FIRST — A first violation is deemed to have occurred if a
police officer concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a
violation of this article has occurred and within the immediately preceding
12 months a licensee has received no summonses and no written warnings
for violation of this article. Special amusement warnings and summonses
issued prior to January 1, 2003, shall not be considered as within said
twelve-month period.
VIOLATION, SECOND — A second violation is deemed to have occurred
if a police officer concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that another violation of this article has occurred, less than 12 months
have elapsed since the first violation, and the licensee has received written
warning of a first violation; provided, however, that if a second violation
occurs within five calendar days after the first violation, the verbal warning
previously issued to the licensee or licensee's manager shall be sufficient.
VIOLATION, SUBSEQUENT — A subsequent violation is deemed to have
occurred if a police officer concludes that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that another violation of this article has occurred, less than 12
months have elapsed since the first violation, and the licensee has received
written warning of a third violation; provided, however, that if a subsequent
violation occurs within five calendar days after the third violation, the
verbal warning previously issued to the licensee or licensee's manager shall
be sufficient.
VIOLATION, THIRD — A third violation is deemed to have occurred if a
police officer concludes that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
another violation of this article has occurred, less than 12 months have
elapsed since the first violation, and the licensee has received written
warning of a second violation; provided, however, that if a third violation
occurs within five calendar days after the second violation, the verbal
warning previously issued to the licensee or licensee's manager shall be
sufficient.
§ 14-3. Permit required; application procedure.
No licensee for the sale of liquor or malt liquor to be consumed on
his/her licensed premises, situated in the Town of Bar Harbor, shall
permit on said licensed premises any music, except a radio or other
mechanical device, or any dancing or entertainment of any sort unless
the licensee shall have first obtained from the Town Council of Bar
Harbor a special amusement permit approved by at least a majority of
the members of said Town Council.
A.
Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing
to the Town Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk for that purpose
and shall state the name of the applicant; his/her residence address;
the name of the business to be conducted; his/her business address;
the nature of his/her business; the location to be used; whether the
applicant has ever had a license to conduct the business therein
B.
§ 14-2 BAR HARBOR CODE § 14-3
7:16
described either denied or revoked and, if so, the applicant shall
describe those circumstances specifically; whether the applicant,
including all partners or corporate officers, has ever been convicted
of a felony and, if so, the applicant shall describe specifically those
circumstances; the type of music and entertainment intended by the
applicant to be permitted on the licensed premises; whether dancing
is permitted, and any additional information as may be needed by the
Town Council in the issuing of the permit, including but not limited to a
copy of the applicant's current liquor license.
The Town Council may revoke or refuse to issue a special amusement
permit if the premises or building to be used for the purposes do not
fully comply with all ordinances, articles, rules and regulations of the
Town of Bar Harbor.
C.
The Town Council shall set the fee for the special amusement permit
from time to time.
D.
Within 15 days of the Town Clerk's receipt of a complete application
for a special amusement permit, the Town Council shall hold a public
hearing, at which time the testimony of the applicant and any interested
member of the public shall be taken. Prior to the hearing, reasonable
notice of the same shall be given to all owners of land within 300 feet
of the applicant's premises as provided below.
For purposes of the issuance of a new permit for an applicant for a
particular location, reasonable notice to owners of land within 300
feet of the applicant's premises shall include written notice sent by
United States Mail, first class postage prepaid, which notice shall
be mailed at least five days prior to the hearing.
(1)
For purposes of renewing a permit for an applicant against whom
no complaint, warning or summons has been lodged in the
preceding year, reasonable notice to all persons may be achieved
by giving notice of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Bar Harbor at least three days prior to
the hearing.
(2)
For purposes of renewing a permit for an applicant against whom
one or more complaints, warnings or summonses (in any
combination) have been lodged in the preceding year, reasonable
notice may be achieved by sending a written notice by United
States Mail, first class postage prepaid, which notice shall be
mailed at least five days prior to the hearing.
(3)
E.
The Town Council, after hearing and upon such terms and conditions
as it reasonably deems necessary to protect the public interest and to
fulfill the purposes of this article, shall grant or renew a permit unless
it finds that issuance of the permit will be detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare or would violate municipal ordinances or rules
and regulations, articles or bylaws.
F.
§ 14-3 ADULT BUSINESSES § 14-3
7:17
§ 14-4. Classes of permit; reapplication.
§ 14-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the applicant's
existing liquor license.
G.
Special amusement permits granted by the Town Council shall be
limited to the following classes:
Without mechanical amplification:
(a) Class 1: single musician.
(b) Class 2: two musicians.
(c) Class 3: three or more musicians.
(1)
With mechanical amplification:
(a) Class 1a: single musician.
(b) Class 2a: two musicians.
(c) Class 3a: three or more musicians.
(2)
With mechanical amplification and dancing:
(a) Class 1ad: single musician.
(b) Class 2ad: two musicians.
(c) Class 3ad: three or more musicians.
(3)
Other entertainment or amusement:
Class 4: any other type of entertainment, as provided by 28-A
M.R.S.A. § 1054(1)(C).
(a)
(4)
A.
Any permit granted shall be for one of the above-noted classes. A
licensee shall not permit on the licensed premises any music, dancing
or entertainment which exceeds that permitted by the class of his/her
permit, during the period for which his/her permit is valid as otherwise
determined by this article.
B.
During the period for which a license is valid, the licensee may reapply
for a new special amusement permit, if he/she elects to permit dancing,
music or entertainment which exceeds that permitted by the current
permit. Said reapplication shall be governed by all the provisions of this
article with respect to applications for a special amusement permit in
general, including the payment of the usual permit fee.
C.
A violation of this section by a licensee shall be grounds to revoke
or suspend his/her permit and/or to refuse to grant a permit upon
subsequent application by the same licensee.
D.
§ 14-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 14-5
7:18
Enforcement authority. The provisions of this article shall be enforced
by the Bar Harbor Police Department.
A.
Violations. Each violation of this article following a warning or
summons issued by a police officer shall constitute a separate violation.
B.
Delivery of notices. Any notice mailed or delivered to any licensee as
provided in this article shall be effective as to the licensee identified
in the notice notwithstanding such licensee's refusal to accept delivery
of the notice and notwithstanding any failure of any other licensee to
actually receive notice. Any notice required under this article to be
sent to the applicant or licensee shall be mailed or hand delivered to
the applicant's address as shown on the application form filed with the
Town Clerk, unless the licensee or applicant has provided written notice
to the Town Clerk of a change of address.
C.
Warning for first violation. Should a police officer conclude that a first
violation of this article has occurred or is occurring, the officer shall
immediately give a verbal warning to the licensee or the licensee's
manager on the premises. Within not more than five calendar days
of this warning, the Police Department shall deliver in hand to the
licensee, or send by first class mail, a written narrative report of the
incident, a copy of this article and a written notice advising the licensee
that the Police Department has substantiated a violation on the licensed
premises.
D.
Warning for second violation. Should a police officer conclude that a
second violation of this article has occurred or is occurring, the officer
shall immediately give a verbal warning to the licensee or the licensee's
manager on the premises. Within not more than five calendar days of
the second violation, the Police Department shall deliver in hand to the
licensee, or send by first class mail, a written narrative report of the
incident, a copy of this article and a written notice advising the licensee
that the Police Department has substantiated a violation on the licensed
premises.
E.
Summons for subsequent violations. Should a police officer conclude
that a third violation or subsequent violation of this article has occurred
or is occurring, the officer shall immediately give verbal notice to
the licensee or the licensee's manager on the premises. Within not
more than five calendar days of this violation, the Police Department
shall deliver in hand to the licensee, or send by first class mail, a
written narrative report of the incident, a copy of this article and a
written notice advising the licensee that the Police Department has
substantiated a violation on the licensed premises and requesting the
licensee to present himself or herself at the Police Department to
accept service of a summons. The police officer shall write a summons
for the licensee to appear in the Maine District Court to answer
therefor. The Police Department shall also provide a copy of all
pertinent documentation to the Town Clerk, who shall place the matter
on the next available Town Council agenda for action under § 14-5F(2)
F.
§ 14-5 ADULT BUSINESSES § 14-5
7:19
below. Court action under Subsection F(1) below and Town Council
action under Subsection F(2) below are separate, independent
remedies which the Town may pursue concurrently, and neither is a
prerequisite to the other. Failure of the licensee to present herself or
himself to accept the summons shall not be cause for postponement of
the Town Council hearing nor negate possible suspension or revocation
of the license.
Court action. A third violation or subsequent violation shall
constitute a civil offense. The penalty for the conviction of said
third violation shall be a fine of no less than $100 and no more than
$1,000. The penalty for the conviction of a subsequent violation
shall be no less than $100 more than the penalty assessed for
the previous conviction but no more than $1,000. Any penalties
assessed hereunder shall inure to the benefit of the Town of Bar
Harbor. Any violation of this article shall be deemed a public
nuisance and may be subject to abatement by a restraining order or
injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, irrespective
of whether a summons has been issued or a civil penalty has been
sought.
(1)
Town Council action.
Upon being informed of a third or subsequent violation, the
Town Clerk shall provide written notice to the licensee, either
in hand or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and to
all owners of land within 300 feet of the licensee's premises, by
first class mail, that, in not less than seven days after the date
of the notice, the Town Council shall conduct a public hearing
to consider whether the licensee committed a violation.
Neither the failure of any landowner actually to receive notice
nor the licensee's refusal to accept certified mail shall
necessitate another hearing or invalidate any action taken by
the Council at such hearing.
(a)
Following a hearing the Council, by a preponderance of the
evidence, shall make a determination of whether the licensee
committed a violation of this article.
If the Council finds the licensee committed a third
violation, Council shall suspend the licensee's special
amusement permit for a period of 30 days from the date of
the hearing.
[1]
If the Council finds that the licensee committed a
subsequent violation, it shall revoke the licensee's permit
for a minimum of 30 days, but not more than one year, at
the discretion of the Council, and the Council may refuse
to approve future licensee applications for a special
amusement permit.
[2]
(b)
(2)
§ 14-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 14-6
7:20
§ 14-6. Regulation of noise. [Amended 11-20-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-07]
An applicant for a special amusement permit hereunder shall, as part of
his/her application, demonstrate his/her ability to prevent the emanation of
excessive noise from the premises sought to be licensed brought about by
music, dancing or entertainment, except for a radio or other mechanical
device excluded under 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1054 or amendments thereto. The
performance of amplified music out of doors by licensees is categorically
declared to be in violation of this article. The performance of nonamplified
music out of doors by licensees is prohibited between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
Sources of noise. Sources of noise contemplated by this section shall
include musical instruments, sound modification or amplification
devices used in connection with musical instruments and/or other
similar devices which produce, reproduce or amplify sound created by
musical instruments. Sources of noise shall further include any noise or
sound produced directly or indirectly by the applicant's music, dancing
or entertainment except for those mechanical devices specifically
excluded under 28-A M.R.S.A. § 1054 or amendments thereto.
A.
Noise. Sources of noise shall be required to be muffled so as not to be
objectionable due to intermittence, beat, frequency, shrillness, intensity
or volume.
B.
Noise control. The maximum permissible sound-pressure level of any
continuous, regular, frequent, intermittent or periodic source of noise
produced by any activity regulated by this article shall not exceed 71
dB(A) at any time at the measuring locations specified in § 14-6D(3)(e)
below.
C.
Measurement procedures. For the purpose of determining noise levels
as set forth in this article, the following procedures shall be used:
All personnel conducting sound measurements shall be trained
in the current techniques and principles of sound-measuring
equipment and instrumentation.
(1)
Instruments used to determine sound-level measurements shall
conform to the standards of ASI Type I or Type II meters.
(2)
The general steps listed below shall be followed when preparing to
take sound-level measurements:
The instrument manufacturer's specific instructions for the
preparation and use of the instrument shall be followed.
(a)
The sound-level meter shall be calibrated before and after each
set of measurements. The calibrator itself shall be recalibrated
at least once every year.
(b)
(3)
D.
§ 14-6 ADULT BUSINESSES § 14-6
7:21
§ 14-7. Loud and unreasonable noise.
Regardless of whether or not the mean sound-pressure level limit as set
forth in § 14-6C is exceeded, the licensee or his/her authorized
representative shall not permit the use of the premises to result in any
continued, excessive or loud and unreasonable noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of individuals or which results in disturbing the peace and tranquility
of the neighborhood.
§ 14-8. Decision on permit application.
Any applicant requesting a special amusement permit from the Town
Council shall be notified in writing of its decision no later than 15 days from
the date his/her request was received by the Town Council. In the event that
an applicant is denied a permit, the applicant shall be provided with the
reasons for denial in writing. The applicant may not reapply for a permit
within 30 days after an application for a permit has been denied, except
with the consent of the Town Council.
§ 14-9. Appeals.
Any applicant who has requested a permit and has been denied or licensee
whose permit has been revoked or suspended may, within 30 days of denial,
suspension or revocation, appeal the decision as provided by Title 28-A
MRSA § 1054.
When measurements are taken out of doors, a wind screen
shall be placed over the microphone of the sound-level meter
as per the manufacturer's instructions. No sound-level
measurement shall be taken at wind speeds greater than 12
miles per hour; neither shall measurements be taken during
periods of precipitation.
(c)
The sound-level meter shall be placed as specified by the
manufacturer's instructions and at least four feet above the
ground. It shall be placed so as not to be interfered with by
individuals conducting the measurements.
(d)
Measurements shall be taken at points outside the licensed
premises which are no less than five feet and no more than 10
feet from the lot lines of the licensed premises.
(e)
No less than two readings taken by the sound-level meter
within a fifteen-minute period shall constitute a reasonable
basis for averaging a set of measurements. A simple arithmetic
average may be taken, summing all the measurements and
dividing the sum by the number of measurements taken. This
is known as "L50 descriptor," representing the mean soundpressure
level which is exceeded 50% of the time.
(f)
§ 14-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 14-10
7:22
§ 14-10. Admission charge.
A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt
liquor licensee who has been issued a special amusement permit may
charge admission in designated areas approved by the municipal special
amusement permit.
§ 14-11. Severability.
The invalidity of any provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any
other part.
§ 14-10 ADULT BUSINESSES § 14-11
7:23
Chapter 18
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals on beaches — See Ch. 25. Noise — See Ch. 139.
§ 14-11 BAR HARBOR CODE § 14-11
7:24
ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as Ch. 3 of the 1990 Code]
§ 18-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context indicates otherwise, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner or keeper and not under the
control of the owner or keeper or a competent person authorized by the
owner or keeper, either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.
DOG — Both male and female.
§ 18-2. Running at large.
No person shall cause or permit any dog owned or kept by him to run at
large within the Town of Bar Harbor. A dog while on any premises other
than that of its owner or keeper or while on any public way or place shall
be under restraint and not at large within the meaning of this article if
it is controlled by a leash, cord, or chain or "at heel" beside a competent
person and obedient to that person's commands or on or within a vehicle
being driven or parked or within the property limits of its owner or keeper.
Nothing in this article shall be held to require the leashing or otherwise
confining of any dog, except a bitch in heat, while on the premises of its
owner or keeper. A leash, cord or chain used to restrain a dog shall not be
more than eight feet long.
§ 18-3. Bitch in heat.
The owner or keeper of any bitch in heat shall keep the same confined or
otherwise restrained by a leash, cord, or chain at all times that said bitch is
in fact in heat.
§ 18-4. Impoundment.
Any dog found running at large or not restrained as defined by the
terms of this article shall be taken up by any law enforcement officer
duly authorized to enforce the laws of the State of Maine and the
ordinances of the Town of Bar Harbor and impounded in the shelter
designated by the Town Council as the Town Animal Shelter and there
confined in a humane manner until claimed by its owner or keeper. If
said dog is not claimed by its owner or keeper at the expiration of 10
days from the date of its impoundment, then the person in charge of
said animal shelter may give away, sell or otherwise humanely dispose
of said dog.
A.
Upon the taking up of said dog found running at large and not under
restraint, said law enforcement officer shall immediately notify the
owner or keeper of said dog. In ascertaining the owner or keeper of said
B.
§ 18-1 ADULT BUSINESSES § 18-4
7:25
§ 18-5. Barking or howling dogs.
No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which, by loud, frequent and
habitual barking, howling or yelping, shall disturb the peace of any person.1
§ 18-6. Dangerous dogs.
A dangerous dog is hereby defined to be a dog at large which shall cause
reasonable fear of bodily injury to any person by attacking or threatening to
attack such person. Any such dog is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The
owner or keeper of any dangerous dog shall keep the same confined in a
secure enclosure or on a chain or leash controlled by the owner or keeper or
competent person authorized by the owner or keeper at all times and shall
not permit such dog to be at large within the Town.
§ 18-7. Disposition of dogs which have bitten persons.
dog the law enforcement officer may rely upon the records of the Town
of Bar Harbor or any other information reasonably calculated to make
known to him the owner or keeper of said dog.
In order to claim a dog impounded under the provisions of this article,
the owner or keeper of said dog shall make known the fact of his
ownership or custody to the person in charge of the animal shelter
containing said dog and shall pay to the Town Clerk the sum of $5 per
day for each day that said dog is so confined, and upon the second
and all subsequent impoundments of the same dog the owner or keeper
shall pay the sum of $10 per day.
C.
The Town Council shall designate as the Town Animal Shelter any
veterinarian licensed under the laws of the State of Maine, humane
society or other shelter deemed by the Council suitable for this purpose
and is hereby authorized to enter into financial arrangements with the
owner or owners of any animal shelter so selected by the Town Council
for the purpose of providing said shelter. The fees provided for by this
section shall be applied first to defray the cost to the Town for confining
said dog and any surplus over and above said costs shall be placed in
the general government account.
D.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, when notified
that such dog has bitten any person or has so injured any person as to
cause abrasion of the skin, to sell or give away such dog, or to permit or
allow such dog to be taken beyond the limits of the Town, except under
the care of a licensed veterinarian. It shall be the duty of such owner or
keeper, upon receiving notice of the character aforesaid, to immediately
place such dog under confinement for a period of at least 14 days or
to deliver such dog to the Police Department. The Town Manager shall
A.
1. Editor's Note: Original § 03.01.06, Number of dogs limited, which immediately followed
this section, was deleted 5-21-2002.
§ 18-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 18-7
7:26
§ 18-8. Rabies.
§ 18-9. When dogs may be killed.
If any dangerous dog cannot be safely taken up, such dog may be slain by
any law enforcement officer duly authorized to enforce the laws of the State
of Maine and the ordinances of the Town of Bar Harbor. In all cases where
any dog which has bitten a person or caused an abrasion of the skin of any
be notified immediately by the person in charge of the death of any dog
while under confinement.
Any person having knowledge of someone being bitten by a dog may
notify the Town Manager, and the Town Manager shall cause all dog
bites referred to him to be referred to a veterinarian and his report shall
be kept on file.
B.
Any dog which shall have been bitten by another dog having or
suspected of having rabies shall be immediately confined for
observation as provided in this section.
C.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, when notified
that such dog has bitten any person or has so injured any person as to
cause abrasion of the skin, to destroy such animal without permission
from the Town Manager.
D.
Upon positive diagnosis of rabies in any dog within the Town, the
Chairman of the Council shall proclaim and invoke a Town-wide
quarantine for a period of 30 days, and upon the invoking of such
quarantine no animal shall be taken into the streets or be permitted to
be in the streets during such period of quarantine.
A.
During such period of rabies quarantine as herein described every
animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith
destroyed or, at the owner's or keeper's expense and option, shall be
treated for rabies by a licensed veterinarian or held 30 days under
quarantine by the owner or keeper in the same manner as other animals
are quarantined.
B.
In the event that there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring
during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be
extended by the Chairman of the Council.
C.
The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand
be surrendered to the Town Manager.
D.
The Town Manager shall direct the disposition of any animal found to
be infected with rabies.
E.
No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or
destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the
Town Manager.
F.
§ 18-7 ADULT BUSINESSES § 18-9
7:27
person is slain by any said law enforcement officer, whether by order of
court or otherwise, and a period of less than 15 days has elapsed since the
day on which such dog bit any person or caused an abrasion of the skin of
any person, it shall be the duty of said law enforcement officer slaying such
dog to forthwith deliver the carcass to the Chief of Police who shall forward
the carcass to the Town Manager who shall cause the same to be examined
by a veterinarian.
§ 18-10. Duty to dispose of feces. [Amended 6-3-1997]
It shall be a violation of this article for any person who owns, possesses,
or controls a dog to fail immediately to remove and dispose of any feces
left by his or her dog on any street, sidewalk, publicly owned property
or private property of another.
A.
Penalties for violations. Effective July 1, 1997, violation of this section
shall be punishable by a civil penalty not to exceed $50 for each
occurrence.
B.
Exemptions. This regulation shall not apply to a dog accompanying any
handicapped person who, by nature of his/her handicap, is physically
unable to comply with the requirements of this section.
C.
§ 18-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 18-10
7:28
ARTICLE II
Sales of Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 12-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
§ 18-11. Definitions.
The following words when used in this article, shall have the meanings
given herein:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality,
whose mission or practice is, in whole or significant part, protecting the
welfare of animals and the placement of animals in permanent homes or
with animal rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant
part, the rescue of animals and the placement of those animals in
permanent homes, and which does not obtain dogs or cats from a breeder
or broker for payment or compensation.
BREEDER — A person who maintains dogs or cats for the purpose of
breeding and selling their offspring.
BROKER — A person who transfers dogs or cats at wholesale for resale by
another.
CAT — A member of the Felis catus family.
DOG — A member of the Canis familiaris family, or resultant hybrid.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, barter, auction, give
away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — Any place or vehicle required to be licensed under 7 M.R.S.A.
§ 3933. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
§ 18-12. Retail sales restricted.
A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility, as defined in § 18-11; or
(2) An animal rescue organization, as defined in § 18-11.
A.
A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight
weeks old.
B.
Each pet shop shall maintain records sufficient to document the source
of each dog or cat the pet shop acquires, for at least one year following
the date of acquisition. Such records shall be made available,
C.
§ 18-11 ADULT BUSINESSES § 18-12
7:29
§ 18-13. Sales in public places prohibited; exceptions.
§ 18-14. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article may be enforced by any designated
representative of the Chief of Police or by any animal control officer.
§ 18-15. Violations and penalties.
Violation of this article shall be punished by a minimum penalty of $250 for
each violation. Each dog or cat offered for sale is a separate violation.
§ 18-16. Severability.
In the event that any section, subsection or portion of this article, or the
application of such section, subsection or portion of this article to any
person or circumstance, shall be declared by any competent court to be
invalid for any reason, such decision shall not be deemed to affect the
validity of any other section, subsection or portion of this article, or the
applicability of such section, subsection or portion of this article to other
persons or circumstances.
§ 18-17. When effective.
The provisions of this article shall be effective 30 days after passage.
immediately upon request, to any designated representative of the
Chief of Police or animal control officer.
Each pet shop offering dogs or cats for sale shall post, in a conspicuous
location on the cage or enclosure of each animal, a sign listing the name
of the animal care facility or animal rescue organization from which
each dog or cat in the cage or enclosure was acquired.
D.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, trade, barter, lease
or display for a commercial purpose any dog or cat on any roadside,
public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, other recreation area, flea
market or other outdoor market, or commercial or retail parking lot,
regardless of whether such access is authorized.
A.
This section shall not apply to the following:
The display or adoption of dogs or cats by an animal care facility or
an animal rescue organization, as defined in § 18-11; or
(1)
The display of dogs or cats as part of a state or county fair
exhibition, 4-H program, or similar exhibitions or educational
programs.
(2)
B.
§ 18-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 18-17
7:30
ARTICLE III
Display of Wild and Exotic Animals
[Adopted 12-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-08]
§ 18-18. Definitions.
The following words and phrases have the following meanings:
DIRECTOR — The Town Manager or his/her designee, which is the party
responsible for enforcement of this article.
DISPLAY — Any exhibition, fair, act, circus, ride, or similar undertaking in
which wild and/or exotic animals are required to perform tricks, give rides,
or participate as accompaniments for the entertainment, amusement, or
benefit of a live audience, whether or not a fee is charged.
MOBILE OR TRAVELING HOUSING FACILITY — A transporting vehicle
such as a truck, trailer or railway car, used to transport or house wild and/or
exotic animals while traveling for exhibition or other performance of those
wild and exotic animals.
TRAVELING ANIMAL ACT — Any display of wild and/or exotic animals
where such animals are transported to, from, or between locations for the
purpose of such display, in a mobile or traveling housing facility.
WILD AND/OR EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any live animal from any of the
following scientific classifications:
§ 18-19. Prohibited acts; violations and penalties.
Artiodactyla (including hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, and llamas,
but excepting cattle, swine, sheep, and goats);
A.
B. Crocodilia (including alligators and crocodiles);
C. Elephantidae (elephants);
Felidae (including tigers, lions, jaguars, leopards, cheetahs, and
cougars, or any hybrid thereof, but excluding domestic cats);
D.
E. Marsupialia (including kangaroos);
F. Nonhuman primates (including apes, monkeys, and lemurs);
G. Perissodactyla (including rhinoceroses, tapirs, and zebras);
H. Pinnipedia (including seals, sea lions, and walruses);
I. Ursidae (bears); or
J. Elasmobranchii (including nurse sharks and lemon sharks).
It shall be a violation of this article for any person, business, entity,
corporation, limited-liability company or other imilar organization to
A.
§ 18-18 ADULT BUSINESSES § 18-19
7:31
§ 18-20. Administration and enforcement.
The Director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of
the provisions of this article.
§ 18-21. When effective.
This article shall be effective 30 days after passage.
allow for the participation of a wild and/or exotic animal in a traveling
animal act in the Town of Bar Harbor.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be $500 per offense. Each
and every wild and/or exotic animal exhibited and each day exhibition
occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
§ 18-19 BAR HARBOR CODE § 18-21
7:32
Chapter 25
BEACHES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and public places — See Ch. 147. Port and harbor — See Ch. 153.
§ 25-1. Swimming area.
Any person engaging in swimming or related activities from the municipal
beach shall do so only in that area between said beach and the swimming
float, marked boundaries and life lines, said municipal beach being situated
easterly of the Municipal Pier.
§ 25-2. Vehicles and bicycles.
No person shall operate, keep or maintain or permit to be operated, kept or
maintained any vehicle of any kind or bicycle on the municipal beach which
is situated easterly of the Municipal Pier.
§ 25-3. Animals.
No person shall permit any animal owned by him or within his custody or
control to be on the municipal beach which lies easterly of the Municipal
Pier.
Chapter 31
BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Departments — See Ch. 58.
Design Review Board — See Ch. 125, Art. XIII.
Marine Resources Committee — See Ch. 170.
§ 18-21 BEACHES § 25-3
25:33

ARTICLE I
Planning Board
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 09.01 of the 1990 Code; amended
1-17-1995]
§ 31-1. Membership; term of office; vacancies. [Amended 7-11-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-05]
§ 31-2. Authority and duties.
§ 31-3. Organization; meetings; quorum. [Amended 7-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-05]
The Town Council shall appoint a Planning Board consisting of five
members. The term of office shall be for three years or such shorter
term as the Town Council may determine. Board members shall be
sworn by the Town Clerk or other person authorized to administer
oaths.
A.
When there is a permanent vacancy, the Town Council shall within 60
days of its occurrence appoint a person to serve for the unexpired
term. A vacancy shall occur upon the resignation or death of any
member, or when a member ceases to be a voting resident of the
Town, or when a member fails to attend at least 50% of all meetings
during the preceding twelve-month period, or when a member fails to
attend four consecutive regular meetings. When a vacancy occurs, the
Planning Director shall immediately advise the Town Council in writing.
The Board may recommend to the Town Council that the attendance
provision be waived for cause, in which case no vacancy will then exist
until the Town Council disapproves the recommendation.
B.
The Planning Board shall have all the authority and be subject to all
the duties set out in the provisions of the Maine Statutes relating to
municipal planning boards.
A.
The Planning Board may adopt bylaws, consistent with statutes and
ordinances, governing its deliberations. In the absence of any other
applicable rules, ordinances or statutes, proceedings of the Board shall
be governed by the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order.
B.
The Planning Board may request the Planning Department to obtain
goods and services necessary to its proper function within the limits of
appropriations made for the purpose.
C.
At the first meeting in July of each year, the Planning Board shall
organize, elect a Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary, and shall file in the
Town Clerk's office within five days from the date of its organizational
meeting the record of said meeting and the names of the Chair, Vice
Chair and Secretary. The terms of all officers shall be one year with
eligibility for re-election.
A.
§ 31-1 BEACHES § 31-3
25:35
§ 31-4. Restrictions on membership; disqualification from voting.
§ 31-5. Compensation.
The members of said Planning Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 31-6. Record of meetings.
The record of the meetings of the Planning Board shall be a public record.
The Planning Director shall file in the Town Clerk's office of the Town of
Bar Harbor, in a book kept especially for that purpose, the record of each
meeting of the Board within 30 days from the date of any meeting of the
Board to which the record pertains.
The Chair shall call at least one regular meeting of the Board each
month. No meeting of the Board shall be held without a quorum
consisting of three members. The Board shall act by majority vote of the
members present and voting.
B.
A Town Councilor may not be a member of the Board. [Amended
7-11-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-05]
A.
Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting on
a particular matter shall be decided by a majority vote of the members,
excluding the member who is being challenged.
B.
§ 31-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-6
25:36
ARTICLE II
Board of Appeals
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 09.02 of the 1990 Code; amended in its
entirety 12-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9]
§ 31-7. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691, as amended, there is
hereby established a Board of Appeals for the Town of Bar Harbor.
§ 31-8. Membership; term of office; officers; vacancies.
§ 31-9. Jurisdiction.
The Board shall have the power to hear and decide any appeal by any
person, affected directly or indirectly, from any decision, order, rule or
failure to act of any officer, board, agency or other body where such appeal
has been authorized by the Town of Bar Harbor by ordinance specifying the
precise subject matter that may be appealed to the Board and the official or
officials whose action or nonaction may be appealed to the Board.
§ 31-10. Applicability of state law.
Except to the extent that they are inconsistent with the provisions of this
article, all the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691, as amended, shall apply
to and govern the organization, procedures and jurisdiction of the Board of
Appeals.
The Board shall consist of five members and one associate member, all
of whom shall be residents of Bar Harbor. The members and associate
member of the Board shall be appointed by the Town Council for terms
of three years. The associate member may not hold any office on the
Board. At the first meeting of the Board in July of each year, the
members elect one of their number Chair to preside at all meetings
of the Board; one of their number Vice Chair, to serve as Chair in the
absence of the Chair; and one of their number Secretary. A person
shall forfeit their membership on said Board if they fail to attend three
meetings of the Board in any one calendar year without being excused
by the Board.
A.
When a member is unable to act because of interest, physical
incapacity, or any other reason satisfactory to the Chair, the Chair shall
designate the associate member to act in their stead. When designated
by the Chair to act, the associate member shall have all the authority
and responsibility of a member.
B.
In the event that a vacancy occurs by nonacceptance of appointment,
resignation, abandonment, death, disability, incompetency, forfeiture or
failure to qualify after written demand from the Town Council; the Town
Council shall appoint a resident of Bar Harbor to fill the unexpired
term.
C.
§ 31-7 BEACHES § 31-10
25:37

ARTICLE III
Conservation Commission
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 09.03 of the 1990 Code]
§ 31-11. Establishment; membership; purpose.
There is hereby established a Conservation Commission for the Town of Bar
Harbor to consist of seven members to be appointed by the Town Council
pursuant to the authority provided in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3261, as amended.
It is the intent of the Town of Bar Harbor to establish a Conservation
Commission in order to maintain or enhance the conservation of natural or
scenic resources, to protect natural streams or water supplies, to promote
conservation of swamps, wetlands, beaches or tidal marshes, to enhance
the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife
preserves, nature reservations or sanctuaries or other open areas or open
spaces, to effect or enhance public recreation opportunities, to preserve
historic sites, to implement the plan of development adopted by the
Planning Commission of the municipality, and to promote orderly urban or
suburban development.
§ 31-12. Appointment; term of office.
Each member of the Conservation Commission shall be appointed by the
Town Council for a three-year term, except that with respect to the initial
appointments, two members shall be appointed for a one-year term, two
members shall be appointed for a two-year term and three members shall
be appointed for a three-year term.
§ 31-13. Powers and duties.
The Conservation Commission shall conduct research, in conjunction
with the Planning Board, if any, into the local land areas and shall seek
to coordinate the activities of conservation bodies organized for similar
purposes and may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps,
charts, plans and pamphlets which in its judgment it deems necessary.
It shall keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned,
within the municipality, including open marsh lands, swamps and other
wetlands, for the purpose of obtaining information pertinent to proper
utilization, protection, development or use of such open areas and may
recommend to the municipal officers or any municipal body or board,
or any body politic or public agency of the State of Maine, a program
for the better utilization, protection, development or use of such areas,
which may include the acquisition of conservation easements. The
Conservation Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and shall make an annual report to the municipality to be
published as part of the Annual Municipal Report.
A.
With the approval of the Town by vote of any Special or Annual Town
Meeting, the Commission may acquire land or any interest therein in
the name of the municipality for any purpose set forth in 30-A M.R.S.A.
B.
§ 31-11 BEACHES § 31-13
25:39
§ 31-14. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet every month unless it agrees to meet more
frequently. Except when otherwise provided by vote of the Commission, all
meetings shall be conducted by Robert's Rules of Order.
§ 31-15. Voting and quorum.
The Commission's decision shall be made by a vote of the majority of the
members present and voting provided a quorum is present. A majority of
the members appointed and serving on the Commission shall constitute a
quorum.
§ 3264, as amended, and may accept gifts of land, money or easements
for conservation purposes.
The Commission shall, prior to making any recommendations pursuant
to this section, submit its recommendations to the Planning Board at
least 30 days in advance.
C.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to conflict with or usurp
any duties, powers or functions of the existing Parks and Recreation
Committee as set forth in § 31-23 of the Town of Bar Harbor Code.
D.
§ 31-13 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-15
25:40
ARTICLE IV
Harbor Committee
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 10.04 of the 1990 Code; amended
8-10-1993]
§ 31-16. Appointment. [Amended 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-05]
The Town Council shall appoint a committee of 11 individuals familiar with
the harbor and its activities, all of whom shall be Bar Harbor residents. This
committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council with respect
to harbor management.
§ 31-17. Powers and duties. [Amended 10-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-05]
The Harbor Committee shall:
§ 31-18. Term of office.
Each member shall be appointed for a three-year term, except that the
persons initially appointed to the seats created in 1993 shall be appointed
to terms of one year.
Assist in the planning, development and establishment of a policy for
the harbor area.
A.
Prepare a plan for the waterfront at 121 Eden Street, that may include
an international ferry terminal, recreational marina, tendering facility,
commercial dock, all-tide launching ramp, transportation hub,
information and education center and parking facility and recreational
areas.
B.
Be organized with a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary and shall
keep minutes, with copies of said minutes being provided to the Town
Clerk.
C.
Assist the Harbor Master in the resolution of conflicts which may
arise as a result of harbor rules and regulations regarding the use of
the harbor and its facilities and establish an appeals process for this
purpose.
D.
Recommend rules and regulations, including all fees, for use of the
harbor.
E.
F. Review the activities of the Harbor Master.
G. Review the Harbor Master's assignments of mooring locations.
Provide an annual report and other reports as requested to the Town
Council and Town Manager.
H.
§ 31-16 BEACHES § 31-19
25:41
§ 31-19. Meetings. [Amended 10-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-04]
The Committee shall meet a minimum of four times a year, one of which
shall be for organizational purposes. Except when otherwise provided by
vote of the Committee, all meetings shall be conducted by Robert's Rules of
Order.
§ 31-20. Voting.
The Committee's decision shall be made by vote of a majority of the
members present and voting, provided a quorum is present.
§ 31-21. Quorum.
A majority of the members appointed and serving on the Committee shall
constitute a quorum.
§ 31-19 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-21
25:42
ARTICLE V
Parks and Recreation Committee
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 12.01 of the 1990 Code; amended
9-5-1995; 10-5-1999; 8-15-2000]
§ 31-22. Appointment. [Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4;
8-5-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-02]
The Town Council shall appoint a committee of five individuals, including
one representative from the YMCA, and one of whom may be a Town
Councilor, who are familiar with the Town’s parks and related recreational
activities. All members shall be Bar Harbor residents, except the YMCA
representative, who may or may not be a resident.
§ 31-23. Powers and duties.
The Parks and Recreation Committee shall:
§ 31-24. Term of office.
Each member shall be appointed for a three-year term. All terms shall
expire in June.
§ 31-25. Meetings.
The Committee shall meet every month unless the Committee agrees to
meet more frequently. Except when otherwise provided by vote of the
Committee, all meetings shall be conducted by Robert's Rules of Order.
Act in an advisory capacity to the Town Council and Town Manager in
all matters relating to the development and management of the Town's
parks and recreational facilities.
A.
Each July, elect a Chairman, Vice Chairman and Secretary, none of
whom shall be a Town Councilor, and shall keep minutes, with copies
of said minutes being provided to the Town Clerk. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-4]
B.
Provide an annual report and other reports as requested to the Town
Council and Town Manager.
C.
Make recommendations for the use, maintenance, improvement and
development of Glen Mary Park, Park Street Playground, Athletic Field,
Grant Park, the Village Green, Agamont Park and the Town Beach and
such other recreational facilities and areas as the Town may acquire.
D.
Approve applications for special event permits, as provided by § 144-25.
[Added 3-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
E.
§ 31-22 BEACHES § 31-26
25:43
§ 31-26. Voting and quorum.
The Committee's decision shall be made by a vote of a majority of the
members present and voting provided a quorum is present. A majority of
the members appointed and serving on the Committee shall constitute a
quorum.
§ 31-26 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-26
25:44
ARTICLE VI
Parking and Traffic Committee
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 14.08 of the 1990 Code]
§ 31-27. Creation; membership; terms of office. [Amended
11-20-2001; 5-1-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01]
There is hereby created a Parking and Traffic Committee, the membership
of which shall be the current Police Chief, Fire Chief, Public Works Director,
and Deputy Clerk as Secretary, together with five members of the
community at large, at least two of whom shall be business persons in the
community. The Town Council shall appoint the at-large members of said
Committee for terms of two years.
§ 31-28. Powers and duties.
The Parking and Traffic Committee shall, at the request of the Town Council
or on its own initiative, make recommendations to the Town Council
regarding amendment of Chapter 194, Vehicles and Traffic, of this Code and
other parking and traffic matters.
§ 31-29. Organization; meetings.
§ 31-30. Vacancies.
When there is a permanent vacancy among the at-large members of the
Parking and Traffic Committee, the Town Council shall, within 60 days of
its occurrence, appoint a person to serve for the unexpired term. A vacancy
shall occur upon the resignation or death of any member or when any
member fails to attend at least 75% of all meetings during the preceding
twelve-month period. When a vacancy occurs, the Chairman of the
Committee shall immediately so advise the Town Council in writing. The
Committee may recommend to the Town Council that the attendance
provision be waived for cause, in which case no vacancy will then exist until
the Town Council rejects the recommendation.
The Parking and Traffic Committee shall meet within 20 days of the
date of the appointment of new members and organize by electing a
Chairman and Vice Chairman and shall file in the Town Clerk's office
within five days from the date of its organizational meeting the record
of and names of its officers. The terms of all officers shall be one
year with eligibility for re-election. [Amended 5-1-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-01]
A.
Meetings of the Parking and Traffic Committee shall be held on the call
of the Chairman or as otherwise provided by the Committee.
B.
No meeting of the Parking and Traffic Committee shall be held without
a quorum of five members. The Committee shall act by majority vote
of the members present and voting and shall follow the most recent
edition of Robert's Rules of Order.
C.
§ 31-27 BEACHES § 31-30
25:45

ARTICLE VII
Board of Assessment Review
[Adopted 2-19-1991]
§ 31-31. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a Board of Assessment Review in
the Town of Bar Harbor to handle appeals pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 843(1).
§ 31-32. Membership; term of office.
The Board of Assessment Review shall consist of five members, all of
whom shall be residents of Bar Harbor. Members shall be appointed by the
Town Council for terms of three years, except upon initial appointment two
members shall be appointed for terms of three years, two members shall be
appointed for terms of two years, and one member shall be appointed for
a term of one year. All members shall be sworn by the Town Clerk or other
person authorized to administer oaths.
§ 31-33. Vacancies.
When there is a permanent vacancy in the Board of Assessment Review, the
Town Council shall, within 60 days of its occurrence, appoint a person to
serve the remainder of the unexpired term. A vacancy shall occur upon the
resignation or death of any member, when a member ceases to be a resident
of the Town of Bar Harbor, or when a member fails to attend at least 75% of
all meetings during the preceding 12 months.
§ 31-34. Compensation.
Members of the Board of Assessment Review shall not receive
compensation for their services.
§ 31-35. Organization.
The Board of Assessment Review shall meet within 10 days of its date of
appointment and elect from its membership a Chairman, Vice Chairman
and Secretary and shall file with the Town Clerk within five days of
said meeting the record thereof, including the names of its officers. The
terms of all officers shall be one year with eligibility for re-election.
A.
The Chairman shall preside at all meetings. The Vice Chairman shall
preside at meetings in the absence of the Chairman. The Secretary
shall keep minutes of all meetings. The Board may fill any vacancies
of officers during the year for the remainder of a term. The members
present at a meeting may elect a Chairman Pro Tem for said meeting
in the absence of the Chairman and Vice Chairman and may elect a
Secretary Pro Tem for said meeting in the absence of the Secretary.
B.
§ 31-31 BEACHES § 31-36
25:47
§ 31-36. Meetings.
Following its organizational meeting, the Board of Assessment Review shall
meet on an as-needed basis and always within 30 days after the Town Office
receives an appeal pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 843.
§ 31-37. Quorum and rules of order.
§ 31-38. Powers and duties.
The Board of Assessment Review shall have all of the powers and duties
given to it by the Constitution and laws of the State of Maine, by the Charter
of the Town of Bar Harbor and by this article.
§ 31-39. through § 31-40. (Reserved)
No meeting of the Board of Assessment Review shall be held without
the presence of a quorum, which shall consist of at least three
members. The Board shall act by a majority vote of the members
present and voting.
A.
All meetings of the Board shall be conducted in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 2691(3) and in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order
unless the Board shall adopt its own rules which shall supersede
Robert's Rules of Order to the extent they are contrary to the same. All
meetings shall be electronically or stenographically recorded.
B.
§ 31-36 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-39
25:48
ARTICLE VIII
Cruise Ship Committee
[Adopted 1-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01]
§ 31-41. Creation, mission and goals. [Amended 3-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-02]
There is hereby created a Cruise Ship Committee, with a mission to advise
the Town Council on all matters related to cruise ships visiting Bar Harbor.
To further this mission, the Committee shall:
§ 31-42. Membership composition. [Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-02; 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01; 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-06]
The Committee shall be composed of 17 members, including one member
of the Town Council, the Harbor Master, the Planning Director, the Police
Chief, one representative from the maritime industry, two representatives
from downtown businesses, two residents at large, one representative from
the Bar Harbor Chamber of Commerce, one representative from
CruiseMaine, one member with working knowledge of the cruise ship
industry in the State of Maine, one representative from a shore excursion
company serving the cruise ship industry, one representative from the taxi
tours industry serving cruise ship passengers, one representative from an
entity receiving cruise ship tenders, one representative of the scientific
community and one representative of Acadia National Park.
§ 31-43. (Reserved)2
§ 31-44. Appointment, resignation and terms of office.
Conduct a yearly review of the cruise season to identify operational and
environmental issues.
A.
Conduct a yearly review of passenger service fees, port development
fees, and the use and allocation of these funds.
B.
C. Maintain and further industry relations and communications.
Provide a yearly report to the Town Council and cruise industry on goals
in Subsections A through C above.
D.
At the request of the Town Council or on its own initiative, make
recommendations to the Town Council regarding cruise ship visitation.
E.
A. Terms.
2. Editor's Note: Former § 31-43, Resource group composition, as amended 3-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-02, was repealed 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02. See now § 31-42, Membership
composition.
§ 31-41 BEACHES § 31-44
25:49
The terms of the Harbor Master, Planning Director and Police
Chief shall continue as long as they hold their respective office.
[Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
(1)
All non-Town official members shall serve terms of three years,
except that the initial term of the representative of Acadia National
Park shall expire June 30, 2014. [Amended 3-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-02; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
(2)
The terms of all members, other than Town officials, shall expire on
July 31. [Amended 3-7-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-01]
(3)
Organizational representatives. Nominations for representatives of the
Bar Harbor Chamber of Commerce, CruiseMaine and Acadia National
Park shall be solicited from those respective organizations. [Amended
6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
Organizations shall forward the names of their nominees to the
Town Clerk, who shall refer them to the Town Council for its review
and consideration.
(1)
The Town Council may appoint a member from either the
nominations received or such other individual as the Council feels
would adequately represent the interest of that organization.
(2)
B.
Residency. Members need not be residents of the Town of Bar Harbor.
[Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
C.
Resignations. Members wishing to resign from the Committee shall
submit their resignation to the Town Clerk, who shall forward the
resignation to the Town Council for acceptance. As a courtesy, the
resigning member should also inform staff and the Committee Chair.
D.
Attendance. A person shall forfeit their membership on the Committee
if they fail to attend 75% of all meetings in any twelve-month period.
The Committee may vote to recommend to the Town Council that the
attendance provision be waived for cause, in which case no vacancy
will then exist until the Town Council rejects the recommendation.
[Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
E.
Vacancies.
When there is a vacancy among the non-Town official members of
the Committee, the Town Council shall appoint a person to serve
for the unexpired term.
(1)
A vacancy shall occur upon the resignation or death of any member
or when any member fails to meet the attendance requirement
above.
(2)
When a vacancy occurs, the Chair should immediately advise the
Town Clerk in writing.
(3)
F.
§ 31-44 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-45
25:50
§ 31-45. Organization.
§ 31-46. Organization representatives.
It shall be the duty of each member representing an organization to serve
as its liaison, keep them informed of Committee progress and involve them
in decisionmaking.
§ 31-47. Transparency; notice; agendas.
Election of officers. At its first scheduled meeting, the Committee shall
organize itself by electing a Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary. Thereafter,
elections shall be held each July for all positions.
A.
Duties of the Chair.
When present, the Chair shall preside at all meetings of the
Committee.
(1)
The role of the Chair is to facilitate discussion and seek consensus
of the Committee in order to fulfill the Committee mission.
(2)
The Chair shall serve as the primary point of contact for staff for
the coordination of follow-up, Committee and staff assignments and
the assembly of agendas.
(3)
The Chair, or his/her designee, shall present progress reports to the
Town Council as requested.
(4)
B.
Duties of the Vice Chair.
In the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall perform all duties
of the Chair.
(1)
C.
Duties of the Secretary.
The Secretary shall keep a faithful record of all meetings, including
attendance and any action taken, and provide a signed, true copy
of the minutes to the Planning Department, which shall forward
copies to the Town Council.
(1)
In the absence of the Chair and the Vice Chair, the Secretary shall
serve in the capacity of Chair and may appoint a Secretary Pro
Tem.
(2)
D.
Right to know. Discussion of Committee business by five or more
members outside of a properly posted meeting is illegal under the
Maine Freedom of Access Act3 and is forbidden.
A.
B. Public notice.
3. Editor's Note: See 1 M.R.S.A. § 401 et seq.
§ 31-45 BEACHES § 31-47
25:51
§ 31-48. Procedure.
All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public and
notice thereof shall be given as provided below.
(1)
Notice of the meetings of the Committee shall be so given that
all members shall have reasonable opportunity to make plans to
attend.
(2)
Agendas.
Regular meetings shall be conducted utilizing the following order
of business:
(a) Call to order.
(b) Approval of minutes.
(c) Adoption of agenda.
(d) Regular business.
(e) Matters for next meeting.
(f) Date/time/location for next meeting.
(g) Adjournment.
(1)
The Chair, in consultation with the Planning Director, shall draft the
agenda.
(2)
Copies of the agenda shall be e-mailed to the Committee, Town
Clerk, Town Council and the local press at least five business days
prior to each meeting.
(3)
The agenda shall be posted in the Municipal Offices at least five
days prior to a meeting.
(4)
Items for the agenda shall be submitted to the Planning Director by
12:00 noon six days prior to the meeting.
(5)
Once the agenda is posted, no items may be added to the agenda,
except that by a two-thirds vote of the Committee members present
and voting, the Committee may add items where:
Significant inconvenience may result if the matter is
postponed; or
(a)
The routine nature of the request is expected to be of little
public interest.
(b)
(6)
C.
Robert's Rules. Officers and members shall conduct all meetings as set
forth in the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise
provided by ordinance or in the committee bylaws.
A.
§ 31-47 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-48
25:52
§ 31-49. Bylaws.
Quorum.
A quorum of the Committee shall consist of nine members.
[Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02]
(1)
Once a quorum is established, passage of a motion shall require the
affirmative vote of a majority of those members present and voting.
(2)
B.
Meeting schedule. Meetings shall be conducted quarterly at a
minimum, with the schedule of meetings approved by the Committee.
The Planning Director shall schedule the first meeting of the Committee
at a time convenient for a majority of the members.
C.
Staff support. The Planning Department shall function as the primary
professional and administrative support to the Committee.
D.
A. Bylaws may be adopted and amended only by the Town Council.
The Committee may suggest bylaws to the Town Council for its
consideration.
B.
§ 31-48 BEACHES § 31-49
25:53

ARTICLE IX
Age Friendly Committee
[Adopted 11-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
§ 31-50. Mission.
There is hereby created the Age Friendly Committee, with a mission to
provide services and advocacy that enable all residents of Bar Harbor to live
in their homes for as long as possible as well as provide programs geared to
keeping older adults active and engaged in the community.
§ 31-51. Appointment.
§ 31-52. Meetings.
The Committee shall elect a Chair, Vice Chair and Secretary at the first
regular meeting of each year for a one year term. The Chair shall call
a meeting at least once a month unless there are no agenda items. The
Secretary shall take minutes at each meeting and send approved minutes
to the Town Clerk. A quorum is four members of the Committee. Meeting
agendas shall be posted on the bulletin board in the Municipal Building
lobby and on the Town's website.
§ 31-53. Duties and responsibilities.
The Committee will:
A. The Town Council shall appoint Bar Harbor residents to the Committee.
The Committee shall consist of seven members with one member being
a Town Councilor. There will also be two alternate members that serve
one-year terms and do not have voting rights.
B.
The term of each resident member shall be for three years, except
the initial appointments which shall be two appointments for one year;
two appointments for two years and two appointments for three years.
The Council representative shall be appointed annually. All newly
designated committee members are to be sworn in by the Town Clerk.
[Amended 1-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-03]
C.
A. Identify needs of residents in the community.
Provide opportunity for public input into strategic planning and
delivery of services for all citizens.
B.
C. Recommend to Town Council services to fill those needs.
D. Pursue outside funding sources to advance the work of the Committee.
Explore ways to make Bar Harbor Age Friendly in the following eight
areas:
E.
§ 31-50 BEACHES § 31-53
25:55
(1) Transportation.
(2) Housing.
(3) Outdoor spaces and building.
(4) Social participation.
(5) Respect and social inclusion.
(6) Civic participation and employment.
(7) Communication and information.
(8) Community support and health services.
F. Provide an annual report to the Town Council.
§ 31-53 BAR HARBOR CODE § 31-53
25:56
Chapter 36
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical installations — See Ch. 70.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 85.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 90.
Land use — See Ch. 125.
Sewers — See Ch. 165.
Water — See Ch. 201.
§ 36-1. Administration and enforcement of Maine Uniform Building
and Energy Code.
Effective September 28, 2011, the Town of Bar Harbor applies and enforces
the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code ("M.U.B.E.C."), as required
by 10 M.R.S.A. § 9724. The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town of Bar
Harbor shall serve as the building official as defined in 25 M.R.S.A. § 2371
and shall be responsible for issuing building permits and certificates of
occupancy. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for
inspecting all permitted construction for compliance with all components
of the M.U.B.E.C., as such components may be revised from time to time
by the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board. Administration and
enforcement of the M.U.B.E.C., including permits, fees, violations, penalties
and appeals, shall be in accordance with Chapter 125, Land Use.
§ 36-2. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be
held invalid or unconstitutional or if the application of this chapter to any
person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions
shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses,
and phrases of this chapter.
§ 36-3. Ongoing action.
Nothing in this chapter, or in the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code
hereby adopted, shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending
in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy
of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 31-53 BEACHES § 36-3
25:57
Chapter 40
BUSES, LIMOUSINES, TAXICABS, PEDICABS AND
CARRIAGES FOR HIRE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 194.
§ 40-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUS — A motor vehicle designed for carrying more than 15 persons,
including the operator.
CARRIAGE — Any flatbed wagon, hansom, hack, buggy, wagon or other
means of transportation that is drawn by a horse.
CARRIAGE FOR HIRE — Any carriage, as defined above, which is used for
hire.
COACHMAN — Any person assisting the driver either on the ground or on
the carriage and who is capable of controlling the horse(s) in the event the
driver is incapacitated or away from the carriage.
CRUISING — The driving of a bus, limousine or taxicab on the streets,
alleys, or public places of the Town of Bar Harbor in search of or soliciting
prospective passengers for hire.
DRIVER — The same meaning as "operator."
LIMOUSINE — A motor vehicle for hire, with a driver, that is used for the
transportation of passengers and that has a seating capacity of at least five
and no more than 14 persons behind the driver.
OPERATE — To drive, cause to move, steer or exercise control over a
vehicle.
OPERATOR — An individual who drives, causes to move, steers or exercises
control over a vehicle.
OWNER — An individual, corporation, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, fiduciary, trust, estate or any other legal or commercial entity
holding title to a vehicle or having exclusive right to the use of a vehicle.
PEDICAB — A vehicle used for hire with a seating area for passengers, used
to transport passengers and powered primarily by human power, with or
without motorized assistance.
TAXICAB — A sedan, station wagon or minivan motor vehicle used for hire,
with a driver, that has a seating capacity of fewer than five persons behind
the driver.
§ 36-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 40-1
25:58
VEHICLE — A device, whether motorized or nonmotorized, for conveyance
of persons or property on a way.
§ 40-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or association or corporation to
operate or cause to be operated a bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage for hire
or pedicab in the Town of Bar Harbor without having first obtained therefor
a license as hereinafter provided.
§ 40-3. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter relating to licensing shall not apply to owners
or operators of buses, limousines, taxicabs, carriages for hire or pedicabs:
§ 40-4. Application for and issuance of license.
A. Which provide service for no charge;
Which are used for the transportation of passengers for hire in
interstate or intrastate commerce, or both, provided that the owners or
operators thereof hold certificates of public convenience and necessity
or permits issued by the Maine Public Utilities Commission;
B.
Which are used for public transit services operated under contract
with the Maine Department of Transportation in accordance with an
approved biennial operations plan; or
C.
Carrying passengers for hire from other jurisdictions into the Town;
provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for the operator or driver
of any such bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab to
accept any new local passengers within the Town of Bar Harbor for any
destination within said Town without first having obtained a license as
hereinafter provided.
D.
Application for a license to operate a bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage
for hire or pedicab in the Town of Bar Harbor shall be filed by the owner
of the vehicle(s) with the Town Clerk upon forms provided by the Town
of Bar Harbor.
A.
The Town Council shall approve an application for a bus, limousine,
taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab license after determination that
the applicant is fit to perform such public transportation.
B.
Upon approval by the Town Council, the Town Clerk shall issue a license
to the owner or operator provided he/she shall comply with the further
conditions of this chapter and upon payment of a license fee as set from
time to time by the Town Council.
C.
All licenses so issued shall expire on the last day of the first April
following their issuance.
D.
§ 40-1 BEACHES § 40-5
25:59
§ 40-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Enforcement authority. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
by the Bar Harbor Police Department and may also be enforced by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
A.
Violations. Each violation of this chapter following a warning or a
citation issued by a police officer or the Code Enforcement Officer shall
constitute a separate violation.
B.
Warning for first violation. If a licensee has not had a warning or a
citation for violation of this chapter or any previous version of this
chapter within the immediately preceding 12 months, a police officer
or the Code Enforcement Officer, upon concluding that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this chapter has
occurred or is occurring, shall, orally or in writing, warn the licensee
or the licensee's agent and shall inform the licensee or the licensee's
agent of the steps necessary to correct the violation. The official issuing
the warning shall endeavor to create a written record of the warning
and to notify the licensee in writing of the warning and the corrective
actions requested; provided, however, that a failure to do so shall not
prevent subsequent enforcement actions consistent with this chapter.
C.
Citations for subsequent violations. If a licensee has had a warning
or a citation for violation of this chapter or any previous version of
this chapter within the immediately preceding 12 months, a police
officer or the Code Enforcement Officer, upon concluding that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this chapter has
occurred or is occurring, shall issue the licensee a citation to appear
in the Maine District Court to answer therefor. The official issuing the
citation shall also provide a copy of the citation to the Town Council for
action consistent with this chapter.
Court action. A violation of this chapter within 12 months after
a licensee or the licensee's agent has been warned about any
other violation of this chapter or within 12 months after a previous
conviction for violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil
offense. The penalty for the conviction of a first violation in any
twelve-month period shall be a fine of no less than $100 and no
more than $1,000. The penalty for the conviction of a second
or subsequent violation in any twelve-month period shall be no
less than $100 more than the penalty assessed for the previous
conviction but no more than $1,000. Any penalties assessed
hereunder shall inure to the benefit of the Town of Bar Harbor.
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and
may be subject to abatement by a restraining order or injunction
issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, irrespective of whether
a citation has been issued or a civil penalty has been sought.
(1)
(2) Town Council action.
D.
§ 40-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 40-5
25:60
§ 40-6. Driver's license required.
No person shall drive a bus, limousine or taxicab unless duly licensed by the
State of Maine.
§ 40-7. Inspection of vehicles.
Every owner of a bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab shall
present such vehicle to the Chief of Police or his/her designee for inspection
before placing it in service and at least annually immediately prior to
obtaining a license as herein provided. Any bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage
for hire or pedicab which is deemed, after such inspection, to be unsafe
or unsuitable for service may be immediately ordered out of service by the
Chief of Police until it shall be made safe and suitable for such service.
No bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab that is subject to
this chapter shall be used to provide public transportation unless the owner
thereof has proof of inspection as required by this section.
§ 40-8. Transfer of license.
No license to operate a bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab
may be sold, as-signed, mortgaged or otherwise transferred.
Upon being informed that a licensee has been issued a citation
for violation of this chapter, the Town Council shall provide
written notice to the licensee, either in hand or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, that in not less than seven
days after the date of the notice the Council shall conduct a
public hearing to consider whether the licensee's license shall
be suspended or revoked. Neither the failure of any licensee
actually to receive notice nor the licensee's refusal to accept
certified mail shall necessitate another hearing or invalidate
any action taken by the Council at such hearing.
(a)
Following a hearing the Council, by a preponderance of the
evidence, shall make a de-termination of whether the licensee
has committed a violation of this chapter. If the Council finds
the licensee has committed a violation within 12 months after
the licensee or the licensee's agent has been warned about any
other violation of this chapter but that within 12 months no
other violation of this chapter has been found by a court or
the Council to have occurred, it shall suspend the licensee's
license for a period of 30 days from the date of the hearing. If
the Council finds that the licensee has committed a violation
within 12 months after any other violation has been found by
a court or the Council to have occurred, it shall revoke the
licensee's license for a period of one year from the date of the
hearing.
(b)
§ 40-5 BEACHES § 40-9
25:61
§ 40-9. Solicitation of passengers.
No bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab owner, operator
or driver shall by him-self or by another under his/her direction stand or
remain in any public street, sidewalk, or park or in any doorways or other
place adjacent to a public street, sidewalk, or park within the Town of Bar
Harbor and by calls, cries, ringing of bells, or the operation of any noisemaking,
-producing or -amplifying device or by any other vocal or physical
means solicit passersby or attract their attention to the vehicle.
§ 40-10. Receipt and discharge of passengers.
Drivers of buses, limousines, taxicabs, carriages for hire or pedicabs shall
not receive or dis-charge passengers in the roadway but shall pull to the
extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge
passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be
discharged at either side of the roadway, in the absence of a sidewalk.
Owners or operators of vehicles required to obtain a license under § 40-2
shall not use designated loading zones to receive or discharge passengers.
§ 40-11. Additional passengers.
No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in a taxicab,
carriage for hire or pedicab unless the person or persons first employing
the taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab consent to the acceptance of an
additional passenger or passengers.
§ 40-12. Refusal to carry passengers.
No operator shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons,
upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the
provisions of this chapter to do so; provided, however that the operator of
a pedicab may refuse to convey a person or persons if he/she reasonably
judges that he/she is physically unable to transport such person or persons
or if he/she determines that he/she cannot practicably travel the distance
requested.
§ 40-13. Cruising.
No driver shall cruise in search of passengers within the corporate limits of
the Town of Bar Harbor.
§ 40-14. Designation of parking spaces.
The Town Council may designate, from time to time, by an order of the
Council, certain parking spaces to be used during specific hours and
between specific dates exclusively for the parking of buses, limousines,
taxicabs, carriages for hire or pedicabs. Fees for such exclusive use, as well
as regulations, may be set by the Town Council from time to time, if deemed
necessary in the public interest. Said fees, if charged, shall be in addition to
those annual license fees as set forth in § 40-4 above.
§ 40-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 40-15
25:62
§ 40-15. Temporary parking.
Section 40-14 above shall not be construed to limit the Police Chief's
authority to designate temporary parking spaces for large vehicles, as set
forth in Chapter 194, Vehicles and Traffic, § 194-21 of this Code.
§ 40-16. Certificate of insurance required.
No license shall be issued to operate any bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage
for hire or pedicab until the owner of said vehicle has filed with the Town
Clerk a certificate from a reputable insurance agency showing that the
vehicle is insured for the period of the license covering liability for injuries
to persons and property damage resulting from the use and operation of
such vehicle. Said insurance or insurance coverage shall be issued for a
principal sum sufficient to provide indemnity for personal injury or property
damage in at least the minimum amount required by the State of Maine. In
the case of carriages for hire and pedicabs, such insurance shall be in the
minimum amount required by the State of Maine for passenger vehicles. No
bus, limousine, taxicab, carriage for hire or pedicab that is subject to this
chapter shall be used to provide public transportation unless it is covered
by insurance as required by this section.
§ 40-17. Operation.
§ 40-18. Additional Carriage-for-Hire regulations.
Public ways only. Vehicles subject to this chapter shall be operated only
on and within public ways and not on or within sidewalks or public
parks.
A.
Pedicabs and carriages for hire subject to traffic regulations. Pedicabs
and carriages for hire shall be subject to all state and local traffic
regulations and ordinances that apply to the operation of motor
vehicles.
B.
Pedicabs and carriages for hire not to interfere with pedestrians or
motorized vehicles. No pedicab or carriage for hire shall be operated in
any manner that unreasonably obstructs the flow of motorized vehicles
or pedestrian traffic or that otherwise endangers public safety. A police
officer of the Town of Bar Harbor shall have the right to prohibit
pedicabs and carriages for hire from routes or public ways where, in
the opinion of such officer, the operation of pedicabs and carriages for
hire on such routes or public ways will present a threat to the safety
of the operator or passengers or to other users of the routes or public
ways or will unreasonably interfere with the passage of pedestrians or
motor vehicles. In addition, when necessary for public safety or the free
flow of pedestrians or motor vehicles, a police officer may at any time
order the operator of a pedicab or carriage for hire to move along, pull
over, make way or temporarily discontinue the use of a particular way
or route.
C.
§ 40-15 BEACHES § 40-18
25:63
Operation:
Carriages for hire may be operated only on ways that have a speed
limit of 35 miles per hour or less, except to cross intersections or
in accordance with an exception permit issued by the Police Chief.
(1)
In addition, carriages for hire may be operated only on ways
approved by the Police Chief, although an exception permit may
be obtained from the Chief for special events such as weddings,
funerals or special occasions.
(2)
Every carriage shall be driven with caution and due care for the
safety of others in conformance with all applicable traffic laws, and
always with the horse(s) under complete control.
(3)
Drivers shall not permit a horse to pull a carriage at a speed faster
than a trot, except in an emergency situation.
(4)
Drivers shall not leave a carriage, except for brief periods of less
than five minutes while a coachman holds the horse(s) in place.
(5)
Drivers shall not use a cell phone while in a carriage unless there
are no passengers on board, the carriage is parked, and the
coachman is holding the horse(s) in place.
(6)
Carriage owners and drivers must treat urine with water, wood
shavings or a chemical deodorizing solution (Sweet PDZ, or equal)
as well as remove any manure from the street, as soon as
reasonably practicable.
(7)
Carriage owners or drivers shall not willfully impede the normal
flow of motor vehicle traffic on any Town street. Carriages are
required to pull promptly to the nearest curb when more than two
vehicles are unable to safely pass or continue in the normal flow of
traffic.
(8)
Carriages, when in motion, shall be operated only in the right-most
traffic lane on any street, except when making a left-hand turn.
(9)
No carriage owner or driver shall allow any passenger to ride on
any part of the carriage while in motion except seated inside the
carriage.
(10)
A.
Equipment and maintenance. Every carriage shall:
Be maintained in a clean, sanitary and safe mechanical condition
and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers;
(1)
Be equipped with two operational red taillights, having a minimum
surface area of six square inches, which shall be illuminated during
the period between sunset and sunrise;
(2)
B.
§ 40-18 BAR HARBOR CODE § 40-18
25:64
Chapter 46
CABLE TELEVISION
Be equipped with lights that will emit to the front and side, light
visible from a distance of 500 feet, which shall be illuminated
during the period between sunset and sunrise;
(3)
Have attached to the rear of the carriage a slow-moving vehicle
reflective triangle approved by the Maine Department of
Transportation;
(4)
Be equipped with an effective manure-catching device for each
horse;
(5)
Be equipped with an effective foot brake in working order, either
friction or hydraulic;
(6)
Have the carriage owner's name, address and phone number
posted on the interior of the carriage so it is clearly visible to the
occupants;
(7)
Have a current certificate of insurance in the carriage at all times,
which shall be shown to any police officer upon request.
(8)
Care of horses.
No driver shall place a horse into service that is not fit for such
service.
(1)
For each horse placed in service, the carriage owner shall possess
a certificate of soundness issued within the previous 12 months by
a veterinarian licensed within the State of Maine and shall show
that certificate to any police officer upon request.
(2)
Each horse shall have its hooves maintained in an appropriate
condition for street surfaces.
(3)
No horse shall be subjected to any condition or treatment which
impairs its health or physical condition.
(4)
C.
§ 40-18 CABLE TELEVISION § 40-18
46:65

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 46-1. Title; when effective.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Bar Harbor Cable
Communications Regulatory Ordinance" and, pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3008(2) it shall become effective immediately upon adoption.
§ 46-2. Findings and purpose.
The Town of Bar Harbor finds that the development of cable television
systems has the potential of greatly benefiting and having a positive
impact on the people of Bar Harbor. Cable technology is rapidly
changing, and cable is expected to play an essential role as part of the
Town's basic infrastructure. Cable television systems extensively make
use of scarce and valuable public rights-of-way, in a manner different
from the way in which the general public uses them, and in a manner
reserved primarily for those that provide services to the public, such as
utility companies. The Town finds that public convenience, safety, and
general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers
vested in the Town or such persons as the Town so designates to protect
the public and to ensure that any franchise granted is operated in the
public interest.
A.
In light of the foregoing, the following goals and the state policies set
forth at 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3008(1), among others, underlie the provisions
set forth in this chapter:
(1) Cable should be available to as many Town residents as possible.
A cable system should be capable of accommodating both the
present and reasonably foreseeable future cable-related needs of
the community, to the extent economically feasible.
(2)
A cable system should be constructed and maintained during a
franchise term so that changes in technology may be integrated
to the maximum extent that is economically feasible into existing
system facilities.
(3)
A cable system should be responsible to the needs and interests of
the local community.
(4)
B.
The Town intends that all provisions set forth in this chapter be
construed to serve the public interest and the foregoing public
purposes and that any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter be
construed to include the foregoing findings and public purposes as
integral parts thereof.
C.
§ 46-1 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-3
46:67
§ 46-3. Word usage and definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise
expressly stated. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Unless otherwise
expressly stated, words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set
forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A, 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as amended, and, if not defined therein, their common
and ordinary meaning.
AFFILIATE — Any person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by,
or is under common ownership or control with a grantee.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier that includes the retransmission
of local television broadcast signals.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C
§ 521 et seq., as amended by the Cable Competition and Consumer
Protection Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as it may
be further amended from time to time.
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Any video programming provided over
a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of
equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than:
CABLE SERVICE — This term shall have the meaning given it by the Cable
Act, as amended.
CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM —
A. Video programming carried on the basic cable service tier; and
B. Video programming offered on a per-channel or per-program basis.
A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated
signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed
to provide cable television service which includes video programming
and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the Town, but such
term does not include:
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one
or more television broadcast stations;
(1)
A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-ofway;
(2)
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of
1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system
to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video
(3)
A.
§ 46-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-3
46:68
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any
successor governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — The nonexclusive authorization granted in accordance with
this chapter to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system along the
public rights-of-way within the Town. Any such authorization, in whatever
form granted, shall not mean or include any license or permit required for
the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the Town as
required by the ordinances and laws of the Town, or for attaching devices
to poles or other structures, whether owned by the Town or a private entity,
or for excavating or performing other work in or along public rights-of-way.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A contract entered into in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter between the Town and a grantee that sets
forth, subject to applicable state and federal law, the terms and conditions
under which a franchise will be exercised.
FRANCHISE AREA — The term "franchise area" for any franchise granted
under this chapter shall mean the whole of the Town of Bar Harbor. All
new or renewal franchise agreements granted under this chapter shall
require the grantee, within a reasonable period after the effective date of
the franchise agreement, to extend service to all areas of the Town that
meet density requirements to be set out in the franchise agreement. No
franchise or renewal franchise approved under this chapter shall contain
density requirements that are less restrictive than the density requirements
of franchise agreements with other grantees that are then in force.
GRANTEE — The natural person(s), partnership(s), domestic or foreign
corporation(s), association(s), joint venture(s), or organization(s) of any
kind which has (have) been granted a cable television franchise by the
Town.
GROSS REVENUES — Those items within the scope of the term "gross
revenues" as used in the Cable Act, as amended, including any and all cash,
credits, or other consideration of any kind or nature received directly or
indirectly by a grantee, an affiliate of a grantee, or any person in which
a grantee has a five-percent or greater financial interest, or by any other
entity that is a cable operator of a cable system arising from, attributable
to, or in any way derived from the operation of a grantee's cable system to
provide cable service, including the facilities associated therewith.
programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use
is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
(4) An open video system that complies with federal law; or
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems.
(5)
A reference to a cable system refers to any part thereof, including,
without limitation, facilities located in the interior of a subscriber's
residence or other premises.
B.
§ 46-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-3
46:69
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint-stock company,
organization, corporation, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee
thereof, but such term does not include the Town.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface, the air space above the surface,
and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, lane, path,
alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge, tunnel, park, parkway, waterway,
easement, or similar property in which the Town now or hereafter holds
any property interest, or may lawfully grant the use of, which, consistent
with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purpose
of installing and maintaining a cable system. No reference herein, or in
any franchise agreement, to a public right-of-way shall be deemed to be
a representation or guarantee by the Town that its interest or other right
to control the use of such property is sufficient to permit its use for such
purposes, and a grantee shall be deemed to gain only those rights to use as
are properly in the Town and as the Town may have the undisputed right
and power to give.
Gross revenues include, but are not limited to, monthly fees charged
subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel, or perprogram
service; installation, disconnection, reconnection, and changein-
service fees; leased channel fees; late fees; payments or other
consideration received from programmers for carriage of programming
on the system; revenues from converter rentals or sales; advertising
revenues; barter; revenues from program guides; and revenues from
home shopping channels. Gross revenues do not include reimbursed
expenses unless the expense is separately claimed. Gross revenues
earned on a system-wide basis shall be allocated to the Town on the
basis of the ratio of the subscribers in the Town to the total subscribers
in all the franchising authorities served by the system. Gross revenues
shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee under this chapter.
A.
Gross revenues shall not include:
To the extent consistent with generally accepted accounting
principles, actual bad debt writeoffs; provided, however that all or
part of any such actual bad debt that is written off but subsequently
collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period
collected;
(1)
The value of free cable services provided to the grantee's
employees or to the Town;
(2)
Revenues received by an affiliate from the grantee on which the
grantee has already paid the franchise fee;
(3)
Any taxes on services furnished by a grantee which are imposed
directly on any subscriber or user by the state, Town, or other
governmental unit and which are collected by a grantee on behalf
of said governmental unit; and
(4)
(5) Revenues from the provision of telecommunications services.
B.
§ 46-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-3
46:70
SALE — Any sale, exchange, or barter transaction.
SERVICE TIER — A package of two or more cable services for which a
separate charge is made by the grantee, other than a package of premium
and pay-per-view services that may also be sold on a true a la carte basis.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who legally receives cable service, whether or
not a fee is paid for such service.
TOWN — The Town of Bar Harbor, Maine, and any agency, department, or
agent thereof.
TRANSFER —
USER — A person or organization utilizing a channel or equipment and
facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as contrasted
with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
Any transaction in which:
An ownership or other interest in a grantee, its cable system, or any
person that is a cable operator of the cable system is transferred
from one person or group of persons to another person or group of
persons so that control of a grantee is transferred; or
(1)
The rights or obligations held by a grantee under a franchise
agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group
of persons.
(2)
A.
"Control" for these purposes means working control, in whatever
manner exercised. By way of illustration and not limitation, the
addition, deletion, or other change of any general partner of a grantee,
any person who owns or controls a grantee, or a cable operator of a
cable system is such a change of control.
B.
§ 46-3 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-3
46:71

ARTICLE II
Grant of Franchise
§ 46-4. Authority of Town.
The Town may grant one or more cable television franchises, and each such
franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of this chapter. In no event shall this chapter be considered a contract
between the Town and a grantee.
§ 46-5. Franchise required.
No person may construct or operate a cable system without a franchise
granted by the Town unless otherwise authorized by law, and no person may
be granted a franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement
with the Town pursuant to this chapter.
§ 46-6. Franchise characteristics.
Authority granted by franchise. A franchise authorizes use of public
rights-of-way for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber,
underground conduit, and other devices necessary and appurtenant
to the operation of a cable system without a franchise area but does
not expressly or implicitly authorize a grantee to provide service to
or install a cable system on private property without owner consent
[except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621 of the
Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)] or to use publicly or privately owned
conduits without a separate agreement with the owners.
A.
B. Term of franchise. The term of a franchise may not exceed 15 years.
Nonexclusivity. A franchise is nonexclusive and will not explicitly or
implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable
systems within the Town; affect the Town's right to authorize use of
public rights-of-way by other persons to operate cable systems or for
other purposes as it determines appropriate; or affect the Town's right
to itself construct, operate, or maintain a cable system, with or without
a franchise.
C.
Franchise agreement constitutes contract. Once a franchise agreement
has been accepted and executed by the Town and a grantee, such
franchise agreement shall constitute a contract between the grantee
and the Town, and the terms, conditions, and provisions of such
franchise agreement, subject to the ordinance in effect as of the
effective date of such franchise agreement and all other duly enacted
and applicable laws, shall define the rights and obligations of the
grantee and the Town relating to the franchise. Nothing in this chapter
or a franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of or restriction on
the Town's police powers or a waiver of any of the terms of any Town
ordinance regarding the use or management of the public rights-of-way
or intended to protect the public's safety.
D.
§ 46-4 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-6
46:73
§ 46-7. Grantee subject to other laws and Town authority.
§ 46-8. Interpretation of franchise terms.
Use of public rights-of-way. All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall
be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the public rights-ofway,
and the Town reserves the right to reasonably designate where a
grantee's facilities are to be placed within the public rights-of-way.
E.
Franchise personal to grantee. A franchise shall be a privilege that is
in the public trust and personal to the original grantee. No transfer
of a franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the Town and
unless application is made by the grantee and Town approval obtained,
pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement, which approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, that the grantee
may make assignments of collateral to a lender upon reasonable prior
notice to the Town. No such assignment of collateral shall be deemed
to permit any person to avoid any obligations under this chapter or a
franchise agreement.
F.
Exclusive contracts unenforceable. A franchise holder may not enter
into or enforce any exclusive contract with a subscriber as a condition
of providing or continuing service.
G.
Compliance with laws. A grantee shall at all times be subject to and
shall comply with applicable federal, state, and local laws. A grantee
shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of
the Town, including all rights the Town may have under 47 U.S.C. § 552.
A.
No waiver of Town rights. No course of dealing between a grantee
and the Town, nor any delay on the part of the Town in exercising any
rights hereunder, shall operate as a waiver of any such rights of the
Town or acquiescence in the actions of a grantee in contravention of
rights except to the extent expressly waived by the Town or expressly
provided for in a franchise agreement or other applicable laws, rules or
regulations.
B.
Town has maximum regulatory authority. The Town shall have the
maximum plenary authority to regulate cable systems, grantees, and
franchises as may now or hereafter be lawfully permissible; except
where rights are expressly waived by a franchise agreement, they are
reserved, whether expressly enumerated or not.
C.
Provision to Town's benefit controlling. In the event of a conflict
between this chapter as effective on the effective date of a franchise
agreement and that franchise agreement, the terms of this chapter as
effective on the effective date of that franchise agreement shall control,
except as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement.
A.
Liberal construction. To the extent permitted by law, the provisions of
this chapter and a franchise agreement will be liberally construed in
B.
§ 46-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-8
46:74
§ 46-9. Operation of cable system without franchise.
Any person who occupies public rights-of-way for the purpose of operating
or constructing a cable system and who does not hold a valid franchise from
the Town shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including but
not limited to its provisions regarding construction and technical standards
and franchise fees. In its discretion, the Town at any time may require such
person to enter into a franchise agreement within 30 days of receipt of a
written notice by the Town that a franchise agreement is required; require
such person to remove its property and restore the area to a condition
satisfactory to the Town within such time period; remove the property itself
and restore the area to a satisfactory condition and charge the person the
costs therefor; and/or take any other action it is entitled to take under
applicable law, including filing for and seeking damages under trespass. In
no event shall a franchise be created unless it is issued by action of the Town
and subject to a franchise agreement.
§ 46-10. Right of condemnation reserved.
Nothing in this chapter or any franchise agreement shall limit any right the
Town may have to acquire by eminent domain or otherwise any property of
the grantee.
§ 46-11. Acts at grantee's expense.
Any act that a grantee is or may be required to perform under this chapter, a
franchise agreement, or applicable law shall be performed at the grantee's
expense, unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the
franchise agreement, or applicable law.
favor of the Town in order to effectuate their purposes and objectives
and to promote the public interest, except as otherwise provided in a
franchise agreement.
Governing law. Except as to matters that are governed solely by federal
law or regulation, a franchise agreement will be governed by and
construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Maine.
C.
§ 46-8 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-11
46:75

ARTICLE III
Application for Grant, Renewal or Modification of Franchise
§ 46-12. Written application.
§ 46-13. Application for grant of a franchise other than a Cable Act
renewal franchise.
Application requirement. A written application shall be filed with the
Town for grant of an initial franchise; renewal of a franchise under
47 U.S.C. § 546(a) to (g); or modification of a franchise agreement
pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement. An applicant shall
demonstrate in its application compliance with all requirements of this
chapter, any existing franchise agreement held by the applicant and all
applicable laws.
A.
Acceptability for filing. To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of
the application shall be submitted together with 12 copies. The Town
Manager may, in combination with neighboring communities, establish
a joint application procedure, provided that any such procedure
conforms to the standards of this chapter. The application must be
accompanied by the required application filing fee as set forth in
§ 46-17, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain
all required information. All applications shall include the names and
addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with
respect to the application.
B.
Applications available for public inspection. All applications accepted
for filing shall be made available by the Town for public inspection in
the office of the Town Clerk during normal business hours. Upon receipt
of an application, the Town Clerk shall provide prompt public notice
that the application or proposal is available for public inspection at the
municipal offices during regular business hours for a period of at least
three weeks.
C.
Town may waive. The Town Council may waive any of the provisions
of this Article III by resolution, where application of the rule would
cause manifest injustice, except for those provisions required by state
or federal law. Any waiver granted shall explain the basis for the waiver
and shall not unduly discriminate against any applicant.
D.
Application. A person may apply for an initial franchise by submitting
an application containing the information required in § 46-15 and
requesting an evaluation of that application pursuant to Subsection B of
this section. Prior to evaluating that application, the Town shall conduct
such reasonable investigations as are necessary to determine whether
the application satisfies the standards set forth in Subsection B of this
section and may seek additional applications.
A.
§ 46-12 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-13
46:77
Factors in evaluating application for franchise or renewal of existing
franchise. In evaluating an application for a franchise, the Town shall
consider, among other things, the following factors:
The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise for the Town.
(1)
Whether the quality of the applicant's service under an existing
franchise in the Town, including signal quality, response to
customer complaints, billing practices, and the like, has been
reasonable in light of the needs and interests of the communities
served.
(2)
Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to provide cable service.
(3)
Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements
established by the Town and is otherwise reasonable to meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the community, taking
into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.
(4)
Whether, to the extent not considered as part of Subsection D(4),
the applicant will provide adequate public, education, and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial
support, consistent with community needs and interests.
(5)
Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on the public rights-ofway
and private property that would be used by the cable system,
including the extent to which installation or maintenance as
planned would require replacement of property or involve
disruption of property, public services, or use of the public rightsof-
way; the effect of granting a franchise on the ability of the
applicant and its proposed facilities to meet the cable-related needs
and interests of the community.
(6)
Whether the applicant or an affiliate of the applicant owns or
controls any other cable system in the Town or whether grant of
the application may eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery
of cable service in the Town.
(7)
B.
Town determination. If the Town finds that it is in the public interest
to issue a franchise after considering the factors set forth above, and
subject to the applicant's entry into an appropriate franchise
agreement, it shall issue a franchise. If the Town denies a franchise, it
will issue within 30 days a written decision explaining why the franchise
was denied. Prior to deciding whether or not to issue a franchise,
the Town may hold one or more public hearings or implement other
procedures under which comments from the public on an applicant may
be received. The Town also may grant or deny a request for a franchise
based on its review of an application without further proceedings and
C.
§ 46-13 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-13
46:78
§ 46-14. Application for grant of a Cable Act renewal franchise.
Applications for renewal under the Cable Act shall be received and reviewed
in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 427 U.S.C. § 546.
If neither a grantee nor the Town activates in a timely manner or can
activate the renewal process set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 546 (a) through (g)
(including, for example, if the provisions are repealed), and except as to
applications submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(h), the provisions of
§ 46-13 shall apply and a renewal request shall be treated the same as any
other request for a franchise. The following requirements shall apply to
renewal requests properly submitted pursuant to the Cable Act:
may reject any application that is incomplete. This chapter is not
intended and shall not be interpreted to grant any applicant or existing
grantee standing to challenge the issuance of a franchise to another,
except as provided by applicable state or federal laws or regulations.
Joint review. The Town may elect to delegate review of an application to
a consortium of local governments or a formally constituted interlocal
body of which the Town is a member. Any such entity shall review the
application in accordance with the standards of Subsection B of this
section and make a recommendation to the Town. In such a case, the
Town Council shall review the recommendation of the designated body
and approve or reject it in accordance with the terms of Subsection C
of this section.
D.
Issuance of RFP. If the provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) through (g)
are properly invoked, the Town may issue an RFP after conducting a
proceeding to review the applicant's past performance and to identify
future cable-related community needs and interests. The Town
Administrator, or the Administrator's designee, shall establish
deadlines and procedures for responding to the RFP, may seek
additional information from the applicant, and shall establish deadlines
for the submission of that additional information.
Following receipt of the application responding to that RFP (and
such additional information as may be provided in response to
requests), the Town will determine that the franchise should be
renewed or make a preliminary assessment that the franchise
should not be renewed. That determination shall be in accordance
with the time limits established by the Cable Act. The preliminary
determination shall be made by order.
(1)
If the Town determines that the franchise should not be renewed
and the applicant that submitted the renewal application notifies
the Town, either in its RFP response or within 10 working days of
the preliminary assessment, that it wishes to pursue any rights to
any administrative proceeding it has under the Cable Act, then the
Town shall commence an administrative proceeding after providing
prompt public notice thereof, in accordance with the Cable Act.
(2)
A.
§ 46-13 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-14
46:79
If the Town decides preliminarily to grant renewal, it shall prepare
a final franchise agreement that incorporates, as appropriate, the
commitments made by the applicant in the renewal application.
If the applicant accepts the franchise agreement, and the final
agreement is ratified by the Town, the franchise shall be renewed.
If the franchise agreement is not so accepted and ratified within
the time limits established by 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1), renewal shall
be deemed preliminarily denied and an administrative proceeding
commenced if the applicant that submitted the renewal application
requests it within 10 days of the expiration of the time limit
established by 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1).
(3)
Administrative hearing. If an administrative hearing is commenced
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(c), the applicant's renewal application shall
be evaluated considering such matters as may be considered consistent
with federal law. The following procedures shall apply:
The Town Council shall, by order, appoint an administrative hearing
officer or officers (referred to hereafter as "hearing officer"). The
Town Council may appoint itself as hearing officer.
(1)
The hearing officer shall establish a schedule for proceeding which
allows for documentary discovery and interrogatory responses,
production of evidence, and cross-examination of witnesses.
Depositions shall not be permitted unless the party requesting the
deposition shows that documentary discovery and interrogatory
responses will not provide it an adequate opportunity to require the
production of evidence necessary to present its case. The hearing
officer shall have the authority to require the production of
evidence as the interests of justice may require, including to
require the production of evidence by the applicant that submitted
the renewal application and any entity that owns or controls or is
owned or controlled by such applicant directly or indirectly. The
hearing officer may issue protective orders to the extent permitted
under applicable state law. Any order may be enforced by a court
of competent jurisdiction or by imposing appropriate sanctions in
the administrative hearing.
(2)
The hearing officer may conduct a prehearing conference and
establish appropriate prehearing procedures. Intervention by nonparties
is not authorized except to the extent permitted by the
Cable Act.
(3)
The hearing officer may require the Town and the applicant to
submit prepared testimony prior to the hearing. Unless the parties
agree otherwise, the applicant shall present evidence first and the
Town shall present evidence second.
(4)
Any reports or the transcript or summary of any proceedings
conducted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) shall for purposes of
the administrative hearing be regarded no differently than any
(5)
B.
§ 46-14 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-14
46:80
§ 46-15. Contents of application.
If issued by the Town, an RFP for the grant of a renewal franchise under 47
U.S.C. § 546(c) shall require, and any application for an initial or renewal
other evidence. The Town and the applicant must be afforded full
procedural protection regarding evidence related to these
proceedings, including the rights to refute any evidence introduced
in those proceedings or sought to be introduced by the other
party. Both shall have the opportunity to submit additional evidence
related to issues raised in the proceeding conducted pursuant to 47
U.S.C. § 546(a).
Following completion of any hearing, the hearing officer shall
require the parties to submit proposed findings of fact with respect
to the matters that the Town is entitled to consider in determining
whether renewal should be granted. Based on the record of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall then prepare written findings
with respect to those matters and submit those findings to the
Town Council and to the parties (unless the hearing officer is the
Town Council, in which case the written findings shall constitute
the final decision of the Town).
(6)
If the hearing officer is not the Town Council, the parties shall
have 30 days from the date the findings are submitted to the
Town Council to file exceptions to those findings. The Town Council
shall thereafter issue a written decision granting or denying the
application for renewal, consistent with the requirements of the
Cable Act and based on the record of such proceedings. A copy of
that decision of the Town Council shall be provided to the applicant.
(7)
(8) The proceeding shall be conducted with due speed.
In conducting the proceedings, and except as inconsistent with the
foregoing, the hearing officer will follow the Maine Administrative
Procedure Act4 or the successor statutes thereto unless otherwise
governed by federal law or regulations. The hearing officer may
request that the Town Council adopt additional procedures and
requirements as necessary in the interest of justice.
(9)
Informal renewal applications. This section does not prohibit any
grantee from submitting an informal renewal application pursuant to
47 U.S.C. § 546(h), which application may be granted or denied in
accordance with the provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 546(h).
C.
Consistency with Cable Act. The provisions of this chapter shall be read
and applied so that they are consistent with Section 626 of the Cable
Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546.
D.
4. Editor's Note: See 5 M.R.S.A. § 8001 et seq.
§ 46-14 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-15
46:81
franchise [other than an application submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
§ 546(h)] shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
Identification of applicant and its ownership and control. Name and
address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control
of the applicant, including the names and addresses of the 10 largest
holders of an ownership interest in the applicant and controlling
affiliates of the applicant and all persons with five-percent or more
ownership interest in the applicant and its affiliates; the persons who
control the applicant and its affiliates; all officers and directors of the
applicant and its affiliates; and any other business affiliation and cable
system ownership interest of each named person.
A.
Statement of applicant's technical ability. A demonstration of the
applicant's technical ability to construct and/or operate the proposed
cable system, including identification of key personnel.
B.
Statement of applicant's legal qualifications. A demonstration of the
applicant's legal qualifications to construct and/or operate the proposed
cable system, including but not limited to a demonstration that the
applicant meets the following criteria:
The applicant must not have submitted an application for an initial
or renewal franchise to the Town which was denied on the ground
that the applicant failed to propose a system meeting the cablerelated
needs and interests of the community, or as to which any
challenges to such licensing decision were finally resolved
adversely to the applicant, within one year preceding the
submission of the application.
(1)
The applicant must not have had any cable television franchise
validly revoked by any licensing authority within three years
preceding the submission of the application.
(2)
The applicant must have the necessary authority under Maine law
to operate a cable system within Maine.
(3)
The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it may not hold the
franchise as a matter of federal law. An applicant must have or
show that it is qualified to obtain any necessary federal approvals
or waivers required to operate the system proposed.
(4)
The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time during
the 10 years preceding the submission of the application, the
application was convicted of any act or omission of such character
that the applicant cannot be relied upon to deal truthfully with
the Town and subscribers of the cable system or to comply
substantially with its lawful obligations under applicable law,
including obligations under consumer protection laws and laws
prohibiting anticompetitive acts, fraud, racketeering, or other
similar conduct.
(5)
C.
§ 46-15 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-15
46:82
The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files materially
misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
(6)
The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if an elected official of
the Town holds a controlling interest in the applicant or an affiliate
of the applicant. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town shall
provide an opportunity to an applicant to show that it would be
inappropriate to deny it a franchise under Subsection C(2) or (5)
by virtue of the particular circumstances surrounding the matter
and the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing
therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of involvement of
the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from the
operation of cable television systems.
(7)
Statement of applicant's financial qualifications. A statement prepared
by a certified public accountant regarding the applicant's financial
ability to complete the construction and operation of the cable system
proposed.
D.
Description of prior experience. A description of the applicant's prior
experience in the cable system ownership, construction, and operation
and identification of communities in which the applicant or any of
its principals have, or have had, a cable franchise or license or any
interest therein, provided that an applicant that holds a franchise for
the Town and is seeking renewal of that franchise need only provide this
information for other communities where its franchise was scheduled
to expire in the two calendar years prior to and after its application was
submitted.
E.
Identification of area to be served. Identification of the area of the Town
to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of
the proposed franchise area's boundaries. All grantees shall be bound
and required to serve the same areas within the Town.
F.
Description of physical facilities. A detailed description of the physical
facilities proposed, including channel capacity, technical design,
performance characteristics, head end, and access facilities.
G.
Description of construction of proposed system. Where applicable, a
description of the construction of the proposed system, including an
estimate of plant mileage and its location, the proposed construction
schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services will be
converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information
on the availability of space in conduits, including, where appropriate,
an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing
facilities.
H.
Proposed rate structure. The proposed rate structure, including
projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and
other equipment or services.
I.
§ 46-15 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-15
46:83
§ 46-16. Application for modification of franchise.
An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at a
minimum, the following information:
Demonstration of how future community needs and interests will be
met. A demonstration of how the applicant will reasonably meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including
descriptions of how the applicant will meet the needs described in
any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the Town
and how the applicant will provide adequate public, educational, and
governmental access channel capacity, facilities, or financial support to
meet the community's needs and interests. The Town Manager may, in
coordination with neighboring communities, establish procedures for
conducting a joint needs assessment.
J.
Pro forma financial projections. Pro forma financial projections for the
proposed franchise term, including a statement of projected income
and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant
assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules.
K.
Identification of area of overbuild. If the applicant proposes to provide
cable service to an area already served by an existing cable grantee, the
identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential
subscriber density in the area that would encompass the overbuild,
the ability of the public rights-of-way and other property that would
be used by the applicant to accommodate an additional system, and
assurances that any existing facilities will not be disturbed by the
proposed overbuild, except as necessary for make ready work.
L.
Other information. Any other information as may be reasonably
necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
M.
Information requested by Town. Information that the Town may
reasonably request of the applicant that is relevant to the Town's
consideration of the application.
N.
Certification of accuracy. An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or
authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information
in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application
commitments, and certifying that the application meets all federal and
state law requirements, in a format approved by the Town.
O.
A. The specific modification requested;
The justification for the requested modification, including the impact
of the requested modification on subscribers and the financial impact
on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved,
demonstrated through, inter alia, submission of financial pro formas;
B.
§ 46-15 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-16
46:84
§ 46-17. Filing fees.
§ 46-18. Public hearing.
An applicant shall be notified in writing at least 10 calendar days in advance
of any public hearings held in connection with the evaluation of its
application and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition, prior
to the issuance of a franchise, the Town shall provide for the holding of
a public hearing within the proposed franchise area, following reasonable
notice to the public, at which every applicant and its applications shall be
examined and the public and all interested parties afforded a reasonable
opportunity to be heard. Reasonable notice to the public shall include
causing notice of the time and place of such hearing to be published in
A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625
of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the
requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545;
C.
Any other information that the applicant believes is necessary for the
Town to make an informed determination on the application for
modification; and
D.
An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application
and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and
state law requirements.
E.
To be acceptable for filing, an application submitted after the effective
date of this chapter shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the following
amount to cover costs incidental to the awarding or enforcement of the
franchise, as appropriate:
(1) For an initial franchise: $500.
(2) For renewal of a franchise: $500.
(3) For modification of a franchise agreement: $500.
A.
The Town may also elect to share the costs of reviewing an application
with other communities served by the system of which an existing
or proposed cable system in the Town is a part. In that case, the
filing fees shown above shall not apply and shall be replaced with
combined filing fees for all communities with whom the Town is sharing
expenses. The combined filing fees shall be $500 per Town for an
initial grant, a modification, or a renewal. Combined filing fees shall
be prorated among the participating communities on the basis of a
number of residents in each community as of the most recent United
States Census or allocated according to some other mutually agreeable
method. Application fees for franchise renewals may be increased as
necessary to recover the Town's additional cost of conducting any
hearings required under 47 U.S.C. § 546(a) through (g), if the grantee
has invoked that procedure in its renewal application.
B.
§ 46-16 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-18
46:85
a newspaper of general circulation in the proposed franchise area once a
week for two consecutive weeks. The first publication shall be not less than
14 days before the day of the hearing. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
prevent or limit communities in which the applicant has requested grant
or renewal of a franchise from holding joint public hearings in a location
reasonably accessible to residents of each community which is the subject
thereof.
§ 46-18 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-18
46:86
ARTICLE IV
Insurance and Indemnity
§ 46-19. Insurance required.
§ 46-20. Qualifications of sureties.
All insurance policies shall be with sureties qualified to do business in the
State of Maine, with an A or better rating of insurance by Best's Key Rating
Guide, Property/Casualty Edition, and in a form acceptable to the Town.
§ 46-21. Evidence of insurance.
A grantee shall keep on file with the Town current certificates of insurance.
A grantee shall provide the Town with copies of all insurance policies in
effect during the franchise period upon the written request of the Town.
§ 46-22. Additional insureds; prior notice of policy cancellation.
All general liability insurance policies shall name the Town, elected officials,
officers, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees as
additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or
A grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of a franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the entire length
of the franchise period, such insurance as will protect the Town and
elected officials, employees and agents from any claims that may arise
directly or indirectly or result from its acceptance of the franchise or
its activities under the franchise, whether such activities are performed
by the grantee or by anyone for whose acts the grantee may be liable,
including but not limited to the following:
Workers' compensation, including disability benefits and any other
legally required employee benefits, meeting all statutory amounts;
(1)
Property insurance, all risk, replacement cost basis, on all of the
grantee's assets;
(2)
General liability insurance, in the following minimum amounts:
Bodily injury or death primary insurance: $1,000,000 per
person; $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(a)
(b) Umbrella insurance: $5,000,000.
(c) Property damage: $1,000,000.
(3)
A.
The Town may review these amounts no more than once a year and
may require reasonable adjustments to them consistent with the public
interest. The franchise agreement may specify the procedures to be
followed in the event that the grantee objects to an increase in a policy
limit and the parties are unable to agree on a mutually acceptable
amount.
B.
§ 46-19 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-22
46:87
reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless 30 days' prior written
notice thereof has been given to the Town. A grantee shall not cancel any
required insurance policy without submission of proof that the grantee has
obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the Town which complies with
this chapter.
§ 46-23. Indemnification.
§ 46-24. No limit of liability.
Neither the provisions of this article nor any damages recovered by the
Town shall be construed to limit the liability of a grantee for damages under
any franchise issued hereunder.
Indemnification for damages and equitable relief. A grantee shall, at
its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the
Town, its inhabitants, elected officials, officers, boards, commissions,
commissioners, agents, and employees against any and all claims, suits,
causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for damages or equitable
relief arising out of the construction, maintenance, or operation of its
cable system; copyright infringements or a failure by the grantee to
secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or grantees
of programs to be delivered by the cable system; the conduct of the
grantee's business in the Town; or in any way arising out of the
grantee's enjoyment or exercise of a franchise granted hereunder,
regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed, or prohibited by this chapter or a franchise agreement.
A.
Indemnification for Cable Act claims. A grantee shall, at its sole cost
and expense, fully indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Town, and
in its capacity as such, the officers, agents, and employees thereof, from
and against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability, and judgment
for damages or otherwise subject to Section 638 of the Cable Act, 47
U.S.C. § 558, arising out of or alleged to arise out of the installation,
construction, operation, or maintenance of its system, including but not
limited to any claim against the grantee for invasion of the right of
privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation
or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark,
or patent or of any other right of any person, firm, or corporation. This
indemnity does not apply to programming carried on any channel set
aside for public, educational, or government use, or channels leased
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 532, unless the grantee was in any respect
engaged in determining the editorial content of the program or adopts
a policy of prescreening programming for the purported purpose of
banning indecent or obscene programming.
B.
Attorneys' fees. The indemnity provision includes, but is not limited to,
the Town's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any
such claim, suit, action or proceeding.
C.
§ 46-22 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-25
46:88
§ 46-25. Town not liable for damages.
Without limiting such immunities as it may have under applicable law, the
Town shall not be liable to the grantee for any damages or loss that the
grantee may suffer as the result of the Town's exercise of its lawful authority
pursuant to this chapter, a franchise agreement, or other applicable law.
§ 46-25 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-25
46:89

ARTICLE V
Performance Bond
§ 46-26. Bond required.
Prior to any construction, rebuild or upgrade of the cable system requiring
work in the public rights-of-way, other than installation of aerial facilities
and utility poles, a grantee shall establish in the Town's favor an irrevocable
performance bond in an amount specified in the franchise agreement or
otherwise determined as reasonable by municipal officers as necessary to
ensure the grantee's faithful performance of the construction, upgrade, or
other work. The amount of such performance bond shall not exceed the
lesser of 10% of the total cost of the work being done in the public right-ofway,
other than installation of aerial facilities and utility poles, or $50,000.
§ 46-27. Recovery under performance bond.
In the event that a grantee subject to such a performance bond fails to
complete the cable system construction, upgrade, or other work in the
public rights-of-way in a safe, timely (subject to the force majeure provision
of § 46-85) and competent manner in accordance with the provisions of
a franchise agreement, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally
from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered
by the Town as a result, including the full amount of any compensation,
indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the
grantee, or the cost of completing or repairing the system construction,
upgrade, or other work in the public rights-of-way, plus a reasonable
allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The Town
may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against the
security fund required under Article VI of this chapter, where such amount
exceeds that available under the security fund.
§ 46-28. Elimination or reduction of bond.
Any performance bond shall remain in place for one full year after
completion to the satisfaction of the Town of the work in the public rightsof-
way.
§ 46-29. New bond for new project.
The Town may subsequently require a new bond for any subsequent
construction or other work in the public rights-of-way, other than
installation of aerial facilities and utility poles, whose cost exceeds an
amount specified in a franchise agreement. In the event a grantee fails to
complete the work secured by such a new performance bond in a safe,
timely and competent manner, there shall be recoverable, jointly and
severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss
suffered by the Town as a result, including the full amount of any
compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any
property of the grantee, or the cost of completing or repairing the system
§ 46-26 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-29
46:91
construction, upgrade, or other work in the public rights-of-way, plus a
reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the
bond. The Town may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable
against the security fund required under Article VI of this chapter, where
such amount exceeds that available under the security fund. In any event,
the total amount of the bond shall not exceed the lesser 10% of the cost of
the work being done in the public rights-of-way or $50,000.
§ 46-30. Issuance of bond; notice of cancellation required.
Any performance bond shall be issued by a surety qualified to do business
in the State of Maine and have an A-1 or better rating of insurance in
Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the
approval of the Town; and shall contain the following endorsement: "This
bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after notice
to the Town, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice
from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew."
§ 46-31. Forfeiture.
The total amount of any outstanding bond shall be forfeited in favor of the
Town in the event that:
The grantee abandons the cable system or any part thereof at any time
during the term of the franchise;
A.
The grantee fails to purchase and maintain insurance as required by
Article IV hereof; or
B.
C. The franchise is revoked as provided in § 46-40 hereof.
§ 46-29 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-31
46:92
ARTICLE VI
Security Fund
§ 46-32. Establishment.
§ 46-33. Use of fund.
If a grantee fails to make timely payment to the Town of any amount due as
a result of franchise requirements, fails to make timely payment to the Town
of any amounts due under a franchise agreement or applicable law, fails
to make timely payment to the Town of any taxes lawfully due, or fails to
compensate the Town for any damages, costs, or expenses the Town suffers
or incurs by reason of any act or omission of the grantee in connection with
its franchise agreement, the Town may withdraw the amount thereof from
the security fund. To invoke the provisions of this section, the Town shall
give the grantee written notice of the default in the grantee's performance.
If within 30 calendar days following such written notice from the Town to
A franchise agreement may provide that, prior to the franchise's
becoming effective, the grantee shall post with the Town a cash security
deposit to be used as a security fund to ensure the grantee's faithful
performance of and compliance with all provisions of this chapter,
the franchise agreement, and other applicable laws and compliance
with all orders, permits, and directions of the Town or any agency
thereof having jurisdiction over the grantee's acts or defaults under
the franchise and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens,
fees, or taxes due the Town which arise by reason of the construction,
operation, or maintenance of the system. The amount of any security
fund shall be specified in a franchise agreement.
A.
In lieu of a cash security fund, a grantee may agree to file and maintain
with the Town an irrevocable letter of credit with a bank having an
office in the State of Maine in the amount specified in the preceding
subsection to serve the same purposes as set forth therein. Said letter
of credit shall remain in effect for the full term of the franchise plus
an additional six months thereafter. The grantee and its surety shall be
jointly and severally liable under the terms of the letter of credit for the
grantee's failure to ensure its faithful performance of and compliance
with all provisions of this chapter, the franchise agreement, and other
applicable law and compliance with all orders, permits, and directions
of the Town and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens,
fees, or taxes due the Town which arise by reason of the construction,
operation, or maintenance of the system. The letter of credit shall
provide for 30 days' prior written notice to the Town of any intention on
the part of the grantee to cancel, fail to renew, or otherwise materially
alter its terms. Neither the filing of a letter of credit with the Town nor
the receipt of any damages recovered by the Town thereunder shall be
construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the
liability of the grantee under the terms of its franchise for damages,
either to the full amount of the letter of credit or otherwise.
B.
§ 46-32 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-33
46:93
the grantee the grantee has not remedied the default to the satisfaction
of the Town, the Town may proceed to withdraw the amount in question
from the security fund, provided that, if by its nature the default cannot
be remedied within 30 days and the grantee has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Town that it is making a continuing good faith effort to
remedy the default, the Town shall not draw on the security fund.
§ 46-34. Notification of withdrawal.
Within 10 business days of a withdrawal from the security fund, the Town
shall mail, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of
the amount, date, and purpose of such withdrawal to the grantee.
§ 46-35. Inadequate fund balance.
If at the time of a withdrawal from the security fund by the Town the amount
of the fund is insufficient to provide the total payment towards which the
withdrawal is directed, the balance of such payment shall continue as the
obligation of the grantee to the Town until it is paid.
§ 46-36. Replenishment.
No later than 30 days after mailing of notification to the grantee by certified
mail, return receipt requested, of a withdrawal under the security fund, the
grantee shall deliver to the Town for deposit in the security fund an amount
equal to the amount so withdrawn. Failure to make timely delivery of such
amount to the Town shall constitute a material violation of the franchise.
§ 46-37. Disposition.
Upon termination of the franchise under conditions other than those
stipulating forfeiture of the security fund, the balance then remaining in the
security fund shall be withdrawn by the Town and paid to the grantee within
90 days of such termination, provided that there is then no outstanding
material default on the part of the grantee.
§ 46-38. Grantor rights.
The rights reserved to the Town with respect to Articles IV, V and VI hereof
are in addition to all other rights of the Town, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by other law or a franchise agreement, and no action,
proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to such sections shall affect
any other right the Town may have.
§ 46-33 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-38
46:94
ARTICLE VII
Remedies
§ 46-39. Available remedies.
In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the Town may
pursue the following remedies in the event a grantee or any other person
violates this chapter, its franchise agreement, or applicable state or federal
law. The Town may:
§ 46-40. Revocation or termination of franchise.
Seek a determination from a court of competent jurisdiction that a
provision of this chapter has been violated. If such a violation is found
to exist by the court the minimum fine imposed shall be $50 and
the maximum fine imposed per violation shall be $250. Each day the
violation is found to exist shall constitute a separate violation for which
the above-indicated fine may be assessed. Any violation found to exist
on the day of trial may be found, at a minimum, to have existed from the
filing date of the complaint until the day of trial and the fine assessed
accordingly, unless the grantee affirmatively proves that said violation
did not exist during any part of or all of the aforementioned time period.
If the grantee is found by the court to have been adjudicated in violation
of any provision of this chapter on more than one occasion within two
years, whether or not a violation of the same provision of this chapter,
the minimum fine per violation shall be $100 and the maximum fine per
violation shall be $500.
A.
B. Seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction.
Apply any remedy provided for in a franchise agreement, including
enforcing provisions, if any.
C.
Town right to revoke franchise. The Town shall have the right to revoke
the franchise for a grantee's substantial failure to construct or operate
the cable system as required by this chapter or a franchise agreement,
for defrauding or attempting to defraud the Town or subscribers, if
the grantee is declared bankrupt, or for any other material violation
of this chapter or material breach of a franchise agreement. To invoke
the provisions of this section, the Town shall give the grantee written
notice of the default in its performance. If within 30 calendar days
following such written notice from the Town to the grantee the grantee
has not taken corrective action or corrective action is not being actively
and expeditiously pursued to the satisfaction of the Town, the Town
may give written notice to the grantee of its intent to revoke the
franchise, stating its reasons, provided that no opportunity to cure shall
be provided where the grantee has defrauded or attempted to defraud
the Town or its subscribers or in the event the grantee is declared
bankrupt. In the case of fraud or attempted fraud, the franchise may be
revoked after the hearing required under Subsection B of this section;
A.
§ 46-39 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-40
46:95
revocation for bankruptcy shall be governed by Subsection C of this
section.
Public hearing. Prior to revoking a franchise, the Town shall hold a
public hearing, on 30 calendar days' written notice, at which time
the grantee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
Following the public hearing, the Town may determine to revoke the
franchise based on the information presented at the hearing and other
information of record. If the Town determines to revoke a franchise, it
shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision.
A copy of such decision shall be transmitted to the grantee.
B.
Revocation after assignment for benefit of creditors or appointment of
receiver or trustee.
To the extent provided by law, any franchise may, at the option of
the Town following a public hearing, be revoked 120 calendar days
after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment
of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the grantee,
whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment
for the benefit of creditors or other action or proceeding, unless
within that one-hundred-twenty-day period:
Such assignment, receivership, or trusteeship has been
vacated; or
(a)
Such assignee, receiver, or trustee has fully complied with the
material terms and conditions of this chapter and a franchise
agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a
court of competent jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be
bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter and a
franchise agreement and such other conditions as may be
established or as are required under Article XII of this chapter.
(b)
(1)
In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the
facilities, equipment, or property of a grantee, the Town may
revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the Town,
by serving notice on the grantee and the successful bidder at the
sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges
of the franchise will be revoked and will terminate 30 calendar
days after serving such notice, unless the Town has approved the
transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder and the successful
bidder has covenanted and agreed with the Town to assume and be
bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and
this chapter and such other conditions as may be established or as
are required pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter.
(2)
C.
Procedures on revocation, abandonment and termination. If the Town
revokes a franchise or if for any other reason a grantee abandons,
terminates, or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers, the
following procedures and rights are effective:
D.
§ 46-40 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-40
46:96
§ 46-41. Obligation of compliance.
The Town's exercise of one remedy or a grantee's payment of liquidated
damages or penalties shall not relieve a grantee of its obligations to comply
The Town may require the former grantee to remove its facilities
and equipment located in the public rights-of-way and on public
premises at the former grantee's expense. If the former grantee
fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the Town may
have the removal done at the former grantee's and/or surety's
expense. The foregoing provisions shall not apply if, within three
months after expiration, termination or revocation of the franchise,
the grantee obtains certification from the FCC to operate an open
video system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications services.
(1)
In the event of revocation, the Town, by written order, may acquire
ownership of the cable system at not less than fair market value,
determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going
concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself, as
specified at 47 U.S.C. § 547(a)(1).
(2)
If a cable system is abandoned by a grantee or the franchise
otherwise terminates, the ownership of all portions of the cable
system in the public rights-of-way shall revert to the Town and
the Town may sell, assign, or transfer all or part of the assets
of the system. If a grantee abandons a portion of its system, the
ownership of the abandoned portions of the cable system in the
public rights-of-way shall revert to the Town and the Town may
sell, assign or transfer the abandoned facilities. A cable system or
a portion thereof shall be deemed abandoned if a grantee:
Gives the Town written notice of its decision to abandon the
system or the portion in question; or
(a)
Fails to provide cable service to subscribers served by the
system or the relevant portion thereof on a continuous basis
for a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or more.
(b)
(3)
Forfeiture for failure to comply with franchise obligation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter other than the
force majeure clause of § 46-85, where the Town has issued a franchise
specifically conditioned in the franchise agreement on the completion
of construction, system upgrade, or other specific obligation by a
specified date, failure of the grantee to complete such construction or
upgrade, or to comply with such other specific obligations as required,
will result in the automatic forfeiture of the franchise without further
action by the Town where it is so provided in the franchise agreement,
unless the Town, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by
the grantee, grants an extension of time.
E.
§ 46-40 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-41
46:97
with its franchise. In addition, the Town may exercise any rights it has at
law or equity.
§ 46-42. Relation to insurance and indemnity requirements.
Recovery by the Town of any amounts under insurance, the performance
bond, the security fund or letter of credit, or otherwise does not limit a
grantee's duty to indemnify the Town in any way, nor shall such recovery
relieve a grantee of its obligations under a franchise, limit the amounts
owed to the Town, or in any respect prevent the Town from exercising any
other right or remedy it may have, provided that this section shall not be
interpreted as permitting the Town to recover twice for the same damage.
In addition, any civil fine imposed pursuant to § 46-39A or other applicable
law shall not be treated as a recovery for purposes of this section.
§ 46-41 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-42
46:98
ARTICLE VIII
Transfers
§ 46-43. Town approval required.
No transfer shall occur without prior approval of the Town; provided,
however, that no such approval shall be required for transfers resulting
from the transfer of ownership interests between existing holders of
ownership interests in a grantee, where such holders were also holders of
ownership interests in the grantee at the time of the original grant of the
franchise to the grantee.
§ 46-44. Application.
An application for a transfer shall provide complete information on the
proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical, and
other qualifications of the transferee and on the potential impact of the
transfer on subscriber rates and service. At a minimum, the information
required under federal law and in § 46-15A to D, I to K, M and O of this
chapter shall be provided with respect to the proposed transferee.
§ 46-45. Determination by Town.
In making a determination as to whether to grant, deny, or grant
subject to conditions an application for a transfer of a franchise, the
Town shall not unreasonably withhold its consent but shall first
consider:
The legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to
operate the system;
(1)
Whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its
franchise agreement and this chapter and, if not, the proposed
transferee owns or controls any other cable system in the Town,
or whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the Town;
(2)
Whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in
the Town, or whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or
reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the Town; and
(3)
Whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer
would adversely affect subscribers, the Town's interest under this
chapter, the franchise agreement, or other applicable law or make
it less likely that the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community would be satisfied at a reasonable cost.
(4)
A.
The Town reserves the right to review the purchase price of any
transfer or assignment of a cable system. To the extent permitted
by applicable law, any negotiated sale value which the Town deems
unreasonable will not be considered in the rate base for any subsequent
request for rate increases.
B.
§ 46-43 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-46
46:99
§ 46-46. Transferee's agreement.
No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the
transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms
of this chapter and the franchise agreement and that it will assume the
obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known
and unknown, of the previous grantee under this chapter and the franchise
agreement for all purposes, including renewal, unless the Town, in its sole
discretion, expressly waives this requirement in whole or in part.
§ 46-47. Approval does not constitute waiver.
Approval by the Town of a transfer of a franchise shall not constitute a
waiver or release of any of the rights of the Town under this chapter or
a franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the
transfer.
§ 46-48. Processing fee.
As a condition of considering a transfer, the Town may impose a fee on the
transferee to cover its estimated out-of-pocket expenses in considering the
application for transfer of a franchise. Any amount collected in excess of the
estimated amount shall be returned to the transferee.
§ 46-46 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-48
46:100
ARTICLE IX
Franchise Fee
§ 46-49. Finding.
The Town finds that the public rights-of-way of the Town, county, and state
to be used by a grantee for the operation of a cable system are valuable
public property acquired and maintained by the county, state, and Town at
great expense to the taxpayers. The Town further finds that the grant of
a franchise to use public rights-of-way is a valuable property right without
which a grantee would be required to invest substantial capital.
§ 46-50. Payment to Town.
As compensation for use of the public rights-of-way and in light of the
scope of any franchise, in addition to providing channels, facilities and
other support for public, educational and governmental use of the cable
system, a grantee shall pay the Town a franchise fee. The amount of the
fee shall be specified in a franchise agreement. The franchise fee shall be
paid annually, provided that provisions for more frequent payments may be
specified in a franchise agreement. At least once a year the grantee shall
provide the Town a report setting forth the total of gross revenues for the
year or other period in question and identifying the amount of revenues
attributable to each category of gross revenues received by the grantee,
including nonsubscriber gross revenues, and the number of subscribers
receiving each category of cable service offered by the grantee.
Town right to request audit. The Town shall have the right to retain
an independent auditor to audit the records of a grantee to verify
the computation of amounts payable under this chapter or a franchise
agreement and recompute any amounts determined to be payable
under this chapter or a franchise agreement, whether the records are
held by the grantee, an affiliate, or any other entity that collects or
receives funds related to the grantee's operation in the Town, including,
by way of illustration and limitation, any entity that sells advertising on
the grantee's behalf.
The grantee shall be responsible for all reasonable costs associated
with any such audit, including the auditor's fees, as a cost
incidental to the enforcement of the franchise and shall have no
control over the identity or selection of the auditor. The Town
shall have sole discretion in selecting the auditor and shall not be
responsible for any costs associated with the audit.
(1)
The Town shall have the right to review the auditor's report and
methodology, including the right to obtain an explanation of all
of the auditor's assumptions and calculations, and the right to
challenge and request changes to any such assumptions and
calculations. The Town shall not, however, be permitted to obtain
copies of documents received by the auditor, with the exception
of documents voluntarily provided by the grantee to the Town or
(2)
A.
§ 46-49 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-50
46:101
subject to copying by the Town pursuant to § 46-73. The grantee
shall be responsible for providing all such records to the auditor,
without regard to by whom they are held. The records shall be
maintained for a least three years.
Any additional amounts due to the Town as a result of an audit shall
be paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by
the Town of the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy
of the audit report. The Town may exercise its audit right no more
frequently than once per year and only upon written notice to the
grantee.
(3)
Maintenance of records.
A grantee shall maintain its fiscal and financial records and have
all relevant fiscal and financial records maintained by others on its
behalf in such a manner as to enable the Town to:
Determine the cost of assets of the grantee which are used in
providing services within the Town for purposes of assessing
any personal property or other taxes and for purposes of
verifying any filings that may be made in connection with any
cost of service proceedings; and
(a)
(b) Determine gross revenues.
(1)
For purposes of assessing state and local taxes, the cost of assets
shall be determined in accordance with any applicable provision
of state law. For purposes of any cost of service proceedings,
and for purposes of assessing state and local taxes if state law
does not provide a method, the cost of assets shall be determined
in accordance with FCC rules pertaining to cost of service
proceedings.
(2)
B.
§ 46-50 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-50
46:102
ARTICLE X
Construction Provisions
§ 46-51. Construction schedule.
Every franchise agreement shall specify the construction schedule that will
apply to any required construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the cable system.
§ 46-52. Construction standards.
Construction shall be in accordance with all applicable laws. The
construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of a cable system
shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational
Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, the National Electrical
Safety Code, the National Electric Code, other applicable federal, state,
or local laws and regulations that may apply to the operation,
construction, maintenance, or repair or a cable system, including,
without limitation, local zoning and construction codes, and laws and
accepted industry practices, all as hereafter may be amended or
adopted.
A.
Wires to cause minimum inconvenience. All wires, cable lines, and
other transmission lines, equipment, and structures shall be installed
and located to cause minimum interference with the rights and
convenience of property owners.
B.
Installation of equipment to be of permanent nature. All installation
of electronic equipment shall be of a permanent nature, using durable
components.
C.
Antennas. Without limiting the foregoing, to the extent applicable,
antennas and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted,
lighted, erected, and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other
applicable state or local laws, codes, and regulations, all as hereafter
may be amended or adopted.
D.
Good engineering practices. Without limiting the foregoing, all of a
grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna
site, head end and distribution system, towers, house connections,
structures, poles, wires, cable, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable, fixtures,
and apparatus shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and operated
in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by
experienced and properly trained maintenance and construction
personnel so as not to endanger or interfere with improvements the
Town shall deem appropriate to make or to interfere in any manner
with the public rights-of-way or legal rights of any property owner or to
hinder unnecessarily or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
E.
§ 46-51 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-52
46:103
Safety practices. All safety practices required by law shall be used
during construction, maintenance, and repair of a cable system. A
grantee shall at all times employ reasonable care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing
failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or
nuisance to the public.
F.
No interference with other utilities. A grantee shall not place facilities,
equipment, or fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric,
telephone, water, sewer, or other utility facilities or obstruct or hinder
in any manner the various utilities serving the residents of the Town or
their use of any public rights-of-way.
G.
Repair of rights-of-way. Any and all public rights-of-way, public property,
or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the
construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance,
or construction of a system or otherwise, including installation, repair,
maintenance or replacement of a grantee's equipment, shall be
promptly repaired by the grantee at its sole expense.
H.
Removal of system due to conditions in rights-of-way. A grantee shall,
at its sole expense, by a time specified by the Town, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when
required by the Town by reason of traffic conditions; public safety;
public right-of-way construction; public right-of-way maintenance or
repair (including resurfacing or widening); change of public right-ofway
grade; construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, water
pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of governmentowned
communications system; public work or improvement of any
government-owned utility; public right-of-way vacation; or for any other
purpose where the convenience of the Town would be served thereby;
provided, however, that the grantee shall, in all such cases, have the
privilege of abandoning any property in place.
I.
Removal by Town due to emergency. In the event of an emergency, or
where a cable system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger
to health, safety, or property, the Town may remove, relay, or relocate
that portion of the cable system. Unless the nature of the emergency
or danger is such that immediate action is necessary to preserve life or
property or to prevent physical harm to any individual, the Town shall
provide telephone notice to the grantee prior to removing, relaying or
relocating any portion of a grantee's cable system.
J.
Raising or lowering wires to permit moving of buildings. A grantee
shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit
issued by the Town, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising
or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in
advance, except in the case where the requesting person is the Town,
in which case no such payment shall be required. The grantee shall be
K.
§ 46-52 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-52
46:104
given reasonable advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes, as provided in 35-A M.R.S.A. § 2516.
Authority to trim trees. A grantee shall have the authority to trim trees
that overhang a public rights-of-way of the Town so as to prevent the
branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables
and equipment of the grantee. Except in emergencies, a grantee shall
notify the Town at least one business day prior to performing any such
trimming. At the option of the Town, such trimming may be done by the
Town or under the Town's supervision and direction, at the expense of
the grantee.
L.
Use of existing utility facilities. A grantee shall use, with the owner's
permission, existing underground conduits or overhead utility facilities
whenever feasible and may not erect poles or support equipment in
public rights-of-way without the express permission of the Town. Copies
of agreements for use of conduits or other facilities shall be filed with
the Town as required by a franchise agreement or upon the Town's
written request.
M.
Undergrounding of cable.
In public rights-of-way or other places where electrical and
telephone utility wiring is located underground, either at the time
of initial construction of a cable system or at any time thereafter, a
grantee's cable system also shall be located underground.
(1)
Between a public right-of-way and a subscriber's residence, if
either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, a grantee may
install aerial cable except where a property owner or resident
requests underground installation and agrees to bear the
additional cost of such installation over and above the cost of aerial
installation. Where existing subdivision approvals, deed covenants,
municipal zoning or other legal restrictions require underground
location of utilities, the grantee's cable shall be located
underground, and the subscriber shall bear the additional cost of
such installation on its property as a condition of receiving cable
service.
(2)
N.
Town use of grantee's poles. The Town shall have the right to install and
maintain free of charge upon the poles owned by a grantee any wire
and pole fixtures that do not materially interfere with the cable system
operations of the grantee.
O.
Town approval of construction. Prior to erection of any towers, poles,
or conduits or the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of a cable system
authorized under this chapter or a franchise agreement, a grantee shall
first submit to the Town and other designated parties for approval
a concise description of the cable system proposed to be erected or
installed, including engineering drawings, if required, together with a
map and plans indicating the proposed location of all such facilities.
No erection or installation of any tower, pole, underground conduit,
P.
§ 46-52 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-52
46:105
§ 46-53. Publicizing proposed construction work.
Except in emergencies or to restore outages, the grantee shall publicize
proposed construction work prior to commencement of that work by
causing written notice of such construction work to be delivered to the
Town and by notifying those persons most likely to be affected by the work
in at least two of the following ways: by telephone, in person, by mail
or distribution of flyers to residences, by publication in local newspapers,
or in any other manner reasonably calculated to provide adequate notice,
including use of local informational channels. Whenever practicable, such
notice shall be given at least one week prior to commencement of the work
concerned.
§ 46-54. Continuity of service.
or fixture or any rebuilding or upgrading of a cable system shall be
commenced by any person until the grantee has obtained all building
permits, street operating permits or other approvals required by the
Town under any ordinance, regulation or procedure generally
applicable to such activities.
Contractors and subcontractors. Any contractor or subcontractor used
for work or construction, installation, operation, maintenance, or repair
of system equipment must properly be licensed under laws of the
state and all applicable local ordinances. The grantee must ensure that
contractors, subcontractors and all employees who will perform work
for it are trained and experienced. Each contractor and subcontractor
must perform work in compliance with all applicable provisions of law
and a franchise agreement, and the grantee shall implement a quality
control program to ensure that the work is so performed.
Q.
Subscriber right. It is the right of all subscribers in a grantee's
franchise area to receive all services that a grantee is then providing
under the terms of a valid franchise as long as their financial and other
obligations to the grantee are satisfied; provided, however, that to the
extent a grantee's agreements with its programming providers prohibit
the grantee from providing certain cable services to nonresidential
subscribers, the grantee may exclude such services from its offerings to
nonresidential subscribers.
A.
Assurance of continuous uninterrupted service. A grantee shall ensure
that all subscribers receive continuous uninterrupted service. To this
end, the grantee shall:
In the event of a sale or transfer of its franchise, cooperate with the
Town to assure an orderly transition from it to another grantee and
take all steps necessary to maintain service to subscribers until the
sale or transfer has been completed;
(1)
Not abandon service to the entire Town without having given 12
months' prior notice to the Town; and
(2)
B.
§ 46-52 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-54
46:106
Not abandon service to any portion of the Town (excepting
termination of service to individual subscribers as otherwise
permitted) without having given six months' prior written notice to
the Town. Following such notice, the grantee shall continue to be
obligated to comply with the terms and conditions of its franchise
agreement and applicable laws and regulations and shall cooperate
with the Town to assure an orderly transition from it to another
grantee.
(3)
Abandonment of system. If a grantee abandons its system during the
franchise term or fails to operate its system in accordance with this
Article X during any transition period, the Town, at its option, may
operate the system, designate another entity to operate the system
temporarily until the grantee restores service under conditions
acceptable to the Town or until the franchise is revoked and a new
grantee selected by the Town is providing service, or obtain an
injunction requiring the grantee to continue operations. If the Town is
required to operate or designate another entity to operate the cable
system, the grantee shall reimburse the Town or its designee for all
reasonable costs and damages incurred that are in excess of the
revenues from the cable system. In addition, any abandonment of a
system shall be subject to all of the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3008(3)(B).
C.
Injunctive relief. The Town shall be entitled to injunctive relief under
the preceding subsection if:
The grantee fails to provide cable service in accordance with its
franchise over a substantial portion of the franchise area for 96
consecutive hours, unless the Town authorizes a longer
interruption of service or as permitted pursuant to the force
majeure clause of § 46-85; or
(1)
The grantee, for any period, willfully and without cause refuses
to provide cable service in accordance with its franchise over a
substantial portion of the franchise area.
(2)
D.
§ 46-54 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-54
46:107

ARTICLE XI
System Facilities, Equipment and Services
§ 46-55. Applicability.
In addition to satisfying such requirements as may be established through
the application process, every cable system shall be subject to the following
conditions, except as prohibited by federal law.
§ 46-56. Provision of service.
Each franchise agreement shall contain a line extension policy that shall
govern a grantee's obligation to extend service. Unless otherwise specified
in a franchise agreement, after cable service has been established by
activating trunk distribution cable for an area specified in a franchise
agreement, a grantee shall provide cable service to any household
requesting cable service within that area, including each multiple-dwelling
unit in that area, except for multiple-dwelling units to which it cannot
legally obtain access. In providing services to multiple-dwelling units, a
grantee shall comply with all applicable provisions of 14 M.R.S.A. § 6041.
§ 46-57. Full video service to municipal buildings; facilities and
equipment.
A franchise agreement may require a grantee to install, at no charge,
at least one service outlet at all municipal buildings and public schools
within the franchise area that can be reached by a standard drop and may
provide that the grantee shall charge only its time and material costs for
any additional service outlets to such facilities. A franchise agreement may
also require a grantee to provide basic cable service and the lowest tier
of cable programming services to such buildings free of charge. Finally, a
franchise agreement may provide that such service outlets shall be capable
of providing the full range of non-cable electronic data and
telecommunication services provided by a grantee and may require other
facilities and equipment and channel capacity in accordance with the Cable
Act, at rates and terms set out in the franchise agreement.
§ 46-58. Technical standards.
FCC standards. Any cable system within the Town shall meet or exceed
the technical standards set forth in 47 CFR 76.601 and any other
applicable technical standards, including any such standards as
hereafter may be amended or adopted by the Town in a manner
consistent with federal law.
A.
Facilities shall not interfere with others' signals or facilities. A grantee
shall not design, install, or operate its facilities in a manner that will
interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the facilities of
any public utility, the cable system of another grantee, or individual
or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast
signals.
B.
§ 46-55 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-59
46:109
§ 46-59. Proof of performance tests.
At the times specified in a franchise agreement or as required by FCC rules,
a grantee shall perform proof of performance tests, and such other tests
as may be specified in a franchise agreement, designed to demonstrate
compliance with this article, the franchise agreement, and FCC
requirements. The grantee shall provide the results of proof of performance
tests promptly to the Town, upon the Town's written request. The Town shall
have the right to inspect the cable system during and after its construction
to ensure compliance with this article, the applicable franchise agreement,
and applicable provisions of local, state and federal law and may require
the grantee to perform additional tests based on the Town's investigation of
cable system performance or on subscriber complaints.
§ 46-59 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-59
46:110
ARTICLE XII
Consumer Protection Provisions
§ 46-60. Telephone and office availability.
Office hours of operation; telephone.
Each grantee shall maintain an office at a location reasonably
convenient to subscribers that shall be open at least 50 hours each
week, including during the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday
through Friday and 8:30 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Saturday, exclusive
of all state and federal holidays, to allow subscribers to request
service and conduct other business. Each grantee shall ensure that
its office shall meet all applicable access requirements of the Maine
Human Rights Act5 and Americans with Disabilities Act and all
other applicable federal and state laws and regulations.
(1)
Each grantee shall perform service calls, installations, and
disconnections during at least the hours for which its office is open
for business, provided that a grantee shall respond to outages 24
hours a day, seven days a week.
(2)
Each grantee shall establish a publicly listed tollfree telephone
number and shall either ensure that its telephone service has TTY
and TDD capabilities or contract with a third party to provide
the grantee with such services. The phone must be answered by
customer service representatives at least during the hours for
which the grantee's office is open for business for the purpose
of receiving requests for service, inquiries, and complaints from
subscribers. After those hours a grantee shall arrange for the
phone to be answered so that customers can register complaints
and report service problems on a twenty-four-hour-per-day, sevenday-
per-week basis and so that the grantee can respond to service
outages as required herein.
(3)
A.
Telephone answering time. Telephone answering time shall not exceed
30 seconds or four rings, and the time to transfer the call to a customer
service representative (including hold time) shall not exceed an
additional 30 seconds. This standard shall be met 90% of the time,
measured quarterly. When the business office is closed, an answering
machine or service capable of receiving and recording service
complaints and inquiries shall be employed. Any after-hours answering
service used shall comply with the same telephone answer time
standard set forth in this section. If required by its franchise
agreement, a grantee shall supply statistical data to verify it has met
the standards set forth herein.
B.
5. Editor's Note: See 5 M.R.S.A. § 4551 et seq.
§ 46-60 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-60
46:111
§ 46-61. Scheduling work.
Staff. A grantee must hire sufficient staff so that it can adequately
respond to customer inquiries, complaints, and requests for service in
its office, over the phone, and at the subscriber's residence.
C.
Appointments. All appointments for service, installation, or
disconnection shall be specified by date. Each grantee shall offer a
choice of morning, afternoon, or all-day appointment opportunities. If
at any time an installer or technician believes it impossible to make
a scheduled appointment time, an attempt to contact the customer
will be made prior to the time of appointment and the appointment
rescheduled.
A.
Missed appointments. Subscribers who experience a missed installation
appointment due to the fault of a grantee shall receive standard
installation free of charge. If the installation was to have been provided
free of charge, or for other appointments, the subscriber shall receive
one month of the subscriber to service tier free of charge or a credit of
$20, whichever is greater.
B.
Mobility-limited customers. With regard to mobility-limited customers,
upon subscriber request, each grantee shall arrange for pickup and/
or replacement of converters or other grantee equipment at the
subscriber's address or by a satisfactory equivalent (such as the
provision of a postage-prepaid mailer).
C.
Acknowledgment of and response to customer requests. Requests for
service, repair, and maintenance must be acknowledged by a grantee
within 24 hours or prior to the end of the next business day. A grantee
shall respond to all other inquiries (except billing inquiries) within five
business days of the inquiry or complaint. A grantee shall acknowledge
receipt of billing inquiries within five days and provide a detailed
response within 30 days.
D.
Completion of work. Repairs and maintenance for service interruptions
and other repairs not requiring in-unit work must be initiated within
24 hours and must be completed within 62 hours. All other requests
for service must be completed within three days from the date of the
initial request, except installation requests, provided that a grantee
shall complete the work in the shortest time possible where, for reasons
beyond the grantee's control, the work could not be completed in those
time periods even with the exercise of all due diligence; the failure
of a grantee to hire sufficient staff or to properly train its staff shall
not justify a grantee's failure to comply with this provision. Except as
federal law requires, no charge shall be made to the subscriber for this
service, except for the cost of repairs to the grantee's equipment or
facilities where it can be documented that the equipment or facility was
damaged by a subscriber.
E.
§ 46-60 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-61
46:112
§ 46-62. Notice to subscribers.
§ 46-63. Interruptions of service.
A grantee may intentionally interrupt service on the cable system only for
good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency
situations, only after a minimum of 48 hours' prior notice to subscribers
and the Town of the anticipated service interruption; provided, however,
that planned maintenance that does not require more than two hours'
Work standards. The standards of Subsections D and E of this section
shall be met 95% of the time, measured on a quarterly basis.
F.
Provision of information to subscribers. A grantee shall provide each
subscriber at the time cable service is installed, and at least annually
thereafter, written instructions for placing a service call, filing a
complaint, or requesting an adjustment. Each grantee shall also provide
a notice informing subscribers of how to communicate their views
and complaints to the cable company, the proper municipal official
and the State Attorney General; stating the responsibility of the State
Attorney General to receive consumer complaints concerning matters
other than channel selection and rates; and stating the policy regarding
and method by which subscribers may request rebates or pro-rata
credits as provided in this chapter or applicable federal or state law
or regulation. In addition, all grantees shall provide subscribers to
their services a schedule of rates and charges, a copy of the service
contract, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures,
and a description of any other of the grantee's policies in connection
with its subscribers. Copies of these notices shall be provided to the
Town. A grantee shall provide the Town and each subscriber at least
30 days' advance notice of any significant changes in any of the
information required by this section.
A.
Disclosure of price terms. All grantee promotional materials,
announcements, and advertising of residential cable services to
subscribers and the general public, where price information is listed
in any manner, shall clearly and accurately disclose price terms. In the
case of pay-per-view or pay-per-event programming, all promotional
materials must clearly and accurately disclose price terms, and in the
case of telephone orders a grantee shall take appropriate steps to
ensure that the customer service representatives clearly and accurately
disclose price terms to potential customers in advance of taking the
order.
B.
Public file. Each grantee shall maintain a public file containing all
notices provided to subscribers under these customer service
standards, as well as all written promotional offers made to subscribers
by the grantee. Material in the file shall be retained for a least one year
after the later of the date of mailing or public announcement of the
information contained in a notice.
C.
§ 46-61 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-63
46:113
interruption of service and that occurs between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. shall not require such notice to subscribers, and notice to the
Town may be given no less than 24 hours prior to the anticipated service
interruption.
§ 46-64. Billing.
§ 46-65. Disconnection and downgrades.
Proration of first billing statement. A grantee's first billing statement
after a new installation or service change shall be prorated as
appropriate and shall reflect any security deposit made or given by the
subscriber to the grantee.
A.
Itemization. A grantee's billing statement must itemize each category
of service and equipment provided to the subscriber and state clearly
the charge therefor.
B.
Payment due date. A grantee's billing statement must show a specific
payment due date not earlier than 10 days after the date the statement
is mailed. Any balance not received within 30 days after the due date
may be assessed a late fee not exceeding 1.5% of the amount due or
any higher amount allowed by state law. The late fee shall appear on
the following month's billing statement.
C.
In person payments. A grantee must notify the subscriber that he or
she can remit payment in person at the grantee's office and inform the
subscriber of the address of that office.
D.
No late fees for failures by grantee. Subscribers shall not be charged a
late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by a grantee, including
failure to bill timely or correctly the subscriber or failure to credit
properly the subscriber for a payment timely made.
E.
Credit for lack or impairment of service. Upon request, the account
of any subscriber shall be credited a prorated share of the monthly
charge for the service if said subscriber is without service or if service
is substantially impaired for any reason for a period exceeding six
hours during any twenty-four-hour period, except where it can be
documented that a subscriber seeks a refund for an outage or
impairment which that subscriber caused or in the case of a planned
outage occurring between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of
which the subscriber had prior notice.
F.
Subscriber termination. A subscriber may terminate service at any
time.
A.
Prompt disconnection or downgrade on request; charges. A grantee
shall promptly disconnect or downgrade any subscriber who so
requests from the grantee's cable system, unless the subscriber
unreasonably hinders access by the grantee to equipment of the
grantee or the subscriber's premises to which the grantee must have
B.
§ 46-63 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-65
46:114
access to complete the requested disconnection. No period of notice
prior to voluntary termination or downgrade of service may be required
of subscribers by any grantee. No charge may be imposed for any
voluntary disconnection, and downgrade charges must comply with
the requirements of federal law. So long as the subscriber returns
equipment necessary to receive a service within five business days of
the disconnection, no charge may be imposed by any grantee for any
cable services delivered after the date of the request to disconnect.
Subscriber return of equipment. A subscriber may be asked, but not
required, to disconnect a grantee's equipment and return it to the
business office, provided that if a subscriber requests that a grantee
pick up the equipment, the subscriber shall provide reasonable access
to the subscriber's premises during the grantee's business hours to
allow the grantee to retrieve the equipment.
C.
Refund of security deposit. Any security deposit and/or other funds
due the subscriber shall be refunded on disconnected accounts after
the converter has been recovered by the grantee. The refund process
shall take a maximum of 30 days or the next billing cycle from the
date disconnection was completed as required herein to the date the
customer receives the refund.
D.
Disconnection for failure to pay fee. If a subscriber fails to pay a
monthly subscriber or other fee or charge, a grantee may disconnect
the subscriber's service outlet; however, such disconnection shall not
be effected until at least 45 days after the due date of the monthly
subscriber fee or other charge and after 10 days' advance written
notice of intent to disconnect is given to the subscriber in question.
If the subscriber pays all amounts due, including late charges before
the date scheduled for disconnection, the grantee shall not disconnect
service. Subject to Subsection B of this section, after disconnection,
upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges,
including the payment of the reconnection charge, if any, the grantee
shall promptly reinstate service.
E.
Disconnection for damage to system or equipment. A grantee may
immediately disconnect a subscriber if the subscriber is damaging
or destroying the grantee's cable system or equipment. After
disconnection, the grantee shall restore service after the subscriber
provides adequate assurance that it has ceased the practices that led to
disconnection and paid all proper fees and charges, including reconnect
fees, a reasonable security deposit, and amounts owed the grantee for
damage to its cable system or equipment.
F.
Disconnection for signal leakage. A grantee may also disconnect a
subscriber that in any way, intentionally or otherwise, causes signal
leakage in excess of federal limits. It may do so in accordance with
federal rules and requirements or if the subscriber fails to take steps to
correct the problem. It may also do so without notice in the event of a
danger to the public safety, provided that the grantee shall immediately
G.
§ 46-65 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-65
46:115
§ 46-66. Changes in service.
In addition to rights reserved by the Town, subscribers shall have rights
with respect to alterations in service. The grantee may not alter the service
being provided to a class of subscribers (including by retiering,
restructuring or otherwise) without the express permission of each
subscriber, unless it complies with this section. At the time the grantee
alters the service it provides to a class of subscribers, it must provide
each subscriber 30 days' notice, explain the substance and full effect of
the alteration, and provide the subscriber the right within the thirty-day
period following notice to opt to receive any combination of services offered
by the grantee. Except as federal law otherwise provides, subscribers may
not be required to pay any charge (other than the properly noticed rates),
including an upgrade or downgrade charge, in order to receive the services
selected. No charge may be made for any service or product for which there
is a separate charge that a subscriber has not affirmatively indicated it
wishes to receive. Payment of the regular monthly bill does not in and of
itself constitute such an affirmative indication.
§ 46-67. Deposits.
A grantee may require a reasonable, nondiscriminatory deposit on
equipment provided to subscribers. Deposits shall be placed in an interestbearing
account, and the grantee shall return the deposit, plus interest
earned to the date repayment is made to the subscriber. Interest will be
calculated at the prevailing commercial savings rate on all late payments.
§ 46-68. Record of subscriber complaints.
A grantee shall maintain a record of subscriber complaints in accordance
with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3010(4).
notify the subscriber of the problem and, once the problem is corrected,
reconnect the subscriber without charge.
Removal of grantee property. Except as federal law may otherwise
provide, if a subscriber terminates service, a grantee may offer the
subscriber the opportunity to acquire any wiring located on the
premises that is the property of the grantee at replacement cost. If the
subscriber declines to purchase the wiring, the grantee must remove its
property from the subscriber's premises within seven days, if requested
by the subscriber. If a grantee fails to remove the wiring in that period,
the grantee shall make no further attempt to remove the wiring or
restrict its use.
H.
Every franchisee shall keep a record or log of all written complaints
received regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions, billing
procedure, employee attitude and similar matters. These records shall
be maintained for a period of two years.
A.
§ 46-65 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-68
46:116
§ 46-69. Remedies for violators.
In addition to the remedies set forth elsewhere in this chapter and in
the franchise agreement, subscribers shall have available the remedies
provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3010(7).
The record shall contain the following information for each complaint
received:
(1) Date, time and nature of the complaint;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the person complaining;
(3) Investigation of the complaint;
(4) Manner and time of resolution of the complaint; and
If the complaint regards equipment malfunction or the quality
of reception, a report indicating corrective steps taken, with the
nature of the problem stated.
(5)
B.
Consistent with subscriber privacy provisions contained in the Cable
Act and applicable FCC regulations, every grantee shall make the
logs or records of complaints available to any authorized agent of
any franchising authority having a franchise with that grantee or any
authorized agent of a municipality considering a franchise with that
grantee upon request during normal business hours for on-site review.
C.
§ 46-68 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-69
46:117

ARTICLE XIII
Rate Regulation
§ 46-70. Authority of Town to regulate rates.
The Town may regulate all rates and charges except to the extent it is
prohibited from doing so by law, and if the Town does exercise its rate
regulatory authority, no rate or charge may be imposed or increased without
the prior approval of the Town except such rates and charges that the Town
is prohibited from regulating. Subject to the foregoing, any change made
without prior approval is an illegal change, and a grantee is prohibited from
requesting or requiring a subscriber to pay an illegal rate as a condition
of providing service. This section shall not be construed to mean that any
grantee has consented or will consent to subject itself to rate regulation.
§ 46-71. Authority to adopt regulations.
All rates that are subject to regulation by the Town must be reasonable.
The Town may adopt such regulations, procedures, and standards as it
deems necessary to implement rate regulation and may regulate rates
by amendment to this chapter, by a separate resolution or ordinance, by
amendment to a franchise agreement, or in any other lawful manner. This
section shall not be construed to mean that any grantee has consented or
will consent to subject itself to rate regulation.
§ 46-72. Rate changes.
Advance notice of rate changes. At least 30 days prior to implementing
any increases in rates, or changes in channel positions, programming or
service terms or conditions, a grantee shall provide the Town and each
subscriber with written notice describing any such changes it plans
to make and the proposed effective dates for the changes. A grantee
shall not be required to provide 30 days' notice of rate decreases or
temporary promotional offers that result in lower rates for subscribers,
provided that it has given the Town notice of such decreases and offers
prior to implementation.
A.
Explanation of rate changes. In addition to the required notice, before
it alters services or service terms or conditions, a grantee must provide
a reasonably simple and clear written notice explaining the substance
and full effect of the alteration, including the effect on rates and service
options and the effect of the change on the use of other consumer
electronic equipment. Such written notice shall be provided to the Town
at least 30 days, and to subscribers at least 30 days, before the change.
B.
Changes made without required notice invalid. Any change made
without the required 30 days' notice shall be of no force or effect, and
a grantee shall be obligated to refund any increased amount collected
without the required 30 days' notice and to restore service to the
prior existing status, at least until the required notice is provided. This
subsection shall not limit the right of a grantee to implement any rate
C.
§ 46-70 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-72
46:119
decreases or temporary promotional offers that result in lower rates
for subscribers immediately upon providing written notice of these rate
changes to the Town. This subsection shall not be interpreted to limit
the Town's right to exercise its rate regulation authority under § 46-70
of this chapter, the availability of remedies under applicable laws or
regulations, or rights under the customer service standards set forth in
Article XII of this chapter.
§ 46-72 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-72
46:120
ARTICLE XIV
Records and Reports
§ 46-73. Open books and records.
The Town shall have the right to inspect and copy at any time after
reasonable notice during normal business hours at a grantee's local
office all materials and records of the grantee relevant to the Town's
management of the public rights-of-way and regulation of customer
service and consumer affairs, including all maps, plans, service
complaint logs, performance test results, records of requests for
service, computer records, codes, programs, and discs or other storage
media and other like material which the Town reasonably deems
appropriate in order to monitor compliance with the terms of this
chapter, a franchise agreement, or applicable law.
A grantee shall make available to the Town, to the best of its ability,
the same types of materials which the Town deems relevant and
which are held by an affiliate, a cable operator of the cable system,
and any contractor, subcontractor or any person holding any form
of management contract for the cable system. The grantee is
responsible for collecting, to the best of its ability, such requested
information and producing it at its offices in Maine and as part of
its application it must affirm that it can and will do so.
(1)
The Town shall preserve the confidentiality of proprietary business
information of a grantee or another party provided to the Town by
the grantee, to the extent permissible under Maine law. To that
end, the grantee shall clearly identify any proprietary business
information that it believes to be entitled to confidential treatment,
so that the Town may establish appropriate safeguards against
improper disclosure.
(2)
A.
The Town shall also have the right to inspect at any time after
reasonable notice during normal business hours at a grantee's local
office all materials relevant to the financial condition of the grantee,
including all books, records, receipts, contracts, financial statements,
computer records, codes, programs, and discs or other storage media
and other like material which the Town reasonably deems appropriate
in order to monitor compliance with the terms of this chapter, a
franchise agreement, or applicable law.
A grantee shall make available for inspection by the Town, to the
best of its ability, the same types of materials that the Town deems
relevant and that are held by an affiliate, a cable operator of the
cable system, and any contractor, subcontractor or any person
holding any form of management contract for the cable system. The
grantee is responsible for collecting, to the best of its ability, such
requested information and producing it at its offices in Maine and
as part of its application it must affirm that it can and will do so.
(1)
B.
§ 46-73 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-73
46:121
§ 46-74. Required reports.
A grantee shall file the following with the Town in a form acceptable to the
Town:
§ 46-75. Reports to be provided on request.
The Town shall preserve the confidentiality of proprietary business
information of a grantee provided for inspection by the Town by
the grantee, to the extent permissible under Maine law. To that
end, the grantee shall clearly identify any proprietary business
information that it believes to be entitled to confidential treatment,
so that the Town may establish appropriate safeguards against
improper disclosure.
(2)
Annual construction report. An annual report setting forth the physical
miles of plant construction and plant in operation during the fiscal
year shall be submitted to the Town. Such report also shall contain
any revisions to the system as-built maps filed with the Town. The
annual report shall be provided at the time specified in the franchise
agreement.
A.
Notices instituting civil or criminal proceedings. A grantee shall
provide the Town with copies of any notice of deficiency, forfeiture,
or other document issued by any state or federal agency instituting
any investigation or civil or criminal proceeding regarding the cable
system, the grantee, or any affiliate of the grantee, to the extent the
same may affect or bear on operations in the Town. A notice that an
affiliate that has a management contract for the cable system was not
in compliance with FCC EEO requirements within the work unit serving
the Town would be deemed to affect or bear on operations in the Town.
This material shall be submitted to the Town at the time it is filed or
within five days of the date it is received.
B.
Bankruptcy declarations. Any request for protection under bankruptcy
laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the
grantee or by any partnership or corporation that owns or controls the
grantee directly or indirectly. This material shall be submitted to the
Town at the time it is filed or within five days of the date it is received.
C.
Reports required by FCC. Upon the Town's written request, a grantee
shall deliver to the Town copies of all reports required by the FCC,
including but not limited to any proof of performance tests and results,
equal employment opportunity reports, and all petitions, pleadings,
notices, and applications regarding the cable system, or a group of
cable systems of which the grantee's cable system is a part, submitted
or received by the grantee, an affiliate, or any other person on behalf
of the grantee, either to or from the FCC or any other federal or
state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction over any
matter affecting operation of the grantee's system, for the time period
specified in the Town's request.
A.
§ 46-73 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-75
46:122
§ 46-76. Additional reports.
The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the Town, at a time reasonably
prescribed by the Town, such additional reports with respect to its
operation, affairs, transactions, or property as the Town may reasonably
deem necessary and appropriate to the performance of any of the rights,
functions, or duties of the Town in connection with this chapter or the
franchise agreement.
§ 46-77. Records required.
Financial reports. The Town may request the following financial reports
for the franchise area once per calendar year:
An ownership report, indicating all persons who at any time during
the preceding year did control or benefit from an interest in the
franchise of 5% or more.
(1)
An annual income statement showing subscriber revenue from
each category of service and every source of nonsubscriber
revenue.
(2)
A current annual statement of all capital expenditures, including
the cost of construction and of equipment used or placed within the
Town.
(3)
An annual list of officers and members of the board of directors of
the grantee and any affiliates.
(4)
An organizational charge showing what corporations or
partnerships with more than a five-percent interest own the
grantee and the nature of that ownership interest (limited partner,
general partner, preferred shareholder, etc.) and showing the same
information for each corporation or partnership so identified and
so on until the ultimate corporate and partnership interests are
identified.
(5)
An annual report of each entity identified in Subsection B(5) which
issues an annual report.
(6)
B.
System and operational reports. The following system and operational
reports shall be submitted annually upon request of the Town:
An annual summary of the previous year's activities, including but
not limited to subscriber totals for each category of service offered,
including number of pay units sold, new services offered, and the
amount collected annually from other users of the system and the
character and extent of the service rendered thereto.
(1)
(2) An annual projection of system and service plans for the future.
C.
Records to be maintained. A grantee shall at all times maintain and
shall deliver to the Town upon request the following records:
A.
§ 46-75 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-77
46:123
§ 46-78. Performance evaluation.
(1) Records of all complaints maintained pursuant to § 46-68.
A full and complete set of plans, records, and as-built maps showing
the exact location of all system equipment installed or in use in the
Town, exclusive of subscriber service drops.
(2)
Records of outages, indicating date, duration, area and the
estimated number of subscribers affected, type of outage, and
cause.
(3)
Records of service calls for repair and maintenance indicating the
date and time service was required, the date of acknowledgment
and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled), and
the date and time service was provided and (if different) the date
and time the problem was solved.
(4)
Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service
extension, indicating date of request, date of acknowledgment, and
the date and time service was extended.
(5)
Additional information. The Town may request and a grantee shall
promptly provide additional information, reports, records, and
documents as may be reasonably required from time to time for the
performance by the Town of any of its rights, functions, or duties in
conversations with this chapter or a franchise agreement.
B.
Town discretion to hold public sessions. The Town may, at its discretion,
hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions. All such evaluation
sessions shall be open to the public.
A.
Announcement of sessions. All evaluation sessions shall be open to the
public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation.
B.
Discussion topics. Topics that may be discussed at any scheduled or
special evaluation session may include, but are not limited to, system
performance and construction, grantee compliance with this chapter
and a franchise agreement, customer service and complaint response,
subscriber privacy, services provided, programming offered, service
rate structures, if applicable, franchise fees, penalties, free or
discounted services, applications of new technologies, judicial and FCC
filings, and line extensions.
C.
Grantee cooperation. During the review and evaluation by the Town,
a grantee shall fully cooperate with the Town and shall provide such
information and documents as the Town may need to reasonably
perform its review.
D.
§ 46-77 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-79
46:124
§ 46-79. Inspection of voluminous materials.
If the books, records, maps or plans or other requested documents are too
voluminous or for security reasons cannot be copied and moved, then a
grantee may request that the inspection take place at some other location,
provided that:
§ 46-80. Retention of records; relation to privacy rights.
Each grantee shall take all steps required, if any, to ensure that it is
able to provide the Town all information which must be provided or may
be requested under this chapter or a franchise agreement, including by
providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Nothing in this section
shall be read to require a grantee to violate 47 U.S.C. § 551. Each grantee
shall be responsible for blacking out any data that federal or state law
prevents it from providing to the Town.
The grantee must make necessary arrangements for copying
documents selected by the Town after review; and
A.
The grantee must pay reasonable travel and additional copying
expenses incurred by the Town in inspecting those documents or having
those documents inspected by its designee, if done outside the greater
Bar Harbor area.
B.
§ 46-79 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-80
46:125

ARTICLE XV
Rights of Individuals Protected
§ 46-81. Discriminatory practices prohibited.
§ 46-82. Equal employment opportunity.
A grantee shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or
discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or
privileges of employment because of race, color, religion, national origin,
sex, age, or any other basis prohibited by federal or state law. A grantee
Discrimination prohibited. A grantee shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, programmers,
or residents of the Town on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, age, physical handicap, or on any other basis prohibited by
federal or state law. This provision is not intended to require a grantee
to provide any equipment or service free of charge to any subscriber,
unless such equipment or service is provided free in a manner that
discriminates among subscribers in a manner that is prohibited by state
or federal law, or unless the provision of free equipment or service is
required by state or federal law.
A.
Discrimination for exercise of right prohibited. A grantee shall not
discriminate among persons or take any retaliatory action against a
person because of that person's exercise of any right it may have under
federal, state, or local law, nor may the grantee require a person to
waive such rights as a condition of taking service.
B.
Differential rates based on subscriber income prohibited. A grantee
shall not deny access or levy different rates and charges on the
residents of any particular geographical area because of the income of
the residents of that geographical area.
C.
Rate preferences prohibited. Except to the extent the Town may not
enforce such a requirement, a grantee is prohibited from discriminating
in its rates or charges or from granting undue preferences to any
subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential
subscribers; provided, however, that a grantee may offer temporary,
bona fide promotional discounts in order to attract or maintain
subscribers, so long as such discounts are offered on a
nondiscriminatory basis to similar classes of subscribers throughout
the Town; a grantee may offer discounts for the elderly, the
handicapped, or the economically disadvantaged and such other
discounts as it is expressly entitled to provide under federal law, if
such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner; and a
grantee may enter into bulk service agreements with multiple-dwelling
unit owners, if the rates under such agreements are established and
applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A grantee shall comply
at all times with all applicable federal, state, and Town laws and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
D.
§ 46-81 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-82
46:127
shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations governing
equal employment opportunities.
§ 46-83. Subscriber privacy.
Grantee shall protect subscriber privacy. A grantee shall at all times
protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of
Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551, and 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 3010(6-A). A grantee shall not condition subscriber service on the
subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information which,
pursuant to federal or state law, cannot be disclosed without the
subscriber's explicit consent.
A.
Selling subscriber information prohibited. Neither a grantee nor its
agents or employees shall, without the prior and specific written
authorization of the subscriber involved, sell or otherwise make
available for commercial purposes the names, addresses, or telephone
numbers of any subscriber or subscribers or any information that
identifies the individual viewing habits of any subscriber or subscribers.
B.
§ 46-82 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-83
46:128
ARTICLE XVI
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 46-84. Compliance with laws required.
A grantee shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations as they become effective, unless otherwise stated.
§ 46-85. Force majeure.
A grantee shall not be deemed in default with provisions of its franchise
where performance was rendered impossible by war or riots, civil
disturbances, floods, or other natural catastrophes beyond the grantee's
control, and a franchise shall not be revoked or a grantee penalized for such
noncompliance, provided that the grantee takes immediate and diligent
steps to bring itself back into compliance and to comply as soon as possible
under the circumstance with its franchise without unduly endangering the
health, safety, and integrity of the grantee's employees or property or
the health, safety, and integrity of the public, public rights-of-way, public
property, or private property.
§ 46-86. Connections to system; use of antennas.
§ 46-87. Calculation of time.
Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, or payment is required hereunder and a period of time or duration
for the fulfillment or doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed herein, the time
shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the last day of the
prescribed or fixed period of duration time.
Subscriber right to attach devices. Subscribers shall have the right
to attach devices to a grantee's system to allow them to transmit
signals or services for which they have paid to VCR receivers and
other terminals provided that such terminals are located within the
subscriber's premises and provided that such transmissions do not
result in interference with the operations of grantee's system or
violations of signal leakage compliance standards. Subscribers also
have the right to use their own legally acquired remote control devices
and tuners and other similar equipment, and a grantee shall provide
information to consumers which will allow them to adjust such devices
so that they may be used with the grantee's system.
A.
Requiring disconnection of antennas prohibited. A grantee shall not,
as a condition of providing service, require a subscriber or potential
subscriber to remove any existing antenna, or disconnect an antenna
except at the express direction of the subscriber or potential subscriber,
or prohibit or discourage a subscriber from installing an antenna
switch, provided that such equipment and installations are consistent
with applicable codes.
B.
§ 46-84 CABLE TELEVISION § 46-88
46:129
§ 46-88. Severability.
If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be
held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof shall be valid in
all other respects and continue to be effective. In the event of a subsequent
change in applicable law so that the provision which had been held invalid
is no longer invalid, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and
effect without further action by the Town and shall thereafter be binding on
the grantee and the Town.
§ 46-89. Captions.
The captions and headings of this chapter are for convenience and
reference purposes only and shall not affect in any way the meaning and
interpretation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 46-90. Repealer.
The Town of Bar Harbor Cable Television Ordinance, Section 07.05 of the
Bar Harbor Code, is hereby repealed and replaced in its entirety with the
foregoing, except that the repeal thereof shall not affect the validity of
any franchise agreements issued pursuant thereto and except that said
ordinance shall remain in full force and effect for the trial and punishment
of all past violations thereof and for recovery of penalties already incurred.
§ 46-88 BAR HARBOR CODE § 46-90
46:130
Chapter 49
CAMPAIGN REPORTS
§ 49-1. Reports by political action committees and ballot question
committees.
§ 49-2. Severability.
In the event that any section, subsection, or portion of this chapter, or
the application of such section, subsection, or portion of this chapter to
any person or circumstance, shall be declared by any competent court to
be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not be deemed to affect the
validity of any other section, subsection, or portion of this chapter, or the
applicability of such section, subsection, or portion of this chapter to other
persons or circumstances.
§ 49-3. Effective date.
The provisions of these sections shall be effective 30 days after passage.
Chapter 54
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Adult businesses — See Ch. 7.
Special amusement permits — See Ch. 14.
Noise — See Ch. 139.
§ 54-1. License required.
No person, firm, association or corporation shall conduct or maintain any
public dance or dance hall or place of public entertainment within the Town
of Bar Harbor until such person, firm, association or corporation shall have
first obtained a license to do so from the municipal officers of the Town of
Bar Harbor.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2502(2), the Town of Bar Harbor adopts
and shall be governed by Title 21-A, Chapter 13, Subchapter 4 (21-A
M.R.S.A. §§ 1051 — 1063), as it may be amended.
A.
Registrations and campaign finance reports submitted in accordance
with 21-A M.R.S.A. §§ 1051-1063, as it may be amended, shall be filed
with the Town Clerk, not the State Commission on Governmental Ethics
and Election Practices.
B.
Pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2502(3), as it may be amended, the Town
shall keep said registrations and reports for eight years.
C.
§ 46-90 DANCES AND DANCE HALLS § 54-2
54:131
§ 54-2. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
§ 54-3. License fee.
The fee for the license shall be $2 which shall be paid to the Town of Bar
Harbor before a license shall be issued.
§ 54-4. Rules and regulations; license revocation.
The municipal officers shall make such reasonable rules and regulations
governing public dances or dance halls so as not to create a public
disturbance. Any such license granted by the municipal officers may be
revoked for failure to comply with said rules and regulations.
Chapter 58
DEPARTMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, committees and commissions — See
Ch. 31.
§ 58-1. Establishment.
In addition to the departments and/or agencies created by the Charter
of the Town of Bar Harbor and the laws of Maine, and pursuant to the
authority given by § C-10A(3) of the Town of Bar Harbor Charter, the Town
Council hereby creates and establishes the following departments for the
proper and efficient administering of the affairs of the Town:
A. Dances conducted by or under the authority of public school officials.
Dances conducted by or under the authority of any fraternal
organization.
B.
Dances conducted by any licensee of the Maine State Liquor
Commission who is required by state law or by any regulation of said
Commission to obtain a permit from said Commission in order to
conduct dances.
C.
A. Planning Department.
B. Public Works Department.
C. Finance Department.
D. Fire Department.
§ 54-2 BAR HARBOR CODE § 58-1
58:132
§ 58-2. Department heads.
Chapter 62
DISCRIMINATION
E. Police Department.
F. Clerk's Department.
G. Harbor Department.
The above-named departments shall be governed and administered by
the following department heads:
Department Department Head
Planning Department Planning Director
Public Works Department Public Works Director
Finance Department Finance Director
Fire Department Fire Chief
Police Department Police Chief
Clerk's Department Town Clerk
Harbor Department Harbor Master
A.
Each department head shall have the powers, duties and
responsibilities accorded to him or her by the laws of Maine and the
ordinances, resolves and directives adopted by the Town and/or Town
Council.
B.
Each department head shall have the powers, duties and
responsibilities of the statutory offices as follows:
Department Head Statutory Office
Planning Director Health Officer
Public Works Director Road Commissioner
Tree Warden
Fire Chief Fire Chief
Police Chief Police Chief
Dog Constable
Town Clerk Town Clerk
Registrar of Voters
General Assistance Administrator
Harbor Master Harbor Master
C.
§ 58-1 DISCRIMINATION § 58-2
62:133

ARTICLE I
Discrimination Based on Sexual Orientation
[Adopted 4-21-1998]
§ 62-1. Findings; declaration of policy.
§ 62-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICATION FOR CREDIT — Any communication, oral or written, by a
person to a creditor requesting an extension of credit to that person or
any other person, and includes any procedure involving the renewal or
alteration of credit privileges or the changing of the name of the person to
whom credit is extended.
CREDIT — The right granted by a creditor to a person to defer payment
of debt or to incur debt and defer its payment or to purchase property or
services and defer payment therefor.
CREDITOR — Any person who regularly extends or arranges the extension
of credit for which the payment of a finance charge or interest is required,
whether in connection with loans, sale of property or services or otherwise.
CREDIT SALE — Any transaction with respect to which credit is granted
or arranged by the seller. The term includes any contract in the form of a
The Council finds that:
The people who make up the Town of Bar Harbor include those
who are gay and lesbian (they are family members, neighbors,
friends, employees, taxpayers, landlords and tenants, lenders and
borrowers);
(1)
Some homosexuals face discrimination in employment, housing,
access to public accommodations, education and in the extension
of financial credit;
(2)
Federal, state and Town laws offer no clear prohibition of
discrimination based on sexual orientation in employment, housing,
access to public accommodations, education and in the extension
of financial credit; and
(3)
Many homosexuals are reluctant to report acts of harassment or
violence because of a lack of legal protection against discrimination
in employment, housing, access to public accommodations,
education and in the extension of financial credit.
(4)
A.
Therefore, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, it
is declared to be the policy of this Town to prevent discrimination in
employment, housing, access to public accommodations, education or
in the extension of credit on account of sexual orientation.
B.
§ 62-1 DISCRIMINATION § 62-2
62:135
bailment or lease if the bailee or lessee contracts to pay as compensation
for use a sum substantially equivalent to or in excess of the aggregate value
of the property and services involved and it is agreed that the bailee or
lessee will become the owner of the property upon full compliance with his
obligations under the contract.
CREDIT TRANSACTION — Any invitation to apply for credit, extension of
credit or credit sale.
DISCRIMINATE — Includes, without limitation, segregate or separate.
EMPLOYEE — An individual who is employed by an employer, but not
including any individual employed by his/her parents, spouse or child.
EMPLOYER — Any person in this Town employing any number of
employees, whatever the place of employment of such employees, and any
person outside this Town employing any number of employees whose usual
place of employment is in this Town; any person acting in the interest of
any employer, directly or indirectly; and labor organizations, whether or
not organized on a religious, fraternal or sectarian basis, with respect to
their employment of employees, but does not include a religious or fraternal
corporation or association not organized for private profit and in fact not
conducted for private profit, with respect to employment of its members of
the same religion, sect or fraternity.
EMPLOYMENT AGENCY — Any person undertaking with or without
compensation to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit, refer
or place employees. It includes, without limitation, placement services,
training schools and centers, and labor organizations, to the extent that
they act as employee referral sources, and it includes any agent of such
person.
EXTENSION OF CREDIT — Any acts incident to the evaluation of an
application for credit and the granting of credit.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION — Any building or structure or portion
thereof, or any parcel of land, developed or undeveloped, which is occupied,
or is intended to be occupied or to be developed for occupancy, for
residential purposes excepting:
INVITATION TO APPLY FOR CREDIT — Any communication, oral or written,
by a creditor which encourages or prompts an application for credit.
PERSON — One or more individuals, partnerships, associations,
organizations, corporations, municipal corporations, legal representatives,
The rental of a one-family unit of a two-family dwelling, one unit of
which is occupied by the owner;
A.
The rental of not more than four rooms of a one-family dwelling which
is occupied by the owner; and
B.
The rental of any dwelling owned, controlled or operated for other than
a commercial purpose by a religious corporation to its membership
unless such membership is restricted on account of sexual orientation.
C.
§ 62-2 BAR HARBOR CODE § 62-2
62:136
trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and other legal representatives, including
the Town and all agencies thereof.
PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION — Any establishment which in fact
caters to, or offers its goods, facilities or services to, or solicits or accepts
patronage from, the general public, including but not limited to inns,
taverns, roadhouses, hotels, whether conducted for the entertainment or
accommodation of transient guests or of those seeking health, recreation
or rest, restaurants, eating houses or any place where food is sold for
consumption on the premises, buffets, saloons, barrooms or any store,
park or enclosure where spirituous or malt liquors are sold, ice cream
parlors, confectioneries, soda fountains and all stores where beverages
of any kind are retained for consumption on the premises, retail stores
and establishments, dispensaries, clinics, hospitals, rest rooms, bathhouses,
barbershops, beauty parlors, theaters, motion-picture houses, music halls,
airdromes, roof gardens, race courses, skating rinks, amusement and
recreation parks, fairs, bowling alleys, golf courses, gymnasiums, shooting
galleries, billiard and pool parlors, swimming pools, seashore
accommodations and boardwalks, public libraries, garages and gasoline
stations, all public conveyances operated on land, water or in the air as well
as the stations and terminals thereof, public halls and public elevators of
buildings occupied by two or more tenants or by the owner and one or more
tenants, and educational institutions.
REAL ESTATE BROKER and REAL ESTATE SALESMAN — See 32 M.R.S.A.
§ 4001(2) and (3), as amended,6 but including all persons meeting those
definitions, whether or not they are licensed or required to be licensed.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Having a preference or orientation for, being
identified as having a preference or orientation for, or having a history of a
preference for, heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.
§ 62-3. Employment discrimination.
It shall be unlawful employment discrimination, in violation of this
article, except where based on a bona fide occupational qualification:
For any employer to fail or refuse to hire or otherwise discriminate
against any applicant for employment because of sexual orientation
or because of such reason to discharge an employee or
discriminate with respect to hire, tenure, promotion, transfer,
compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment, or
any other matter directly or indirectly related to employment, or
in recruiting of individuals for employment or in hiring them to
utilize any employment agency which such employer knows, or
has reasonable cause to know, discriminates against individuals
because of their sexual orientation.
(1)
For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly
or refer for employment or otherwise discriminate against any
(2)
A.
6. Editor's Note: Section 4001 of Title 32 was repealed by Chapter 395 of the Acts of 1987.
§ 62-2 DISCRIMINATION § 62-3
62:137
individual because of sexual orientation, or to comply with an
employer's request for the referral of job applicants, if such request
indicates whether directly or indirectly that such employer will
not afford full and equal employment opportunities to individuals
regardless of their sexual orientation.
For any labor organization to exclude from apprenticeship or
membership, or to deny full and equal membership rights to, any
applicant for membership because of sexual orientation or because
of such reason to deny a member full and equal membership rights,
expel from membership, penalize or otherwise discriminate in any
manner with respect to hire, tenure, promotion, transfer,
compensation, terms, conditions or privileges of employment,
representation, grievances or any other matter directly or
indirectly related to membership or employment, whether or not
authorized or required by the constitution or bylaws of such labor
organizations or by a collective labor agreement or other contract,
or to fail or refuse to classify properly or refer for employment
or otherwise discriminate against any member because of such
sexual orientation, or to cause or attempt to cause an employer to
discriminate against an individual in violation of this section.
(3)
For any employer or employment agency or labor organization,
prior to employment or admission to membership of any individual,
to:
Elicit or attempt to elicit any information directly or indirectly
pertaining to sexual orientation except where some privileged
information is necessary for an employment agency or labor
organization to make a suitable job referral;
(a)
(b) Make or keep a record of sexual orientation;
Use any form of application for employment or personnel or
membership blank containing questions or entries directly or
indirectly pertaining to sexual orientation;
(c)
Print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice
or advertisement relating to employment or membership
indicating any preference, limitation, specification or
discrimination based upon sexual orientation; or
(d)
Establish, announce or follow a policy of denying or limiting,
through a quota system or otherwise, employment or
membership opportunities of any group because of sexual
orientation.
(e)
(4)
For an employer or employment agency or labor organization to
discriminate in any manner against any individual because he or
she has opposed any practice which would be a violation of this
article or because he or she has made a charge, testified or assisted
(5)
§ 62-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 62-3
62:138
§ 62-4. Housing discrimination.
in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under
this article.
Not employment discrimination. It shall not be unlawful employment
discrimination:
After employment or admission to membership, to make a record
of such features of an individual as are needed in good faith for
the purpose of identifying them, provided such record is intended
and used in good faith solely for such identification and not for the
purpose of discrimination in violation of this article.
(1)
To record any data required by law, or by the rules and regulations
of any state or federal agency, provided such records are kept in
good faith for the purpose of complying with law and are not used
for the purpose of discrimination in violation of this article.
(2)
B.
It shall be unlawful housing discrimination, in violation of this article:
For any owner, lessee, sublessee, managing agent or other person
having the right to sell, rent, lease or manage a housing
accommodation, or any agent of these, to make or cause to be
made any written or oral inquiry concerning the sexual orientation
of any prospective purchaser, occupant or tenant of such housing
accommodation; or to refuse to show or refuse to sell, rent, lease,
let or otherwise deny to or withhold from any individual such
housing accommodation because of sexual orientation of such
individual; or to issue any advertisement relating to the sale, rental
or lease of such housing accommodation which indicates any
preference, limitation, specification or discrimination based upon
sexual orientation; or to discriminate against any individual
because of sexual orientation in the price, terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any such housing
accommodations or in the furnishing of facilities or services in
connection therewith; or to evict or attempt to evict any tenant of
any housing accommodation because of sexual orientation;
(1)
For any real estate broker or real estate sales person, or agent of
one of them, to fail or refuse to show any applicant for a housing
accommodation any such accommodation listed for sale, lease or
rental because of sexual orientation of such applicant or of any
intended occupant of such accommodation; or to misrepresent for
the purpose of discriminating on account of sexual orientation of
such applicant or intended occupant the availability or asking price
of a housing accommodation listed for sale, lease or rental; or for
such a reason to fail to communicate to the person having the
right to sell or lease such housing accommodation any offer for the
same made by any applicant thereof; or in any other manner to
discriminate against any applicant for housing because of sexual
(2)
A.
§ 62-3 DISCRIMINATION § 62-4
62:139
§ 62-5. Public accommodations discrimination.
It shall be unlawful public accommodations discrimination, in violation of
this article:
orientation of such applicant or of any intended occupant of the
housing accommodation; or to make or cause to be made any
written or oral inquiry or record concerning the sexual orientation
of any such applicant or intended occupant; or to accept for listing
any housing accommodation when the person having the right
to sell or lease the same has directly or indirectly indicated an
intention of discriminating among prospective tenants or
purchasers on the ground of their sexual orientation, or when he
knows or has reason to know that the person having the right to
sell or lease such housing accommodation has made a practice of
such discrimination since the effective date of this article; or
For any person to whom application is made for a loan or other
form of financial assistance for the acquisition, construction,
rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation, whether secured or unsecured, or agent of such
person, to make or cause to be made any oral or written inquiry
concerning the sexual orientation of any individual seeking such
financial assistance, or of existing or prospective occupants or
tenants of such housing accommodations, or to discriminate in the
granting of such financial assistance, or in the terms, conditions
or privileges relating to the obtaining or use of any such financial
assistance, against any applicant because of the sexual orientation
of such applicant or of the existing or prospective occupants or
tenants.
(3)
Not housing discrimination. Nothing in this article shall be construed
in any manner to prohibit or limit the exercise of the privilege of
every person and the agent of any person having the right to sell,
rent, lease or manage a housing accommodation to set up and enforce
specifications in the selling, renting, leasing or letting thereof or in
the furnishings of facilities or services in connection therewith which
are not based on the sexual orientation of any prospective or actual
purchaser, lessee, tenant or occupant thereof. Nothing in this article
contained shall be construed in any manner to prohibit or limit the
exercise of the privilege of every person and the agent of any person
making loans for or offering financial assistance in the acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of housing
accommodations to set standards and preferences, terms, conditions,
limitations or specifications for the granting of such loans or financial
assistance which are not based on the sexual orientation of any existing
or prospective owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of such housing
accommodation.
B.
For any person, being the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager,
superintendent, agent or employee of any place of public
A.
§ 62-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 62-5
62:140
§ 62-6. Credit discrimination.
It shall be unlawful credit discrimination for any creditor to refuse the
extension of credit to any person solely on the basis of sexual orientation
in any credit transaction. It shall not be unlawful credit discrimination to
comply with the terms and conditions of any bona fide group credit life,
accident and health insurance plan or for a financial institution extending
credit to a married person to require both the husband and the wife to sign
a note and a mortgage and to deny credit to persons under the age of 18 or
to consider a person's age in determining the terms upon which credit will
be extended.
§ 62-7. Education discrimination.
It shall be unlawful educational discrimination, on the basis of sexual
orientation, to:
accommodation to directly or indirectly refuse, withhold from or deny
to any person, on account of sexual orientation, any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges of such place of
public accommodation or for such reason in any manner to discriminate
against any person in the price, terms or conditions upon which access
to such accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges may
depend; or
For any person to directly or indirectly publish, circulate, issue, display,
post or mail any written, printed, painted or broadcast communication,
notice or advertisement to the effect that any of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities and privileges of any place of public
accommodation shall be refused, withheld from or denied to any person
on account of sexual orientation, or that the patronage or custom
thereat of any person belonging to or purporting to be of any particular
sexual orientation is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable,
desired or solicited, or that the clientele thereof is restricted to
members of particular sexual orientation. The production of any such
written, printed, painted or broadcast communication, notice or
advertisement purporting to relate to any such place shall be
presumptive evidence in any action that the same was authorized by its
owner, manager or proprietor.
B.
Exclude a person from participation in, deny a person the benefits of,
or subject a person to discrimination in any academic extracurricular,
research, occupational training or other program or activity:
A.
B. Deny a person equal opportunity in athletic programs;
Apply any rule concerning the actual or potential family or marital
status of a person;
C.
§ 62-5 DISCRIMINATION § 62-7
62:141
§ 62-8. Prohibition against retaliation and coercion.
§ 62-9. Enforcement.
Deny admission to the institution or program or fail to provide equal
access to and information about an institution or program through
recruitment; or
D.
E. Deny financial assistance availability or opportunity.
A person may not discriminate against any individual because that
individual has opposed any act or practice that is unlawful under this
article or because that individual made a charge, testified, assisted or
participated in any manner in an investigation or proceeding under this
article.
A.
It is unlawful for a person to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere
with any individual in the exercise or enjoyment of the rights granted
or protected by this article or because that individual has exercised or
enjoyed, or has aided or encouraged another individual in the exercise
or enjoyment of, those rights.
B.
The remedies and procedures available under the enforcement
provisions of this article are available to persons for violations of the
preceding two subsections.
C.
A violation of this article shall be a civil infraction and shall be
enforceable in the Maine Superior Court in a civil action. Not later
than two years after the act of unlawful discrimination complained of,
a person who has been subject to unlawful discrimination may file a
civil action in the Superior Court against the person or persons who
committed the unlawful discrimination.
A.
In any civil action under this article, the burden shall be on the person
seeking relief to prove, by a fair preponderance of the evidence, that
the alleged unlawful discrimination occurred.
B.
In any action filed under this article by any person:
Where any person who has been the subject of alleged unlawful
housing discrimination has not acquired substitute housing,
temporary injunctions against the sale or rental to others of the
housing accommodations as to which the violation allegedly
occurred, or against the sale or rental of a single housing
accommodation substantially identical thereto and controlled by
the alleged violator, shall be liberally granted in the interests of
furthering the purposes of this article, when it appears probable
that the plaintiff will succeed upon final disposition of the case.
(1)
If the court finds that unlawful discrimination occurred, its
judgment shall specify an appropriate remedy or remedies therefor.
Such remedies may include, but are not limited to, any and all
(2)
C.
§ 62-7 BAR HARBOR CODE § 62-9
62:142
§ 62-10. Exceptions.
In addition to the other exceptions and exemptions provided in this article,
this article does not:
remedies provided for in the Maine Human Rights Act, 5 M.R.S.A.
§ 4613, as the same may be amended from time to time.
In any civil action under this article, the court, in its discretion, may
allow the prevailing party reasonable attorneys' fees and costs.
(3)
A. Require the teaching of any particular subject in the public schools;
B. Apply to a religious corporation, association or organization; or
C. Require any form of affirmative action based on sexual orientation.
§ 62-9 DISCRIMINATION § 62-10
62:143
Chapter 64
DISORDERLY HOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 109. Noise — See Ch. 139.
§ 64-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Disorderly House
Ordinance of the Town of Bar Harbor."
§ 64-2. Purpose and findings.
§ 64-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Town of Bar Harbor by eliminating the
proliferation of residences harboring occupants who disturb the peace
and tranquillity of their neighborhoods.
A.
The Town Council finds that:
Chronic unlawful or nuisance activity of various kinds on and near
disorderly properties adversely affects the health, safety and
welfare of citizens and diminishes the quality of life in
neighborhoods where this chronic activity occurs. Chronic unlawful
or nuisance activity constitutes a public nuisance and should be
subject to abatement.
(1)
The Town has a substantial and compelling interest in protecting
the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and the neighborhoods
affected by chronic unlawful or nuisance activity.
(2)
The processes presently available do not adequately control
chronic unlawful or nuisance activity or its detrimental effects on
citizens and neighborhoods where such chronic activity occurs.
(3)
Establishing the proposed regulatory scheme will alleviate the
problems created by chronic unlawful or nuisance activity through
early intervention by the Chief of Police.
(4)
B.
To obtain benefits referred to in the previous subsections, the Council
adopts the following chapter.
C.
§ 62-10 BAR HARBOR CODE § 64-3
64:144
BUILDING — Any building, dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming
unit, tent, camping trailer, camping site or other structure or place occupied
either temporarily or permanently by human beings.
CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the Town of Bar Harbor or his/her designee.
DISORDERLY ACTIVITIES — Situations created within or in the immediate
vicinity of a building by a building's owner, occupants, or tenants, or the
invitees of an owner, tenant or occupant, which would have a tendency
to disturb unreasonably the community, the neighborhood or an ordinary
individual occupying property in or near the disorderly activity, including
but not limited to loud music; boisterous parties; excessive loud or
unnecessary noises emanating from within the building which are audible
outside the building; fights within the building or in its vicinity involving
occupants of the building or their invitees; occupants of the building or their
invitees being intoxicated outdoors in the vicinity of the building; the arrest
and conviction of occupants or their invitees for activities which constitute
either a crime or civil infraction under either state or local law; and other
similar activities in the building or outside the building itself.
DISORDERLY EVENT — A complaint of a disorderly activity to which the
Police Department responds and which the Police Department determines
to be substantiated. Multiple responses to a single building which occur
within a twelve-hour period shall be counted as a single disorderly event,
and a subsequent disorderly event shall not be deemed to have occurred
until the Police Department has notified the owner, by telephone or as
provided below, of the previous complaint and response.
DISORDERLY HOUSE — Any building at which the Police Department has
substantiated four disorderly events.
OWNER — The person or persons having the right of legal title to or
the beneficial interest in a building or parcel of land, as their interest is
recorded in the tax records of the Town of Bar Harbor.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Town of Bar
Harbor.
§ 64-4. Documentation of complaints.
The Police Department shall document all responses to complaints of
disorderly activities and classify each as either a substantiated disorderly
event or unfounded complaint at the sole discretion of the Police
Department.
§ 64-5. Notice of disorderly house.
Whenever the Police Department substantiates a disorderly event, the
Department shall notify the owner according to the number of prior
disorderly events, if any, as provided below.
First disorderly event. At the earliest practicable moment, but within
not more than five calendar days after the first disorderly event at a
A.
§ 64-3 DISORDERLY HOUSES § 64-5
64:145
building, the Police Department shall deliver in hand to the owner or
send by first class mail a copy of this chapter and a notice advising the
owner that the Police Department has substantiated a disorderly event
at his or her building. A copy of the notice shall be provided to the Town
Council.
Second disorderly event. At the earliest practicable moment, but within
not more than three calendar days after the second disorderly event
at a building, the Police Department shall deliver in hand to the owner
or send by first class mail a copy of this chapter and a notice advising
the owner that the Police Department has substantiated a second
disorderly event at his or her building. A copy of the notice shall be
provided to the Town Council.
B.
Third disorderly event. At the earliest practicable moment, but within
not more than three calendar days after the third disorderly event at
a building, the Police Department shall deliver in hand to the owner
or send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of this
chapter and a notice advising the owner that the Police Department
has substantiated a third disorderly event at his or her building and
warning the owner that his or her building will be classified as a
disorderly house if there is a fourth disorderly event. A copy of the
notice shall be provided to the Town Council.
C.
Fourth disorderly event. At the earliest practicable moment, but within
not more than three calendar days after the fourth disorderly event at
a building, the Police Department shall deliver in hand to the owner
or send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of this
chapter and a notice advising the owner that the Police Department
has substantiated a fourth disorderly event at his or her building and
that said building has been classified as a disorderly house. The notice
shall advise the owner that he or she or his or her legal counsel must
meet with the Chief of Police within seven days of the date that the
written notification was mailed or delivered in hand, or such other time
as agreed by the Chief, to identify ways in which the problems which
have been identified will be eliminated. A copy of the notice shall be
provided to the Town Council.
At the time of said meeting, the owner shall provide to the Town
the following documentation:
An up-to-date list of all tenants and/or other authorized
occupants of the disorderly house;
(a)
Copies of all leases with tenants residing in the disorderly
house (confidential financial information may be expunged);
and
(b)
Documentation of any other written or verbal arrangements
authorizing occupancy of the disorderly house.
(c)
(1)
D.
§ 64-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 64-5
64:146
§ 64-6. Enforcement.
At the meeting, the owner must agree to take effective measures
to address the disorderly house, which measures shall be
memorialized in a written agreement at the conclusion of the
meeting and shall be implemented within one week of the meeting
unless another date is agreed upon by the Chief. Said written
agreement shall be signed by the Chief and the owner. If the
owner fails or refuses to enter into such an agreement at the
conclusion of the meeting, the Chief shall refer the matter to the
Town Council for a hearing and possible closure of the disorderly
house to occupancy.
(2)
Delivery of notices. Any notice telephoned, mailed or delivered to any
owner as provided in this chapter shall be effective as to the owner
identified in the notice notwithstanding such owner's refusal to accept
delivery of the notice and notwithstanding any failure of any other
owner to actually receive notice.
E.
Failure to remedy conditions leading to disorderly house classification.
It is a violation of this chapter for any owner to:
(a) Refuse to meet with the Chief as provided in § 64-5D;
Refuse to enter into an agreement to take effective measures
to address the disorderly house;
(b)
Take only measures which the Chief determines are not
actually effective in addressing the disorderly house; or
(c)
Fail to implement the agreement reached with the Chief to
address the disorderly house.
(d)
(1)
If the Chief determines that any such violation has occurred, the
Chief shall notify the owner and the Town Clerk that the matter
is referred to the Town Council for a hearing on closure of the
disorderly house to occupancy as provided in Subsection B below.
(2)
A.
Hearing before the Town Council. Upon being informed by the Chief
that an owner has been referred for a hearing for violation of this
chapter, the Town Clerk shall provide written notice to the owner, either
in hand or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and to all owners
of land within 300 feet of the owner's premises by first class mail,
stating the time and place where the Council will conduct a public
hearing to consider whether the Council will order the disorderly house
closed to occupancy as provided in Subsection C below.
B.
The Council shall hold the hearing no earlier than seven days after the
mailing or in-hand delivery of the notice to the owner of the disorderly
house. Following the hearing, the Town Council, by a preponderance
C.
§ 64-5 DISORDERLY HOUSES § 64-6
64:147
§ 64-7. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter or any provision thereof shall subject the
violator to fines as provided under the general penalty set forth in this
Code.7 Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 64-8. Additional remedy; injunction.
Any violation of this chapter or any provision thereof shall be deemed
a public nuisance and may be subject additionally to abatement by a
restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction
in addition to the general penalty set forth in this Code.
Chapter 70
of the evidence, shall make a determination of whether the owner has
committed a violation of this chapter.
If the Town Council finds that the owner has committed a violation
of this chapter but the owner has committed no prior violation of
this chapter within 12 months of the date of the current violation,
the Council shall order the disorderly house closed to occupancy
for no less than 30 and no more than 120 days.
(1)
If the Council finds that the owner has committed a violation of
this chapter and the owner has committed a prior violation of this
chapter within the 12 months prior to the current violation, the
Council shall order the disorderly house closed to occupancy for no
less than 60 and no more than 180 days.
(2)
Effective date of closure. The Town Council order closing a disorderly
house to occupancy shall take effect 10 days following the date of
the order. Within 24 hours of the Town Council order, the Chief of
Police shall post the closed disorderly house with a notice prohibiting
building occupancy between the dates designated by the Town Council
and showing the fine for occupancy during this period. Removal of said
notice by the occupants, owner or others shall not affect the validity of
the order against the owner or any person having actual knowledge of
the closure.
D.
Occupancy in violation of chapter. No person shall occupy a disorderly
house which the Town Council has closed against occupancy, nor shall
any owner permit the occupancy of any closed disorderly house.
Occupancy of a closed disorderly house shall be prima facie evidence
that the owner has permitted such occupancy, unless the owner
demonstrates that the occupants remained in the disorderly house
despite the owner's having taken all legal actions necessary to remove
them promptly after the date of the Council order of closure, including,
where available to the owner, an action for forcible entry and detainer.
E.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, § 1-18.
§ 64-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 64-8
70:148
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 36. Fire prevention — See Ch. 85.
§ 70-1. Authority and scope.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4171 et seq. This
chapter applies to original installations of electrical equipment and to
alterations of or additions to existing electrical equipment within any
privately or publicly owned building, structure, or premises within the Town
of Bar Harbor, unless exempted below. Alterations of or additions to existing
electrical equipment within owner-occupied single-family residences shall
be exempted from this chapter. The installation or alteration of electrical
equipment which does not require a permit or inspection under this chapter
shall be governed by 32 M.R.S.A. § 1102-B.
§ 70-2. Electrical Inspector.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Electrical Inspector. The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve as the
Electrical Inspector.
§ 70-3. Permit required; exceptions.
No electrical equipment shall be installed in, altered, or added to any
building, structure or premises within the territorial limits of the Town
of Bar Harbor unless an electrical installation permit has been issued in
conformity with this chapter.
A.
No permit shall be required to do minor repair work such as, but not
limited to, the following:
(1) The replacement of fuses;
(2) The installation of additional outlets;
(3) The replacement of existing switches, sockets, outlets and lamps;
(4) Repairs to entrance service equipment; and
(5) Repairs or installation of radio and low-voltage equipment.
B.
Emergency work may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit. A
permit must then be obtained as soon as is reasonably possible.
C.
No major deviation may be made from the installation described in the
permit without the prior written approval of the Electrical Inspector.
D.
§ 64-8 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 70-4
70:149
§ 70-4. Application for permit.
An application for an electrical installation permit shall be made in writing
to the Electrical Inspector, in duplicate, and shall be signed by the
applicant. Application shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by
the Electrical Inspector. The application shall be accompanied by a general
description of the electrical work to be done.
§ 70-5. Invalidation of permit.
Any permit issued under this chapter shall become invalid if:
§ 70-6. Permit fee.
Before an electrical installation permit may be issued, the applicant shall
pay a fee in accordance with a fee schedule which shall, from time to time,
be adopted by the Town Council.
§ 70-7. Minimum standards for equipment and installations.
The minimum standards for electrical equipment and installations within
the territorial limits of the Town of Bar Harbor are the standards contained
in the National Electrical Code 1990 (1990 Edition) designated as the
National Fire Protection Association No. 70 and its subsequent
amendments, which code is hereby adopted.
§ 70-8. Inspections; certificate of acceptance.
In the event that the proposed work is to be performed in a singlefamily
structure by the owner of that structure, the applicant shall be
the owner of that structure.
A.
In all other cases the applicant shall be the licensed master electrician
employed to do the proposed work; a holder of a limited license who
may obtain a permit within such limited licensee's area of expertise;
or the general contractor for the construction project of which the
proposed work is a part, provided that the contractor shall provide as
a part of the application the name, address and license number of the
licensed electrician employed to do the proposed work.
B.
The authorized work is not commenced within six months after issuance
of the permit;
A.
The authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six
months after the time of commencing the work;
B.
The authorized work is not completed within 24 months after the
issuance of the permit; or
C.
The permit holder fails to correct a violation of any provision of this
chapter within the time prescribed in a notice of violation.
D.
§ 70-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 70-8
70:150
§ 70-9. Enforcement; penalties for offenses.
The applicant, by obtaining a permit, consents to the inspection by the
Electrical Inspector of work and equipment described in the permit at
such times and as often as the Electrical Inspector deems reasonably
necessary throughout the course of the authorized work so as to ensure
compliance with this chapter. A failure to permit such reasonable
inspection is expressly made a violation of this chapter.
A.
Prior to the sale, lease, use or occupancy of any building, structure,
portion of a structure or premises for which an electrical installation
permit has been issued, the permit holder must secure a certificate
of acceptance from the Electrical Inspector stating that the electrical
equipment is in conformity with the standards set forth for electrical
equipment in § 70-7. Prior to the issuance of the certificate of
acceptance, the Electrical Inspector will inspect the property to see
that all requirements under this chapter have been met. A certificate
of acceptance must be issued or denied within two working days of
application for inspection by the permit holder. A failure to issue a
certificate within two working days shall be deemed a denial of the
request for a certificate.
B.
There shall be no charge for any such inspection, except in the case
of inspections of commercial property. In the case of inspections of
commercial property the permit holder must pay any difference
between the fee originally paid for the electrical installation permit and
the sum of 1/2 of 1% of the total actual cost of the installation. In the
event that 1/2 of 1% of the total actual cost of the installation is less
than or equal to the fee originally paid for the permit, there shall be no
charge for the inspection. In no case shall any portion of the permit fee
originally paid be refunded.
C.
Upon the discovery of any electrical equipment which does not comply
with this chapter, any person having the power and duty to enforce the
provisions of this chapter may make a written complaint to the State
Electrical Inspector in accordance with 32 M.R.S.A. § 1104.
A.
Whenever any person having the power and duty to enforce the
provisions of this chapter determines that there is a violation of any
provision of this chapter, that person shall give written notice of such
violation to the property owner and the person making the installation,
if known. Such written notice shall contain:
A description of the building, structure or premises in question in
sufficient detail to identify it;
(1)
A description of the violation found and a citation to the provisions
of this chapter or the NFPA Code violated;
(2)
(3) The remedial action required for correction of such violation; and
(4) A date by which such violation must be corrected.
B.
§ 70-8 ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS § 70-9
70:151
Chapter 74
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 74-1. Purpose and declaration of policy.
This chapter is enacted to set out and clarify the authority of the Town and
its officers and employees with regard to emergency and disaster situations.
It is intended to grant as broad a power as permitted by statutory and
constitutional authority. The powers granted by and procedures established
in this chapter are in addition to the Town's participation in Hancock
County's Emergency Management Agency established pursuant to 37-B
M.R.S.A. § 781 et seq. and are intended to supplement and not supplant that
participation.
§ 74-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY — A major natural or man-made disaster, including but not
limited to hurricanes, tornadoes, ice storms, snow storms, earthquakes,
floods, fires, tidal waves, windstorms, epidemics, hazardous materials
accidents or spills, or violent or terrorist acts which threaten the public
health, safety and welfare or which damage or destroy or which threaten
to damage or destroy public or private property in the Town of Bar Harbor.
The term "emergency" shall be broadly construed to effect the purpose of
this chapter to protect people and property in the Town of Bar Harbor.
§ 74-3. Director of Disaster Services.
The Town Manager or the Town Manager's designee shall serve as the
Town's Director of Disaster Services.
§ 74-4. Authority to declare emergency.
In the event of an emergency, the Council Chairman shall have the authority
to declare a state of emergency in the Town when a declaration of
emergency is requested by the Director of Disaster Services. If the Council
Chairman is absent from the Town or cannot reasonably be reached by the
Director of Disaster Services, any Town Councilor shall have the authority
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power and duty to
prosecute violations of the provisions of this chapter to the extent
permitted by law.
C.
Prosecution of violations of this chapter shall be made pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A § 4452. The penalties for violating this chapter are those set
forth at 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452(3). These penalties include, but are not
limited to, fines, injunctive relief and the reimbursement of the Town's
attorneys' fees and costs.
D.
§ 70-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 74-4
74:152
to declare a state of emergency if so requested by the Director of Disaster
Services.
§ 74-5. Director's power during emergency.
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, when a declared
state of public emergency exists within the Town, the Director of Disaster
Services may exercise all emergency powers, including but not limited to
the following:
§ 74-6. Effective date of rules and orders; termination of powers.
Proclamations, rules, and orders issued pursuant to § 74-5 shall be effective
upon issuance and shall remain in effect until withdrawn by the Director
of Disaster Services. However, those proclamations, rules, and orders shall
be withdrawn by the Director of Disaster Services and those persons acting
pursuant to § 74-5 shall cease to exercise emergency powers at such time
as the conditions giving rise to the emergency cease.
§ 74-7. Penalty for violation of emergency proclamation, rule or
order.
The violation of any section of this chapter or any proclamation of
emergency, any subsequent proclamation exercising emergency powers, or
any rule or order, which proclamation, rule or order is issued pursuant to
§ 74-5, or the violation of any order or directive given by a peace officer
or designated emergency services personnel pursuant to authority resulting
Response. The power to direct emergency response activities by Town
departments, including but not limited to the Police and Fire
Departments.
A.
Contracting. The power to execute contracts for the emergency
construction or repair of public improvements, when the delay of
advertising and public bidding might cause serious loss or injury to the
Town, upon following the procedures of § 74-10.
B.
Purchasing. The power to purchase or lease goods and services that the
Director of Disaster Services deems necessary to the Town's emergency
response or for the repair of Town facilities, or both, upon following the
procedures of § 74-10.
C.
Leases. The power to lease real property or structures, or both, that
the Director of Disaster Services deems necessary for the continued
operation of Town government.
D.
Rules and regulations. The power to promulgate rules and orders to
implement and clarify the Council Chairman's proclamation exercising
emergency power.
E.
Curfews. The power to establish curfews where necessary to protect
public health, safety or welfare.
F.
§ 74-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-7
74:153
from § 74-5, is a civil violation and punishable as provided in § 1-18 of this
Code.
§ 74-8. General duties of Director of Disaster Services.
§ 74-9. Specific duties of Director of Disaster Services.
The Director of Disaster Services shall:
§ 74-10. Emergency procurement of goods and services.
Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, the Director
of Disaster Services may procure, by purchase or lease, such goods and
services as are deemed necessary for the Town's emergency response
effort. This emergency procurement of goods or services may be made
in the open market for immediate delivery or furnishing without filing a
requisition or estimate and without advertisement. A full written account
of all emergency procurements made during this emergency, together with
a requisition for the required materials, supplies, equipment, or services,
shall be submitted by the Town Manager to the Town Council within three
months of the conclusion of the emergency.
Supervision of response. The Director of Disaster Services shall be
responsible for the performance and supervision of performance of all
duties in connection with coordinating and carrying out the Town's role
in furnishing services in the event of an emergency.
A.
Emergency planning. The Director of Disaster Services shall act in
coordination with the state and other governmental agencies as may
be necessary to plan and implement a joint jurisdiction emergency
planning and disaster services plan and mutual aid arrangements.
B.
Consultation with Town Attorney. The Director of Disaster Services
shall consult with the Town Attorney in the planning and exercise of
emergency powers.
C.
Request the Council Chairman or Town Councilor when appropriate to
declare a state of emergency as provided in § 74-4.
A.
B. Control and direct emergency training activities.
Maintain a liaison with other municipal, state, regional and federal
disaster services agencies.
C.
Marshal, after the declaration of a state of emergency, all necessary
personnel, equipment and supplies from any department of the Town to
aid in carrying out emergency operations.
D.
Prepare, in consultation with the Town Attorney, all necessary
emergency proclamations, rules, and orders, pursuant to § 74-5, and
implement emergency operations.
E.
F. Assume other emergency responsibilities as necessary.
§ 74-7 BAR HARBOR CODE § 74-11
74:154
§ 74-11. Consumer protection.
§ 74-12. Suspension of ordinance provisions; temporary licenses
and permits.
The Director of Disaster Services may, by proclamation, suspend any
portion of any Town ordinance or policy where the suspension is reasonably
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, including
but not limited to the suspension of fees for building and other permits
and the suspension of those portions of the Bar Harbor Code necessary to
create an expedited process for issuing permits and licenses. The Director
of Disaster Services may also by proclamation authorize the issuance of
temporary licenses or permits where necessary to protect the public health,
safety and welfare. The suspension of any ordinance provisions pursuant to
this section shall terminate upon the termination of the declared state of
emergency.
Price gouging prohibited. No person may charge a consumer an amount
greater than the average retail price for a product or service during a
declared state of emergency. "Average retail price" means the average
price for similar products or services during the thirty-day period
immediately preceding the declaration of the state of emergency.
"Product or service" includes the rental of dwelling units, hotel or motel
rooms or storage facilities, or the provision of kennels or boarding
domestic animals. In the event a price increase is the direct result of
an increase in the cost of goods charged by the seller's manufacturer,
distributor or wholesaler, the actual cost increase may be added to the
average retail price. Each separate sale or rental in violation of this
chapter prohibition shall be a separate violation.
A.
Fraudulent representation prohibited. No person may falsely claim to
any consumer to be a government inspector or safety or health
inspector during a declared state of emergency. Each such false claim
in violation of this chapter prohibition shall be a separate violation.
B.
Persons collecting for charities or offering loans, jobs, or contracting
services to register. Any person collecting for a charity, or offering
loans, jobs or contracting or repair services, who was not collecting for
the same charity, or offering the same or substantially similar loans,
jobs or contracting or repair services, in the Town of Bar Harbor
during the thirty-day period immediately preceding the declared state
of emergency must register with the Town Clerk and must show
consumers proof of registration as provided by the Town Clerk's office.
The Town Clerk's office shall not permit any person to register as a
charitable fund-raiser, a lender, an employer, or a contractor or repair
service unless the person or business registering provides evidence
showing that the charity, lender, employer or contractor is a legitimate
business that satisfactorily provides the goods or services represented.
Each contact with a consumer by an unregistered person or business
shall be a separate violation.
C.
§ 74-11 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 74-12
74:155
Chapter 78
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 31.
§ 74-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 74-12
74:156
ARTICLE I
Purpose, Definitions and Penalties
§ 78-1. Declaration of policy.
The proper operation of democratic government requires that elected
officials and their appointees be fair, impartial and responsive to the needs
of the people and each other in the performance of their respective
functions and duties; that decisions and policy be made in proper channels
of the Town's governmental structure; that public office not be used for
personal gain; and that elected officials and their appointees maintain a
standard of conduct that will inspire public confidence in the integrity of the
Town's government. In recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics is hereby
established for all elected officials and members and associate members of
all Town agencies now existing or hereafter created.
§ 78-1.1. Authority.
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority conferred by the
inhabitants of Bar Harbor through the Town Charter, § C-10A(9)(e).
§ 78-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The Town Council, Superintending School Committee, Warrant
Committee, Housing Authority commission and all Town committees,
commissions, boards, task forces or other public bodies now existing or
hereafter created by virtue of any ordinance, motion, order, article, Charter
amendment or resolve adopted by the Bar Harbor Town Council,
Superintending School Committee, Warrant Committee or Town Meeting.
BUSINESS — Any entity through which business for profit or not for profit
is conducted, including a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, organization or self-employed individual.
CODE OF ETHICS — Chapter 78, Ethics, of the Bar Harbor Town Code.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — Any information, whether transmitted
orally, digitally or in writing, which is obtained by reason of the public
position or office held, and which is required or permitted to be confidential
by state law.
COUNCILOR — A member of the Bar Harbor Town Council.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — A direct or indirect interest having monetary or
pecuniary value of $100 or more, including but not limited to the ownership
of shares of stock. A member or any member of that person's immediate
family who discloses a financial interest in a blind trust shall not be deemed
to have a conflict of interest with regard to matters pertaining to assets held
by the trust.
§ 78-1 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-2
74:157
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Spouse, children, parents, brothers, sisters,
stepparents, grandparents, stepchildren, parents-in-law or foster parents,
domestic partner or other party living in the same household.
MEMBER — Any Town Council member, Superintending School Committee
member, Warrant Committee member or person appointed by one of the
foregoing bodies to membership or associate membership on a Town
agency, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise.
SPECIAL INTEREST —
THIRD-PARTY INTEREST — A person or business other than the member or
any agency of the Bar Harbor Town government. This definition specifically
includes as third parties a member's employer and clients, as well as other
third-party relationships.
TOWN COUNCIL — For purposes of this chapter, references to the "Town
Council" shall be construed to mean the Town Council of the Town of Bar
Harbor.
§ 78-3. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the general penalty prescribed by § 1-18, violation of this
chapter as determined by the Council after notice and hearing shall be
grounds for discipline, up to and including removal from the agency.
A direct or indirect interest, whether economic or otherwise, having
value peculiar to a member, which may be altered as a result of any
motion by an agency and which interest is not shared by the general
public. In addition to the foregoing, a member participating in the
debate or voting upon any of the following is categorically defined as
having a special interest:
(1) A request filed by or on behalf of an immediate family member; or
A request for which the member has been notified pursuant to an
ordinance notification requirement for abutters; or
(2)
A request involving real property, the nearest point of which is
within 300 feet of the lot line of a member’s home; or
(3)
A request involving a not-for-profit organization upon whose board
a member serves.
(4)
A.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a member participating in the debate
or voting upon any of the following does not have a special interest:
A matter which a member reviews in two or more public capacities.
By way of example, but not limitation: a Planning Board member
also serving on the Warrant Committee or a Council member
serving on the Ethics Commission.
(1)
B.
§ 78-2 BAR HARBOR CODE § 78-3
74:158
ARTICLE II
Code of Ethics
§ 78-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to establish ethical standards of
conduct for all agency members by setting forth those acts or actions
deemed to be in conflict or incompatible, or to create the appearance of
conflict or incompatibility, with the best interests of the Town of Bar Harbor.
§ 78-5. Statutory standards.
There are certain provisions of the general statutes of the State of Maine
which, while not set forth herein, should be considered an integral part of
this Code of Ethics. Accordingly, the provisions of the following sections
of the general statutes of the State of Maine, as may be amended, are
hereby incorporated by reference and made a part of this Code of Ethics
and shall apply to all members whenever applicable as if more fully set forth
herein. where a standard set forth in state law conflicts with this chapter,
the stricter standard shall apply.
§ 78-6. Purchasing and employment.
A. 17 M.R.S.A. § 3104, Conflicts of interest; purchases by the state.
B. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 456, Tampering with public records or information.
C. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 602, Bribery in official and political matters.
D. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 603, Improper influence.
E. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 604, Improper compensation for past action.
F. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 605, Improper gifts to public servants.
G. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 606, Improper compensation for services.
H. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 607, Purchase of public office.
I. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 608, Official oppression.
J. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 609, Misuse of information.
K. 17-A M.R.S.A. § 903, Misuse of entrusted property.
L. 21-A M.R.S.A. § 504, Persons ineligible to serve.
M. 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2605, Conflicts of interest.
N. 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5122, Interest of public officials, trustees or employees.
Purchasing. Except as permitted under the laws of the State of Maine,
no member shall award any contracts with the Town or recommend,
approve, or disapprove the purchase of goods or services for the Town
A.
§ 78-4 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-6
74:159
§ 78-7. Confidential information.
No member shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, employees, government or affairs of
the Town, nor shall he/she use such information to advance his/her financial
or private interest or the financial or private interest of others. Information
received and discussed during an executive session of any Town agency
called pursuant to 1 M.R.S.A. § 405 et seq. (the Freedom of Access Law)
shall be considered within the constraints of this section and shall not be
disclosed to any third party unless permitted by affirmative vote of such
body.
§ 78-8. Gifts and favors.
where to their knowledge there is a financial interest or special interest
in such purchase or award held by:
(1) That individual or a member of his/her immediate family;
A business in which that individual or a member of his/her
immediate family serves as an officer, director, trustee, partner or
employee in a supervisory or management position; or
(2)
Any other person or business with whom or with which that
individual or a member of his/her immediate family is in business
or is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning future
employment.
(3)
Hiring. No member shall participate, by means of deliberation,
approval, disapproval or recommendation, in the decision to hire,
promote, discipline, lay off or to take any other personnel action in
respect to any employee or applicant for Town employment where said
employee or applicant is:
(1) A member of the agency member's immediate family; or
A person with whom either the agency member or a member of his/
her immediate family is in business.
(2)
B.
No member shall accept any gift, favor or item with a value in excess of
$100 annually, whether in the form of service, loan, thing or promise,
from any person or business which to his/her knowledge is interested
directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings
with the Town, nor shall any member: [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-02]
Accept any gift, favor or thing of value that tends to influence that
individual in the discharge of his/her official duties; or
(1)
Grant in the discharge of his/her official duties any improper favor,
service or thing of value.
(2)
A.
§ 78-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 78-8
74:160
§ 78-9. Use of Town property.
No member shall use or permit the use of any Town-owned property,
including but not limited to motor vehicles, equipment and buildings, for
any private purposes, except in compliance with the following:
§ 78-10. Solicitations by members.
Nothing herein shall prohibit the acceptance of gifts or favors by
agency members from members of their immediate families.
B.
In determining whether a violation of this section has occurred, the
Ethics Commission shall consider:
The monetary or pecuniary value of the gift, favor or thing
received;
(1)
Any special economic value the gift, favor or thing received may
have to the recipient; and
(2)
The circumstances under which the gift, favor or thing concerned
was received.
(3)
C.
Nothing herein shall prohibit use of Town-owned property at rates and/
or on terms as may be established.
A.
Nothing herein shall prohibit private use of surplus Town property
legally disposed in compliance with the Town Council's Surplus
Property Policy.
B.
Solicitation. Without the prior approval of the Town Council (for
municipal matters) or the Superintending School Committee (for school
matters), no member shall solicit donations of money, services, property
or items of value from any individual or business for the benefit of
the Town of Bar Harbor or for the support of any Town program or
activity. No individual member may directly receive or accept any such
donation, whether or not solicited by the member concerned. This
subsection does not prohibit the following:
Solicitations of individuals related to the member concerned by
blood, marriage or adoption;
(1)
Solicitations of businesses in which the member holds an equity
interest as proprietor, partner or shareholder;
(2)
Solicitations of general statements of support for particular fundraising
efforts, provided that the statements of support are directed
at the public at large and not at any particular individual or
business.
(3)
A.
Accounting. All funds, property and items of value received as a result
of solicitations authorized by this section shall be processed and
deposited in the manner prescribed by the Town Finance Director (for
B.
§ 78-8 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-10
74:161
§ 78-11. Representing third-party interests.
§ 78-12. Conflicts of interest. [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-02]
municipal matters) or the Superintending School Committee (for school
matters).
Definition of "appear." For the purposes of this section:
"Appear" shall mean to present oneself physically before a Town
agency or to personally submit materials advocating or opposing
any agency business.
(1)
"Appear" shall not mean assisting in the preparation of application
materials.
(2)
A.
Meetings. On behalf of any third-party interest, no member shall appear
before a Town agency of which he/she is a member or meet with Town
employees responsible for assisting said agency.
B.
Litigation. On behalf of any third-party interest, no member shall
appear in any action, proceeding or litigation in which the member's
agency or one of its subsidiary agencies is a party, nor meet with Town
employees in regard thereto.
C.
Personal interest. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any member,
on behalf of his/her personal interest, from appearing before any Town
agency, but such member shall leave his/her seat at the table and shall
not deliberate or vote on the item concerned. For purposes of this
section, "personal interest" shall include any interest of the member
concerned as a resident, landowner or taxpayer personally affected by
the matter under consideration to an extent greater than Bar Harbor
residents generally.
D.
Deliberation and vote prohibited. No member shall, in their capacity
as a member of their agency, vote, participate in the deliberation, or
otherwise take part in the decision making process on any agenda item
in which they or a member of their immediate family has a financial or
special interest as defined by this chapter. In the absence of a financial
or special interest, members shall attempt to avoid any appearance of a
conflict of interest by disclosure, as provided below.
A.
Disclosure of conflict. Any member who believes that he or she has a
financial or special interest, or the appearance of a conflict of interest,
in any agenda item before their agency shall disclose the nature and
extent of such interest, and the secretary shall make a record of such
disclosure in the minutes. In cases where a member's ability to disclose
the nature and extent of such interest is limited by the confidentiality
requirements of State or federal law, the member may refrain from
disclosing the details of the interest to the extent necessary to comply
with such confidentiality requirements. The disclosure required by this
B.
§ 78-10 BAR HARBOR CODE § 78-12
74:162
paragraph shall be made at the first meeting of the agency or
subcommittee thereof at which the agenda item concerned is to be
taken up for discussion or vote and at which the member is present.
Additionally, anyone else who believes that a member has a financial
or special interest in any agenda item before an agency may disclose
the nature and extent of such interest, and the secretary shall make a
record of such disclosure in the minutes.
Determination of conflict. Once the issue of conflict has been raised
relative to an individual member and disclosure has been made as
provided above, such individual's fellow members shall review the facts
as disclosed to them and shall vote on whether or not such individual
has a financial or special interest, or the appearance of a conflict of
interest, with respect to the agenda item concerned. All conflict of
interest questions relating to a particular agenda item shall be resolved
prior to any consideration of the item concerned, and each member
present, except the individual member who is alleged to have a conflict
of interest, shall vote on all conflict of interest questions.
All votes of conflict of interest questions shall be recorded. A
majority of those present and voting shall determine the question.
(1)
Upon determination that a conflict of interest in fact exists, the
member concerned shall be excused from participating in
discussion, deliberation or vote on the relevant agenda item at that
meeting and at all future meetings, unless the conflict is resolved,
and shall remove themselves from the meeting room as provided
below.
(2)
In the event that a majority of the agency, or subcommittee thereof,
shall require disclosure of further information not immediately
available or shall require confirmation of the information disclosed,
consideration of the relevant agenda item shall be postponed to an
appropriate time.
(3)
As provided by the Maine Freedom of Access Act, an agency may
enter executive session to discuss a potential conflict of interest,
but only upon a motion "to go into executive session as permitted
by 1 M.R.S.A. § 405.6.A for discussion or consideration of a
potential conflict of interest, since open discussion could
reasonably be expected to case damage to the reputation of the
individual or infringe on the individual's right to privacy."
(4)
C.
Influence prohibited. Once a member is determined to have a conflict of
interest in respect to any agenda item and once all conflict of interest
questions relating to the agenda item concerned have been determined
as provided above, said individual shall immediately remove themselves
from the meeting room and the sight of the remaining members to
prevent their real or apparent influence. Recused members shall not
return to their regular seat nor to the meeting room until deliberation
and action on the item is completed.
D.
§ 78-12 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-12
74:163
§ 78-13. Political activities.
Personal interest. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any member,
on behalf of his/her personal interest, from appearing before any Town
agency, but such member shall leave his/her seat at the table and shall
not deliberate or vote on the item concerned. For purposes of this
section, "personal interest" shall include any interest of the member
concerned as a resident, landowner or taxpayer personally affected by
the matter under consideration to an extent greater than Bar Harbor
residents generally.
E.
Consent agendas. Nothing herein shall require an individual member to
recuse himself or herself for any item contained on a "consent agenda"
on which:
(1) There is no deliberation;
The individual's conflict has been determined by the other
members; and
(2)
(3) The right to abstain from voting on the item has been granted.
F.
No member shall participate in any political activity which would be
in conflict or incompatible with the performance of his/her official
functions and duties for the Town. In conjunction therewith, no member
may use his/her official authority or position for the purposes of
influencing or interfering with or affecting the results of any election.
A.
No member or candidate for membership shall solicit funds or
contributions or accept or receive funds or contributions from
employees for political purposes.
B.
No member or candidate for membership shall solicit a person whom
he/she knows to be a Town employee to sign a petition for election to a
Town office.
C.
No member shall distribute pamphlets or other election materials
promoting a candidate, party or cause, while he/she is performing
official functions or duties with the Town.
D.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any member from
participating in the political process in his/her private capacity as
candidates for elected office or as private citizens, nor prohibit the
member from promoting causes officially endorsed by a recorded vote
of the Council.
E.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit agencies or their
members from discussing local, state or national issues that may affect
the Town of Bar Harbor, but only the Town Council, Superintending
School Committee and Warrant Committee may advocate a position on
behalf of the Town.
F.
§ 78-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 78-14
74:164
§ 78-14. Incompatible employment or office.
No member shall occupy any other office, elected or appointed, in any other
governmental entity when the duties of such office are incompatible with
the proper discharge of his/her official duties with the Town. For purposes
of this Code of Ethics, the occupancy of any office, elected or appointed,
with any other governmental entity by any member is hereby prohibited in
the following circumstances:
§ 78-15. Code of Ethics education. [Amended 9-2-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-02]
Where the duties of the other office make it a physical impossibility to
discharge the duties of the Town position;
A.
B. Where one office is subordinate to the other;
C. Where one office carries the power of removal over the other; or
Where the occupancy of both offices is prohibited by the Town Charter
or by other provisions of law.
D.
Every member shall participate in Ethics Ordinance training, as
prescribed by the Town Council, within six months of appointment and
every three years thereafter.
A.
The Town Clerk shall furnish each new member with a copy of the Code
of Ethics before the member begins the duties of the member's office.
B.
A signed receipt for all copies shall be returned to the Town Clerk, who
shall retain the receipt on file.
C.
§ 78-14 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-15
74:165

ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 78-16. Ethics enforcement procedures. [Amended 9-4-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-04; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-02]
Ethics Commission creation; membership; terms of office. There is
hereby created a Town of Bar Harbor Ethics Commission, the voting
membership of which shall include the current Chair and Vice Chair
of the Town Council, Superintending School Committee and Warrant
Committee, as well as the Secretary of the Warrant Committee. Should
any of the above individuals be unwilling or unable to serve on the
Ethics Commission, a replacement shall be appointed by their
respective board (i.e., Council, School Committee or Warrant
Committee) from within the board’s membership. In the event that the
Commission is processing an ethics complaint at the end of a member’s
elected term of office, either on their respective board or as an officer
of their respective board, their term on the Ethics Commission shall
continue until the Commission has filed its final report regarding the
complaint. [Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
A.
Procedures not mandatory. The ethics enforcement procedures
contained in this article shall be construed as directory rather than
mandatory. The Ethics Commission shall have the authority and
discretion to modify these procedures as it deems necessary on a
case-by-case basis, or by the adoption of a rule which implements a
modification having general applicability. Any such modification by the
Commission shall take precedence over the language contained herein
without need for an amendment to this article. [Amended 8-17-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-03]
B.
Organization. The Chair of the Town Council shall serve as the Ethics
Commission Chair. The Chair of the Superintending School Committee
shall serve as the Ethics Commission Vice Chair. In the absence of both,
the Commission members shall elect a Chair Pro Tem and a Vice Chair
Pro Tem from its remaining membership. The Town Clerk shall serve as
Secretary to the Ethics Commission. The Town Manager shall process
complaints and otherwise assist the Commission as needed. [Amended
8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
C.
Meetings. Meetings of the Ethics Commission shall be held on the
call of the Chair or as otherwise provided by the Commission or this
chapter. [Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-03]
D.
Quorum. No meeting of the Ethics Commission shall be held without a
quorum of four members. The Committee shall act by majority vote of
the members present and voting. [Amended 8-17-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-03]
E.
Commission's duty. The Commission shall make findings of fact,
recommend appropriate discipline to the Town Council and render
F.
§ 78-16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-16
74:167
opinions concerning application of the provisions of the Town Code of
Ethics to any particular situation.
Investigations. The Commission may investigate upon its own volition
any ethical matter that may come to the attention of its members.
G.
Findings. Upon conclusion of its fact-finding and deliberations, the
Commission shall issue written findings with respect to each matter and
question referred to it.
H.
Advisory opinions. Upon the request of any agency member, the
Commission shall issue ethics advisory opinions to the requesting party.
Advisory opinions rendered by the Commission, until amended or
revoked, shall be binding on the Commission and shall be deemed
to be final decisions of the Commission.
(1)
Any advisory opinion concerning the person who requested the
opinion and who acted in reliance thereon, in good faith, shall be
an absolute defense in any matter brought under the provisions of
the Code of Ethics.
(2)
I.
Recordkeeping. The Town Clerk shall compile and maintain a record of
all reports, advisory opinions, statements and memoranda created by
or filed with the Commission and facilitate public access to said records
as appropriate under state law.
J.
Rules and regulations. The Commission may adopt, after a public
hearing, rules and regulations not inconsistent with Town Code Chapter
78, Ethics, for the administration and implementation of the Code of
Ethics.
K.
Executive sessions. The Commission may conduct fact-finding and
deliberations in executive session to the extent permitted by the Maine
Freedom of Access Act, 1 M.R.S.A. § 405, Subsection 6A, and shall
conduct fact-finding and deliberations in executive session as necessary
to protect the confidentiality of certain records under the Municipal
Personnel Records Law, 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2702(1)B(5).
L.
Complaint procedures.
Purpose. It is the purpose and intent of these complaint procedures
to provide a mechanism by which complaints may be handled in an
orderly and impartial fashion to protect the best interests of the
citizens of the Town of Bar Harbor.
(1)
Statute of limitations. No ethics complaint may be filed with the
Commission unless it is alleged that the violation has occurred
within five years of filing with the Commission.
(2)
Whistleblower rights. No person shall take or threaten to take
official action against an individual for such individual's disclosure
(3)
M.
§ 78-16 BAR HARBOR CODE § 78-16
74:168
of information to the Commission under the provisions of the Code
of Ethics.
Confidentiality. During the filing of a complaint, preliminary review,
investigation and hearing, no allegation, complaint, report, or
information supplied to, generated by or received from the
Commission shall be disclosed to any third party by a complainant,
accused, witness, designated party, employee, member or
Commissioner, except upon the written request of the accused or
as needed by the Town Manager and Clerk to administer the intent
of this section.
(4)
Filing a complaint.
The Commission shall provide a form to be used by all those
filing a complaint. Said form shall include a statement to be
signed by the complainant attesting that the facts recited
thereon are true and correct in all regards. The complaint must
contain, within space provided on the form or on a separate
sheet of paper attached to the complaint, a description of the
conduct which is the subject of the complaint, a reference to
the section of the ordinance which is alleged to have been
violated and an explanation as to why the conduct violates the
referenced section. A mere reference to § 78-1 (Declaration
of policy) shall be deemed an insufficient basis for the
prosecution of a complaint.
(a)
The Commission may investigate upon its own volition and in
accordance with this section any ethical matter which may
come to the attention of its members, but a Commissioner shall
first complete and sign a complaint form.
(b)
(c) The complaint form shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
Within 10 days of filing, the Town Clerk shall either accept
the complaint or find it incomplete, improperly completed or
alleging of an offense occurring more than five years prior to
the date of filing:
If the complaint is incomplete, improperly completed or
alleges an offense occurring more than five years prior to
the date of filing, the Town Clerk shall retain a copy of the
complaint and return the original complaint by certified
mail, return receipt requested to the complainant,
together with a letter explaining the reason for the
rejection of the complaint.
[1]
If the complaint is accepted by the Town Clerk, he/she
shall provide a notice of acceptance to the complainant by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
[2]
(d)
(5)
§ 78-16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-16
74:169
Preliminary review. Within 30 days of the Town Clerk’s acceptance
of a complaint, the Commission shall review the complaint in
executive session as permitted by 1 M.R.S.A. § 405 et seq. (the
Freedom of Access Law) to determine whether or not the
allegations contained therein would constitute a violation of any
provision of the Code of Ethics, should they prove true. Neither
the complainant nor the accused shall be permitted to attend the
Executive Session. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the
complainant is an Ethics Commission member, they shall be
allowed to attend the Executive Session. The accused shall not be
advised of the complaint since the accused is not being "charged or
investigated" within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 405.6.A(2).
If the Commission determines that the complaint does not
allege sufficient acts to constitute a violation or has not been
timely filed, the Commission shall dismiss the complaint and
duly notify the complainant.
(a)
If the Commission makes a preliminary determination that the
complaint alleges sufficient acts to constitute a violation, then
Commission shall determine that, if proven true, the violation
would constitute a minor or a major violation.
If the Commission determines that a minor violation may
have occurred:
The Town Manager shall contact the accused, review
the complainant's accusation and concerns, obtain the
accused's side of the story and take whatever action
the Manager feels appropriate, up to an oral
counseling.
[a]
The Town Manager shall issue a written report to
the Town Council and the Ethics Commission which
outlines the accused's side of the story and what,
if any, action the Manager has taken or would
recommend to the Council.
[b]
The Manager shall report to the complainant only
that the matter was reviewed with the accused and
appropriate action was taken. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, if the complainant is a member of the Town
Council or Ethics Commission, the Town Manager
shall provide a copy of the report as provided in
Subsection M(6)(b)[1] immediately above.
[c]
[1]
If the Commission determines that a major violation may
have occurred:
Within five days thereafter, the Town Manager shall
notify both parties of the Commission's preliminary
determination.
[a]
[2]
(b)
(6)
§ 78-16 BAR HARBOR CODE § 78-16
74:170
Within 15 days thereafter, the Town Clerk, in
consultation with the Commissioners, complainant
and accused, shall fix a date for the commencement of
the hearing on the allegation. Said hearing date shall
be not less than 30, nor more than 45 days after the
preliminary determination unless the parties agree in
writing.
[b]
Conduct of investigation.
Commission powers. In the conduct of its investigation of an
alleged violation of the Code of Ethics, the Commission shall have
the power to hold hearings, administer oaths, examine witnesses,
receive oral and documentary evidence, and request witnesses and
the production for examination by the Commission of any books
and papers which the Commission deems relevant in any matter
under investigation or in question. The Town Manager and Town
Clerk shall assist the Commission as requested.
(1)
Hearing.
Due process. The accused shall have the right to appear and to
be represented by legal counsel, to examine and cross-examine
witnesses, and to review and copy all materials relating to the
accusations against them, including, by way of example but
without limitation, complaints, reports, notes and minutes.
(a)
Hearing procedure. The Commission shall hear the case as
follows:
[1] The complainant shall present his/her allegations.
[2] Town staff shall present any additional allegations.
[3] The accused shall be allowed to present his/her defense.
Town staff shall present any additional evidence or
relevant information.
[4]
The Commission shall close the hearing and consider the
evidence presented and any additional information a
majority consider relevant.
[5]
Upon conclusion of its fact-finding and deliberations, the
Commission shall issue written findings as provided below
with respect to each matter and question referred to it.
[6]
The hearing may be continued to a later time or date, at
the discretion of the Commission.
[7]
(b)
(2)
N.
Findings. Not later than three business days after termination of the
hearing, the Town Clerk shall provide a copy of the Commission's
O.
§ 78-16 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT § 78-16
74:171
findings to the complainant and the accused either in person or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
No violation. If the Commission makes a finding of no violation,
the complaint and the record of its investigation shall remain
confidential, except upon the request of the accused. No
complainant, witness, designated party, employee, member or
Commissioner shall disclose to any third party any information
learned from the investigation, including knowledge of the
existence of a complaint, which the disclosing party would not
otherwise have known.
(1)
Violation. If the Commission makes a finding of violation:
The Town Manager or his/her designee shall report the
Commission's finding to the Town Council within 10 days.
(a)
The Town Council may take appropriate disciplinary action up
to and including removal from office.
(b)
The Town Clerk or his/her designee shall make public any final
notice of disciplinary action not later than five business days
after the termination of the hearing.
(c)
(2)
Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Town Council or
Ethics Commission may take an appeal to the State Superior Court
pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
P.
Records. All records relating to the complaint and subsequent
procedures shall be maintained as required by the Maine Rules for
Disposition of Local Government Records.
Q.
§ 78-16 BAR HARBOR CODE § 78-16
74:172
Chapter 81
FIREARMS
§ 81-1. Use of firearms restricted.
No person, except a law enforcement officer in the performance of his
duties, shall, without a permit from the Chief of Police, discharge any
firearm within the limits of the Town as described in § 81-2 except:
§ 81-2. Restricted area.
The limits to be restricted for the discharge of firearms shall be as follows:
§ 81-3. Discharge of firearms near schools.
A. At military exercises, funerals, reviews, or memorial events;
In proper defense of himself, his family and his property, as permitted
by statute; or
B.
For the destruction of a dangerous animal or an animal destroying
property.
C.
Beginning at a point at low water mark due east of the intersection
of Main Street and Schooner Head Road, thence following in a direct
line to the intersection of Main Street and Schooner Head Road, thence
following Main Street to the intersection of Main Street and Cromwell
Harbor Road, thence following Cromwell Harbor Road to the
intersection of Eagle Lake Road, thence following Eagle Lake Road
to the intersection of Cleftstone Road, thence northerly following
Cleftstone Road and the easterly boundary line of Acadia National Park
to Duck Brook, thence following Duck Brook easterly to the high water
mark of Frenchman's Bay.
A.
In that part of the Town known as DeGregoire Park, within 1,000 feet of
either side of the following roads: Asticou Avenue, Bay Road, Sherman
Avenue and that part of the Sand Point Road between said Asticou
Avenue and Sherman Avenue.
B.
In addition to the above, no person, except a law enforcement officer in
the performance of his duties, shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any firearm within 1,000 feet of any building or buildings used for
school purposes. For the purposes of this section, the term "school"
shall include both public and private schools.
A.
This section shall not apply to the discharge of firearms by any person
in the exercise of his duties at military exercises, funerals, reviews or
memorial events or to the discharge of firearms by any person in the
lawful defense of himself, another person or property as permitted by
statute.
B.
§ 78-16 FIREARMS § 81-4
81:173
§ 81-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Includes air rifles or air guns as well as firearms discharged by
gunpowder.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Includes all officers so defined or
described by the ordinances of the Town of Bar Harbor, statutes of the State
of Maine, and provisions of the United States Code.
Chapter 85
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
Electrical installations — See Ch. 70.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 109.
§ 85-1. Life Safety Code.
§ 85-2. Duties of Council during fire emergency.
Life Safety Code adopted. The Town of Bar Harbor ordains the most
current edition of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code published by the
National Fire Protection Association as the official Life Safety Code of
the Town of Bar Harbor with the same force and effect as though set
out in full herein. [Amended 5-18-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5]
A.
Penalty. The violation of any provision of said Life Safety Code shall
be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 plus costs and/or
imprisonment for not more than six months. This penalty shall be
deemed to be exclusive of any other appropriate legal or equitable
action. Each day any violation of said code occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B.
Forest fires. It shall be the duty of the Council at any time it considers
a period of fire emergency exists to:
Declare any part of all woods, fields or other areas closed to entry,
except by owners or tenants or agents thereof.
(1)
Prohibit smoking, building of fires or other acts that may cause fire
in or upon any woods, fields or other areas.
(2)
A.
Council action. The Council shall have the authority to immediately
put into effect the provision of this section by a proclamation issued
B.
§ 81-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 85-2
85:174
§ 85-3. Fire conditions to be prevented; inspections.
§ 85-4. Oil-burning equipment.
through any locally circulated newspaper, posters or radio or television
announcement.
Burning permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons
to burn or cause to be burned trash, lumber, brush, leaves, straw, or any
other combustible materials out of doors within the limits of the Town
of Bar Harbor without having a written permit duly signed by the Fire
Chief granting them this privilege.
A.
Thirty-six-hour limit. No person or persons shall allow to remain longer
than 36 hours in any alley or on any sidewalk or premises, within 30
feet of any building, empty boxes, barrels, rubbish, trash, wastepaper,
excelsior, or other like combustible materials, or open container of
combustible liquid, or permit a hazardous accumulation of rubbish or
combustible material in any building.
B.
Ashes. No person or persons shall be allowed to place ashes within any
building in any box, barrel, or other wooden vessel or upon any wooden
vessel or floor.
C.
Adequate containers. No person shall keep or permit to be kept on
the premises any oily waste or oily rags, unless at all times when not
actually in use such oily waste and oily rags are kept in a metal can with
a self-closing cover and riveted joints, standing on metal legs which
raise the bottom of the container at least five inches above combustible
floors.
D.
Inspection allowed. All owners or occupants of buildings are required
to permit the Building Inspector or the Chief of the Fire Department to
inspect their buildings to determine whether or not there is compliance
with the provisions of this section. Such inspections may be made
whenever and wherever the Building Inspector or Chief of the Fire
Department may suspect a violation of the provisions of this article.
E.
Oil burner standards. No oil-burning equipment and no fuel storage
tank to be used in connection therewith shall be installed, maintained
or used in the Town of Bar Harbor unless it shall conform to the
standards established by the Oil Burnermen's Licensing Board,
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 33 of Title 32 of the Maine
Revised Statutes, as amended,8 and with the standards herein
prescribed, whichever shall be higher. No such equipment or storage
tank shall be installed, maintained or used which shall be unsafe or
which shall endanger life or property.
A.
8. Editor's Note: See 32 M.R.S.A. § 2311 et seq.
§ 85-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 85-4
85:175
No installation to be made before application. No person, firm or
corporation shall install any such equipment or tank without application
for a certificate therefor having first been made to the Chief of the
Fire Department. Such application shall describe the installation to
be made, the name of the person, firm or corporation making such
installation, whether or not such installer is licensed by the Oil
Burnermen's Licensing Board, and such other matter as may be
required by the Chief. Application for such certificate shall be in
writing, signed either by the owner of the premises upon which such
equipment or tank is to be installed or by the person who shall make
such installation. The fee for such certificate shall be required in an
amount sufficient to cover the cost of the inspection hereinafter
required.
B.
Equipment not to be used before certificate issued. After such
equipment or tank has been installed, and within 48 hours after notice
therefor from the applicant, the Chief of the Fire Department or a
Fire Inspector shall inspect the same, and the Chief shall issue such
certificate upon being satisfied that such equipment and tank and the
installation thereof comply with the requirements of this section. No
person, firm or corporation shall use any such equipment or tank, or
maintain the same for more than four days after installation of the same
shall have been complete, unless a certificate for such equipment or
tank shall be in effect. Failure to inspect equipment within the specified
time shall constitute approval.
C.
No certificate required for existing installations. No certificate shall be
required for the maintenance or use of any such equipment or tank
where such equipment or tank was installed prior to the effective date
of this chapter. All such equipment and tanks should conform to the
standards set in Subsection A of this section.
D.
Revocation of certificate. If such equipment or tank should not comply
with the standards set in Subsection A hereof, the Chief of the Fire
Department should notify the installer and set forth wherein the
installation does not meet the specifications of the standards. The
installer shall have seven days after date of notification to comply with
the standards set in Subsection A. If, after the expiration of this period,
the Fire Chief shall determine that the installation is still in violation of
the standards as set forth in Subsection A, he shall give written notice
that such equipment or tank does not conform to the Oil Burnermen's
Licensing Board.
E.
Minimum flash point. No person, firm or corporation shall use oil in any
oil-burning equipment in the Town of Bar Harbor unless its flash point
is not less than 100º F., closed cup test.
F.
§ 85-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 85-4
85:176
Chapter 87
FIREWORKS, CONSUMER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 85. Noise — See Ch. 139.
§ 87-1. Purpose.
This chapter governs and prohibits the sale and use of consumer fireworks
to ensure the safety of the residents and property owners of the Town of Bar
Harbor and of the general public.
§ 87-2. Title and authority.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Bar Harbor Consumer
Fireworks Ordinance" and is adopted pursuant to the enabling provisions of
the Maine Constitution; Title 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001; Title 8 M.R.S.A. § 223-A;
and Town Charter § C-10A(9).
§ 87-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONSUMER FIREWORKS —
The term "consumer fireworks" has the same meaning as in 27 Code
of Federal Regulations, Section 555.11, or subsequent provision, but
includes only products that are tested and certified by a third-party
testing laboratory as conforming with United States Consumer Product
Safety Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States
Code, Chapter 47.
A.
The term "consumer fireworks" does not include the following products:
(1) Missile-type rockets, as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule;
Helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by the State Fire
Marshal by rule; and
(2)
Sky rockets and bottle rockets. For purposes of this subsection,
"sky rockets and bottle rockets" means cylindrical tubes containing
not more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as defined by
the State Fire Marshal by rule, with a wooden stick attached for
guidance and stability, that rise into the air upon ignition and that
may produce a burst of color or sound at or near the height of
flight.
(3)
B.
§ 85-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 87-4
85:177
§ 87-4. Sale of consumer fireworks prohibited.
No person or group of persons shall sell, possess with the intent to sell or
offer for sale consumer fireworks within the Town of Bar Harbor.
§ 87-5. Use of consumer fireworks prohibited.
No person or group of persons shall use, possess with intent to use, display,
fire or cause to be exploded consumer fireworks within the Town of Bar
Harbor.
§ 87-6. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
§ 87-7. Exceptions.
This chapter does not apply to a person issued a fireworks display permit by
the Town of Bar Harbor and/or the State of Maine pursuant to 8 M.R.S.A.
§ 227-A to 237.
§ 87-8. Severability.
In the event that any section, subsection or portion of this chapter shall be
declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not be deemed to affect the validity of any other section,
subsection or portion of this chapter.
Penalty for violation: Any person who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall commit a civil violation punishable by a penalty of not less
than $100 and not more than $500 plus attorney's fees and costs to be
recovered on complaint to the use of the Town of Bar Harbor. Each day
such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A.
Penalty for willful violation: Any person who violates the provisions of
this chapter after having been informed by any officer or employee
or agent of the Town of Bar Harbor that a planned or anticipated
detonation or discharge or sale of consumer fireworks would violate
this chapter shall be fined $10,000 plus attorney's fees and costs.
B.
Enforcement: This chapter shall be enforced by the Town of Bar Harbor
Police Department.
C.
Injunction: In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity,
the Town of Bar Harbor, acting through its Town Manager, may apply to
any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any planned, anticipated
or threatened violation of this chapter.
D.
Seizure and disposal of consumer fireworks: The Town may seize
consumer fireworks that the Town has probable cause to believe are
used or sold in violation of this chapter and shall forfeit seized
consumer fireworks to the state for disposal.
E.
§ 87-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 87-9
85:178
§ 87-9. Effective date.
This chapter takes effect on January 1, 2012.
Chapter 90
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 36. Land use — See Ch. 125.
§ 90-1. Purpose; establishment.
Certain areas of the Town of Bar Harbor, Maine, are subject to periodic
flooding, causing serious damages to properties within these areas.
Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. Therefore, the Town of Bar
Harbor, Maine, has chosen to become a participating community in
the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488,
as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Chapter.
It is the intent of the Town of Bar Harbor, Maine, to require the
recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions
relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood
hazards.
(1)
The Town of Bar Harbor has the legal authority to adopt land use
and control measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to
Title 30-A M.R.S.A. §§ 3001 through 3007, 4352 and 4401 through
4407; Title 38 M.R.S.A. § 440. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
(2)
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the
aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town of Bar Harbor having
a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and that floodplain management measures
be applied in such flood hazard areas. This chapter establishes a
flood hazard development permit system and review procedure for
development activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the
Town of Bar Harbor, Maine.
(3)
A.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, AE, and VE for the Town
of Bar Harbor, Hancock County, Maine, identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance
Study - Hancock County, Maine,” dated July 20, 2016, with
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated July 20, 2016 with
panels 967D, 968D, 969D, 978D, 979D, 983D, 984D, 986D, 987D, 988D,
989D, 991D, 992D, 995D, 1003D, 1004D, 1011D, 1013D, 1014D, 1018D,
B.
§ 87-9 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-1
85:179
§ 90-2. Permit required.
Before any construction or other development (as defined in § 90-12),
including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any areas
of special flood hazard established in § 90-1, a flood hazard development
permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer, except as
provided in § 90-7. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits
which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of
Bar Harbor, Maine.
§ 90-3. Application for permit.
The application for a flood hazard development permit shall be submitted
to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include (Subsections H through
K(3) apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.):
1181D, 1182D, 1202D, 1206D, 1210D, 1227D, 1229D, 1230D, 1231D,
1232D, 1233D, 1237D, and 1241D, derived from the county wide digital
Flood Insurance Rate Map entitled “Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map,
Hancock County, Maine,” are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this ordinance. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-01]
The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and
contractor;
A.
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development,
including but not limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water
supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and the lot dimensions;
C.
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and
labor;
E.
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or
development;
G.
The elevation, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
Base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved
structures, which is determined: [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-01]
In Zones AE and VE from data contained in the Flood
Insurance Study - Hancock County, Maine, as described in
§ 90-1; or
(a)
(1)
H.
§ 90-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-3
85:180
In Zone A:
From any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or
other technical sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model,
FEMA 265), including information obtained pursuant to
§§ 90-6K and 90-9D;
[1]
From the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit
analysis of the floodplain boundary when overlaid onto
a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered
professional engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a
significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or,
in the absence of all other data,
[2]
To be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of
the floodplain boundary and a line perpendicular to the
shoreline which passes along the ground through the site
of the proposed building.
[3]
(b)
Highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the
proposed building;
(2)
Lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such
structures contain a basement; and
(3)
Level, in the case of nonresidential structures only, to which the
structure will be floodproofed.
(4)
A description of an elevation reference point established on the site
of all developments for which elevation standards apply as required in
§ 90-6;
I.
A written certification by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect, that the base flood elevations and
grade elevations shown on the application are accurate;
J.
The following certifications as required in § 90-6 by a registered
professional engineer or architect:
A floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, as amended), to
verify that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential
structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of §§ 90-3H(4), 90-6G
and other applicable standards in § 90-6; [Amended 6-21-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(1)
A V-Zone certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high
hazard areas, Zone VE, will meet the criteria of § 90-6P; and other
applicable standards in § 90-6;
(2)
A hydraulic openings certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic
openings in foundation walls will meet the standards of
§ 90-6L(2)(a);
(3)
K.
§ 90-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-3
85:181
§ 90-4. Application fee; expert's fees.
§ 90-5. Review standards for flood hazard development permit
applications.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of
§ 90-6M;
(4)
A certified statement that containment walls will meet the
standards of § 90-6N;
(5)
A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development; and
L.
A statement or construction plans describing in detail how each
applicable development standard in § 90-6 will be met.
M.
A nonrefundable application fee as set forth by the Town Council from
time to time shall be paid to the Planning Department, and a copy of a
receipt for the same shall accompany the application.
A.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/
or Board of Appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer
or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the Town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to
pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the chapter and be grounds
for the issuance of a stop-work order. An expert shall not be hired by
the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has
either consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity
to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied with a
decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board
of Appeals.
B.
Review all applications for the flood hazard development permit to
assure that proposed developments are reasonably safe from flooding
and to determine that all pertinent requirements of § 90-6
(Development standards) have been, or will be met;
A.
Utilize, in the review of all flood hazard development permit
applications:
The base flood data contained in the Flood Insurance Study —
Hancock County, Maine, as described in § 90-1; [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(1)
In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are
not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
from federal, state, or other technical sources, including
(2)
B.
§ 90-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-5
85:182
information obtained pursuant to §§ 90-3H(1)(b), 90-6K, and 90-9D,
in order to administer § 90-6 of this chapter; and
When the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A
by methods outlined in § 90-3H(1)(b), the community shall submit
that data to the Maine Floodplain Management Program.
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(3)
Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood
hazard areas shown on the maps described in § 90-1 of this chapter;
C.
In the review of flood hazard development permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state and local government agencies from which prior approval
is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section
404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. § 1344;
D.
Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Maine Floodplain Management Program prior to
any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of
such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
E.
Flood hazard development permits.
If the application satisfies the requirements of this chapter,
approve the issuance of one of the following flood hazard
development permits, based on the type of development:
A two-part flood hazard development permit for elevated
structures. Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a
structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above
the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide
the Code Enforcement Officer with an elevation certificate
completed by a professional land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit
construction, as-built, for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of § 90-6F, G, H, or P. Following review
of the elevation certificate data, which shall take place within
72 hours of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall issue Part II of the flood hazard development
permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the
construction project; or
(a)
A flood hazard development permit for floodproofing of
nonresidential structures that are new construction or
substantially improved nonresidential structures that are not
being elevated but that meet the floodproofing standards of
§ 90-6G(1)(a), (b), and (c). The application for this permit shall
include a floodproofing certificate signed by a registered
professional engineer or architect; or
(b)
(1)
F.
§ 90-5 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-5
85:183
§ 90-6. Development standards.
All development in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following
applicable standards:
A flood hazard development permit for minor development for
all development that is not new construction or a substantial
improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. Minor development also includes, but is not
limited to, accessory structures as provided for in § 90-6J,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal
systems or water supply facilities that do not involve
structures; and nonstructural projects such as bridges, dams,
towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
(c)
For development that requires review and approval as a conditional
use, as provided for in this ordinance, the flood hazard
development permit application shall be acted upon by the
Planning Board as required in § 90-7. [Amended 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-01]
(2)
Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all flood hazard
development permit applications, corresponding permits issued and
data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of § 90-10 of this ordinance, and
copies of elevation certificates, floodproofing certificates, certificates
of compliance and certificates of design standards required under the
provisions of §§ 90-3, 90-6, and 90-8 of this chapter. [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
G.
All development. All development shall:
Be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent
flotation (excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement
of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(1)
(2) Use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage; and
(3)
Use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during flooding conditions.
(4)
A.
§ 90-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-6
85:184
Water supply. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems.
B.
Sanitary sewage systems. All new and replacement sanitary sewage
systems shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the
system into floodwaters.
C.
On-site waste disposal systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during floods.
D.
Watercourse carrying capacity. All development associated with altered
or relocated portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and
maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the floodcarrying
capacity of any watercourse.
E.
Residential. New construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure located within:
Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
(1)
Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least two feet above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to §§ 90-3H(1)(b), 90-5B, or 90-9D.
(2)
Zone VE and Coastal AE Zone (as defined) shall meet the
requirements of § 90-6P. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
(3)
F.
Nonresidential. New construction or substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure located within:
Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
Be floodproofed to at least two feet above the base flood
elevation so that below that elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(a)
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(b)
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the floodproofing design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a flood hazard development
permit, as required by § 90-3K, and shall include a record of
(c)
(1)
G.
§ 90-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-6
85:185
the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is
floodproofed.
Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to
at least two feet above the base flood elevation utilizing information
obtained pursuant to §§ 90-3H(1)(b), 90-5B, or 90-9D; [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
Or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, meet
the floodproofing standards of § 90-6G(1).
(a)
(2)
Zone VE and Coastal AE Zone (as defined) shall meet the
requirements of § 90-6P. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
(3)
Manufactured homes. New or substantially improved manufactured
homes located within:
Zone AE shall:
Be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement)
of the manufactured home is at least two feet above the base
flood elevation;
(a)
Be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry
slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be
reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its
wheels and axles; and
(b)
Be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
Over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four
corners of the manufactured home, plus two
additional ties per side at intermediate points
(manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require
one additional tie per side); or by
[a]
Frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five
additional ties along each side at intermediate points
(manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require
four additional ties per side).
[b]
[1]
All components of the anchoring system described in
§ 90-6H(1)(c)[1][a] and [b] shall be capable of carrying a
force of 4,800 pounds.
[2]
(c)
(1)
Zone A shall:
Be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in
§ 90-6H(1)(b), such that the lowest floor (including basement)
(a)
(2)
H.
§ 90-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-6
85:186
of the manufactured home is at least two feet above the base
flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
§§ 90-3H(1)(b), 90-5B, or 90-9D; and
(b) Meet the anchoring requirements of § 90-6H(1)(c).
Zone VE and Coastal AE Zone (as defined) shall meet the
requirements of § 90-6P. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
(3)
Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles located within: [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
Zone A and AE shall either:
(a) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions; or
(b)
Be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring
requirements for manufactured homes in § 90-6H(1).
(c)
(1)
Zone VE and Coastal AE Zone (as defined) shall meet the
requirements of either § 90-6I(1)(a) or (b), or 90-6P.
(2)
I.
Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as defined in § 90-12,
located within Zones AE and A, shall be exempt from the elevation
criteria required in § 90-6F and G above, if all other requirements of
§ 90-6 and all the following requirements are met. Accessory structures
shall: [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(1) Have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
Have hydraulic openings, as specified in § 90-6L(2), in at least two
different walls of the accessory structure;
(2)
(3) Be located outside the floodway;
When possible, be constructed and placed on the building site so
as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and
be placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary
structure; and
(4)
Have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electrical
service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation
and when possible outside the special flood hazard area.
(5)
(6) Be located outside the Coastal AE Zone.
J.
K. Floodways.
§ 90-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-6
85:187
In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, and other development
shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which is
designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer
is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result
in any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(1)
In Zones AE and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway
is designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvement, and other development shall not be
permitted in the floodway as determined in § 90-6K(3) unless a
technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer
is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
Will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community; and
(a)
Is consistent with the technical criteria contained in FEMA's
guidelines and standards for flood risk analysis and mapping.
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(b)
(2)
In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway
is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the
channel of the river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of 1/2 the width of the floodplain as measured
from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
(3)
Enclosed areas below the lowest floor. New construction or substantial
improvement of any structure in Zones AE and A that meets the
development standards of § 90-6, including the elevation requirements
of § 90-6F, G or H, and is elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles,
stilts, or crawl spaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation
requirements, provided that all the following criteria are met or
exceeded:
(1) Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in § 90-12;
Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must
either:
Be engineered and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect; or
(a)
(b) Meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(2)
L.
§ 90-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-6
85:188
A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of the
enclosed area.
[1]
The bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood
elevation and no higher than one foot above the lowest
grade; and
[2]
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves,
or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit
the entry and exit of floodwaters automatically without any
external influence or control, such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other nonautomatic
mechanical means;
[3]
(3) The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and
The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of
vehicles, or storage.
(4)
Bridges. New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in
Zones AE, A and VE shall be designed such that:
When possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the
pilings, or columns) is elevated to at least two feet above the base
flood elevation; and
(1)
A registered professional engineer shall certify that:
The structural design and methods of construction shall meet
the elevation requirements of this section and the floodway
standards of § 90-6K; and
(a)
The foundation and superstructure attached thereto are
designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due
to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on
all structural components. Water-loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood.
(b)
(2)
M.
Containment walls. New construction or substantial improvement of
any containment wall located within Zones AE, A, and VE shall:
Have the containment wall elevated to at least two feet above the
base flood elevation;
(1)
Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and
(2)
Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this
section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for
a flood hazard development permit, as required by § 90-3K.
(3)
N.
§ 90-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-6
85:189
Wharves, piers and docks. New construction or substantial
improvement of wharves, piers, and docks is permitted in Zones AE, A,
and VE, in and over water and seaward of the mean high tide if the
following requirements are met:
Wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local,
state, and federal regulations; and
(1)
For commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered
professional engineer shall develop or review the structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction.
(2)
O.
Coastal floodplains.
All new construction located within Zones AE, A and VE shall be
located landward of the reach of the mean high tide except as
provided for in § 90-6P(6).
(1)
New construction or substantial improvement of any structure
located within Zone VE and Coastal AE Zone (as defined) shall:
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
Be elevated on posts or columns such that:
The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to two feet above the base flood elevation;
[1]
The pile or column foundation and the elevated portion
of the structure attached thereto is anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects
of wind and water-loads acting simultaneously on all
building components; and
[2]
Water-loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. Wind-loading values used shall be those
required by applicable state and local building standards.
[3]
(a)
Have the space below the lowest floor:
[1] Free of obstructions; or
Constructed with open wood lattice work or insect
screening intended to collapse under wind and water
without causing collapse, displacement, or other
structural damage to the elevated portion of the building
or supporting piles or columns; or
[2]
Constructed to enclose less than 300 square feet of area
with nonsupporting breakaway walls which have a design
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 or more than 20
pounds per square foot. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-01]
[3]
(b)
(2)
P.
§ 90-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-6
85:190
Require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
Develop or review the structural design, specifications,
and plans for the construction, which must meet or exceed
the technical criteria contained in the Coastal
Construction Manual (FEMA 55); and [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
[1]
Certify that the design and methods of construction to
be used are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the criteria of § 90-6P(2).
[2]
(c)
The use of fill for structural support in Zone VE and Coastal AE
Zone (as defined) is prohibited. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016-01]
(3)
Human alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE and Coastal AE
Zone (as defined) is prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that
such alterations will not increase potential flood damage.
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(4)
The enclosed areas may be used solely for parking vehicles,
building access, and storage.
(5)
Conditional use. Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located
seaward of mean high tide and shall be exempt from the elevation
requirement in § 90-6G only if permitted as a conditional use
following review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided
in § 90-7, and if all the following requirements and those of
§§ 90-6A and 90-6K and 90-6L are met:
The conditional use shall be limited to low-value structures
such as metal or wood sheds 200 square feet or less and shall
not exceed more than one story.
(a)
The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the
effect of wind and water-loads acting simultaneously on all
building components.
(b)
The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris
impact forces affecting nearby buildings.
(c)
The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be
used for human habitation.
(d)
Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must
be anchored and either elevated or floodproofed to two feet
above the base flood elevation.
(e)
All electrical outlets shall be ground-fault-interrupt type. The
electrical service disconnect shall be located on shore above
(f)
(6)
§ 90-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-6
85:191
§ 90-7. Conditional use review.
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional
uses provided for in this chapter. The Planning Board shall hear and
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all applications for
conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer
that a conditional use permit is required shall file an application for the
permit with the Planning Board.
the base flood elevation and when possible outside the special
flood hazard area.
Review procedure for a conditional use flood hazard development
permit.
The flood hazard development permit application with additional
information attached addressing how each of the conditional use
criteria specified in the chapter will be satisfied, may serve as the
permit application for the conditional use permit.
(1)
Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing on the application within 30 days of its receipt of the
application.
(2)
If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant
requirements of the chapter, the Planning Board must approve the
application or approve with conditions within 45 days of the date of
the public hearing.
(3)
A conditional use permit issued under the provisions of this
ordinance shall expire if the work or change involved is not
commenced within 180 days of the issuance of the permit by the
Planning Board. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(4)
The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing
over the signature of the Chairman of the Planning Board that flood
insurance is not available for structures located entirely over water
or seaward of mean high tide.
(5)
A.
Expansion of conditional uses. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or
enlarged without a permit issued under this section if that building
or use was established or constructed under a previously issued
conditional use permit or if it is a building or use which would
require a conditional use permit if being newly established or
constructed under this chapter.
(1)
B.
§ 90-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-8
85:192
§ 90-8. Certificate of compliance.
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no
structure which is constructed or substantially improved shall be occupied
until a certificate of compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
subject to the following provisions:
§ 90-9. Review of subdivisions and development proposals.
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed
developments that require review under other federal law, state law, or local
ordinances or regulations and all projects on five or more disturbed acres,
or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots,
assure that:
For new construction or substantial improvement of any elevated
structure, the applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer:
An elevation certificate completed by a professional land surveyor,
registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with
§ 90-6F, G, H, or P; and
(1)
For structures in Zone VE and Coastal AE Zone (as defined),
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction used are in compliance
with § 90-6P(2). [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
(2)
A.
The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement
Officer that the development is complete and complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
B.
Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
Review the required certificate(s) and the applicant's written
notification; and
(1)
Upon determination that the development conforms with the
provisions of this chapter, shall issue a certificate of compliance.
(2)
C.
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage.
A.
All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
B.
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
C.
All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in
a riverine floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be
based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
D.
§ 90-8 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-9
85:193
§ 90-10. Appeals and variances.
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Bar Harbor may, upon written
application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board in the administration of the provisions of this chapter.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this
chapter consistent with state law and the following criteria:
Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan
approval requiring that structures on any lot in the development having
any portion of its land within a special flood hazard area are to be
constructed in accordance with § 90-6 of this chapter. Such
requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale
agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or a structure, including but not
limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate
that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any
other document previously described. The construction requirement
shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by
the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval
process.
E.
Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
A.
Variances shall be granted only upon:
(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause; and
A determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood
occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and
(2)
A showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with
other state, federal, or local laws or ordinances; and
(3)
A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
undue hardship, which in this subsection means:
That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return
unless a variance is granted; and
(a)
That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances
of the property and not to the general conditions in the
neighborhood; and
(b)
(4)
B.
§ 90-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-10
85:194
That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality; and
(c)
That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
(d)
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief,
and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions to a variance as
it deems necessary.
C.
Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use, provided that:
(1) Other criteria of this § 90-10 and § 90-6K are met; and
The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety.
(2)
D.
Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
or restoration of historic structures upon the determination that:
The development meets the criteria of § 90-10A though D above;
and
(1)
The proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(2)
E.
Any applicant who meets the criteria of § 90-10A through E, shall be
notified by the Board of Appeals, in writing, over the signature of the
Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
(1)
Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property; and
(2)
The applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of
all the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes
those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality
against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a floodplain and that the applicant
individually releases the municipality from any claims the applicant
may have against the municipality that are related to the use of
land located in a floodplain.
(3)
F.
§ 90-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-10
85:195
§ 90-11. Enforcement and penalties.
Appeal procedure for administrative and variance appeals.
An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board
of Appeals by an aggrieved party within 30 days after receipt of
a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
(1)
Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer
or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision
appealed from.
(2)
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal
within 35 days of its receipt of an appeal request.
(3)
(4) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within 35 days after
the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
(5)
The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer
a report of all variance actions, including justification for the
granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a flood hazard development permit,
which includes any conditions to be attached to said permit.
(6)
Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to
Superior Court in accordance with state laws within 45 days from
the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
(7)
G.
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452.
A.
The penalties contained in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 shall apply to any
violation of this chapter.
B.
In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon
determination that a violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the
Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a
denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of:
The name of the property owner and address or legal description
of the property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
(1)
A clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation
of a cited state or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
(2)
A clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
(3)
C.
§ 90-10 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-11
85:196
§ 90-12. Definitions. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this ordinance
shall have the same meanings as they have at common law and to give
this chapter its most reasonable application. Words used in the present
tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the
plural number includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall"
is mandatory and not discretionary.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A small detached structure that is incidental
and subordinate to the principal structure.
ADJACENT GRADE — The natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain having a
one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically
identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in § 90-1 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year, commonly called the "one-hundred-year flood."
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
BUILDING — See "structure."
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A document signed by the Code
Enforcement Officer stating that a structure is in compliance with all of the
provisions of this chapter.
COASTAL AE ZONE — The portion of the coastal high hazard area with
wave heights between 1.5 feet and 3.0 feet and bounded by a line labeled
the “Limit of Moderate Wave Action" (LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). VE Zone floodplain construction standards are applied to
development, new construction and substantial improvements in the
Coastal AE Zone.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are designated as
Evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and
(4)
A clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant
to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as
amended.
(5)
§ 90-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-12
85:197
Zone VE and Zone AE bounded by a line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave
Action” (LiMWA) on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person certified under Title 30
M.R.S.A. § 4451 (including exemptions in § 4451, Paragraph 1) and
employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable comprehensive
planning and land use laws.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use that, because of its potential impact on
surrounding areas and structures, is permitted only upon review and
approval by the Planning Board pursuant to § 90-7.
CONTAINMENT WALL — A wall used to convey or direct stormwater or
sanitary water from the initial source to the final destination.
DEVELOPMENT — A man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate. This includes, but is not limited to, buildings or other structures;
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations;
or storage of equipment or materials, and the storage, deposition, or
extraction of materials.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — See “Flood Insurance
Rate Map.”
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building:
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE — An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, as
amended) that:
Built, in the case of a building in Zone AE or A, so that the top of the
elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zone VE or Coastal AE
Zone, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the elevated floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings,
columns, post, piers, or stilts; and
A.
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood of up to two feet above the magnitude of the
base flood.
B.
In the case of Zone AE or A, "elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of floodwaters, as required by § 90-6L. In the case of Zone VE or
Coastal AE Zone, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area
is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet
the standards of § 90-6P(2)(b)[3].
C.
Is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program; and
A.
B. Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
§ 90-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-12
85:198
FLOOD or FLOODING —
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY — An examination, evaluation and
determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a community
on which the Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the
special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — See "flood elevation study."
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA — Any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. (See definition of "flooding.")
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT — The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and
floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and contents.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
FLOODWAY — See "regulatory floodway."
A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
A.
The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other
body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves
or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly
caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water,
accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature,
such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in
Subsection (1)(a) of this definition.
B.
§ 90-12 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-12
85:199
FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT LINES — The lines marking the limits of
floodways on federal, state, and local floodplain maps.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge
openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that
could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a
selected size flood and floodway conditions.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE — A use which cannot perform its
intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and
shipbuilding and ship repair facilities but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — The landward limit of
the 1.5 foot breaking wave within a Coastal AE Zone. These areas are
bounded by a line labeled “Limit of Moderate Wave Action” (LiMWA) on a
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The LiMWA line delineates that portion
of the special flood hazard area (SFHA) landward of a VE Zone in which
the principal sources of flooding are astronomical high tides, storm surges,
or tsunamis, not riverine sources. These areas may be subject to wave
effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or combinations of these forces. The
floodplain development and construction standards for VE Zones will be
applied in the Coastal AE Zone.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 90-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-12
85:200
LOCALLY ESTABLISHED DATUM — For purposes of this chapter, an
elevation established for a specific site to which all other elevations at
the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) or any other established datum and is used in areas where mean
sea level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable nonelevation design requirements of § 90-6L of this
ordinance.[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-01]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also
includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a
site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — When related to the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
MINOR DEVELOPMENT — All development that is not new construction or
a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure.
It also includes, but is not limited to, accessory structures as provided for
in § 90-6J, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction
of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and nonstructural projects such as
bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM (NGVD) — The national vertical
datum, a standard established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based upon mean sea level in 1929
and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)."
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM (NAVD) — The national datum
whose standard was established in 1988, which is the new vertical datum
§ 90-12 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-12
85:201
used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) for all new Flood
Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum used by other
North American countries such as Canada and Mexico and was established
to replace NGVD because of constant movement of the earth’s crust, glacial
rebound, and subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOODWAY —
RIVERINE — Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — See “area of special flood hazard.”
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start"
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways,
nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations
or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor
vehicle; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot;
and
A.
When not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, it
is considered to be the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas to a distance of 1/2 the width of the floodplain, as
measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
B.
§ 90-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 90-12
85:202
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or modification
of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building. A gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also
a structure.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to comply
with a community's floodplain management regulations.
Chapter 94
FOOD AND MERCHANDISE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 109. Noise — See Ch. 139.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure, and a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
B.
§ 90-12 FIRE PREVENTION § 90-12
85:203

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § .08.06 of the 1990 Code]
§ 94-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate businesses in Bar Harbor which
offer food and/or merchandise for sale so as to prevent, to the extent
possible, the congestion of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic; to keep
public ways as clean as possible and free of discarded food, merchandise,
wrappings, bags, packages and other items of litter; to protect public safety;
and to improve aesthetics and maintain the appearance of the Town.
§ 94-2. Definitions. [Amended 4-20-1993]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AREA FULLY ENCLOSED WITHIN A STRUCTURE — A space totally
enclosed by walls, a floor or slab, and a ceiling or roof. The walls may
be interrupted only by permanently installed operable or fixed windows or
doors.
MERCHANDISE — Includes the wares, goods and/or commodities
customarily bought and sold, either at retail or wholesale, by merchants in
the exercise of trade or business.
OUTDOOR — Any area visible from any public street, sidewalk, way or park
that is not fully enclosed within a structure.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY — Any outdoor display of goods, materials,
merchandise, or other stock-in-trade intended for sale, exchange or
advertising purposes, but not including a sign as defined in Chapter 125,
§ 125-109, of this Code or otherwise lawful outdoor seating provided by a
restaurant. A vending machine constitutes an outdoor display.
PERSON — Includes individuals, firms, associations, partnerships,
corporations, trusts and other legal entities.
SALE — The exchange of any item of merchandise or food for any form
of money, whether at retail or wholesale, regardless of whether a profit is
made.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on, above or below the surface of the ground or any body of water,
or which is attached to something having a location on, above or below the
surface of the ground or any body of water.
STRUCTURES WHICH ARE OF A MOVABLE OR PORTABLE NATURE —
Structures which are designed to be or are equipped with wheels so as to
be readily movable from one location to another or structures which are
constructed in any other manner as to be readily movable from one location
to another.
§ 94-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 94-3
85:205
§ 94-3. Restrictions on sales. [Amended 4-20-1993]
Food to be sold and merchandise to be sold, leased or rented within
structures. [Amended 4-2-1998; 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-01]
Except for sales conducted at farmers' markets that comply with
Chapter 125, Land Use, it shall be unlawful for any person or
persons conducting or causing to be conducted any business within
the Town of Bar Harbor to offer or cause to be offered for sale,
either at retail or wholesale, items of food to persons without
providing the following facilities with respect to the sale of said
food: an area and/or means of consuming said food on the premises
where sold.
(1)
The structure in or from which said items of food are sold or
merchandise is sold, leased or rented shall be so constructed as to
be permanently attached to the land on which it is located and not
of a movable or portable nature.
(2)
A.
Use of streets, sidewalks and parks for sales and displays prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person within the Town of Bar Harbor to offer
or cause to be offered for sale any food or merchandise:
In such a manner as to require or permit sales to occur on or within
a public street, sidewalk, way or park.
(1)
Which is displayed within the confines of any public street,
sidewalk way or park.
(2)
B.
Exceptions. The provisions of Subsections A and B shall not:
Outdoor seating at restaurants. Be deemed to prohibit restaurants
from providing outside seating on private property so long as such
seating complies will all other codes, ordinances and laws.
(1)
Eleemosynary, educational and philanthropic organizations. Apply
to sales conducted by eleemosynary, educational and philanthropic
organizations with the written permission of the Town Council of
Bar Harbor, or in the case of public parks as defined by § 144-4,
with the permission of the permitting authority responsible for
issuing a special event permit under § 144-25, which permission
shall be given by said Council or permitting authority upon a
finding that: [Amended 3-4-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-1]
The organization conducting the sale is in fact eleemosynary,
educational or philanthropic;
(a)
The sale will be of a temporary nature lasting not more than
two days;
(b)
The sale will not be conducted in such a manner and/or place
as to create congestion of the public streets, sidewalks or other
public ways; and
(c)
(2)
C.
§ 94-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 94-3
85:206
§ 94-4. Soliciting on streets, in open spaces or from aircraft.
[Amended 4-20-1993; 5-18-1993]
§ 94-5. Outdoor displays. [Added 4-20-1993]
All outdoor displays, as defined by this chapter and occurring in the area
described in Subsection A, are subject to the requirements set forth in
Subsection B:
Said sale would not be in violation of any state statute or other
local ordinance, rule or regulation.
(d)
Vending machines. Be construed to prohibit outdoor vending
machines on private property.
(3)
No merchant, storekeeper, shopkeeper or operator of any business,
calling or pursuit shall, by himself or by another under his direction,
stand or remain in any public street, sidewalk or park, or in any
doorway or other place adjacent to a public street, sidewalk or park,
within the Town of Bar Harbor and by calls, cries, ringing of bells,
blowing of horns, or by the operation of any noisemaking, noiseproducing
or noise-amplifying device, or by reaching out into the street,
sidewalk or other place adjacent to a public street or sidewalk, attract
attention to or solicit passersby to enter into any street, shop, or place
of business or commercial pursuit.
A.
Airborne advertising prohibited. No person shall by himself, or by
another under his direction, operate an aircraft for the purposes of
towing or otherwise displaying banners or signs in a manner to attract
the attention of users or inhabitants of public or private lands within
the Town of Bar Harbor.
B.
Regulated area. The requirements set forth in Subsection B shall apply
to all outdoor displays on both sides of the street within the following
portions of the Shoreland General Development I and Downtown
Village Districts: [Amended 6-8-2010]
Main Street from West Street south to Atlantic Avenue and Newton
Way;
(1)
(2) Mount Desert Street from Main Street west to School Street;
(3) Cottage Street from Main Street west to Rodick Street; and
West Street from the Town Pier west to the Downtown Village
District boundary between lots 3-4-10 and 3-4-11.
(4)
A.
Outdoor display regulations.
Three-foot setback. Outdoor displays shall be set back three feet
from the front property lines.
(1)
B.
§ 94-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 94-5
85:207
§ 94-6. Enforcement. [Amended 4-20-1993]
Facades and doorways. Regardless of building setback, no
merchandise or outdoor display shall be attached, hung or affixed
to any door, doorway or outdoor surface of any building facade.
(2)
Exits and exit discharges. No merchandise shall be displayed
within the exit or exit discharge of any building. For purposes of
this section, the terms "exit" and "exit discharge" shall have be
defined as in such edition of the Code for Safety to Life in Buildings
and Structures (ANSI/NFPA 101) published by the National Fire
Protection Association as may be adopted by the Bar Harbor Town
Council pursuant to Chapter 36 of the Bar Harbor Code or as may
be required or recognized by the State of Maine.
(3)
Code Enforcement Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be
enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to Chapter 125,
Article X of this Code and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, as the same may be
amended, provided that neither the Code Enforcement Officer nor the
Town Council shall permit a consent decree which has the effect of
allowing a violation of this chapter to continue.
A.
Nuisance. In addition to any other penalty provided by the law, the
commission of acts prohibited by this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the Town seeking an injunction to
prohibit further and continued violation thereof.
B.
Each day separate offense. Each day that such unlawful act or violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
C.
§ 94-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 94-6
85:208
ARTICLE II
Single-Use Carryout Bags
[Adopted 1-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-01]
§ 94-7. Purpose.
§ 94-8. Authority.
This article is enacted under the Home Rule Authority of municipalities
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Maine, Article VIII, Part 2,
Section 1, the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Chapter 141, and the
general power of municipalities to enact police power ordinances.
§ 94-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — An individual who purchases or accepts food, beverage or
merchandise for use or consumption.
PRODUCT AND PRODUCE BAGS — Bags without handles used exclusively
to carry produce, meats, seafood and bulk items, for the purpose of
containing those items or preventing direct contact between those items
and other items. These bags are used to carry items to the point of sale
inside a store or to prevent such items from coming into direct contact with
other purchased items.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag specifically designed and manufactured for the
repeated use of carrying food, beverage or merchandise, whether made of
cloth, fiber or plastic; is machine washable or made from a material that
can be cleaned and disinfected regularly; has the capability of carrying 18
pounds or more; and, if plastic, is at least 4.0 mil thick.
SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAG — A bag other than a reusable bag, as
defined above, provided at the check stand, cash register, point of sale,
or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting food or
merchandise out of the store. The term single-use carryout bag includes
compostable and biodegradable bags, but does not include reusable bags,
It is in the best interests of the citizens of and visitors to the Town of Bar
Harbor to protect the environment and natural resources of the Town
and the State of Maine and the bodies of water within and adjacent
to the Town by: prohibiting the use and distribution of plastic singleuse
carryout bags, discouraging the distribution of disposable paper
single-use carryout shopping bags, and encouraging the use of reusable
shopping bags.
A.
Therefore, the purpose of this article is to limit the use of single-use
carryout bags to reduce litter and to reduce the environmental impact
caused by the use of single-use plastic bags.
B.
§ 94-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 94-9
85:209
produce bags, product bags required for special handling, or bags provided
by pharmacists to contain prescription drugs.
STORE — Any commercial enterprise engaged in the sale of food and
merchandise, including but not limited to grocery and convenient stores,
markets, pharmacies, restaurants, takeout food, temporary and seasonal
businesses, and other merchant retailers.
§ 94-10. Restriction on single-use carryout bags.
Except as provided below, no store as defined above shall provide or sell a
single-use carryout bag to a customer at a checkout stand, cash register,
point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of transporting any
goods or merchandise out of the establishment.
§ 94-11. Permitted bags.
§ 94-12. Exemptions.
§ 94-13. Violations and enforcement.
A store may, at its discretion, make a reusable bag or a paper bag
available to the customer either for free or for a fee at the checkout
stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the
purposes of transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment.
Businesses shall keep any proceeds from the sale of reusable bags and
paper bags at point of sale.
A.
Customers are encouraged to bring reusable bags to stores, which may
choose to provide a rebate for such.
B.
Customers may use bags of any type that they bring into the store for
their own use.
C.
A store shall be exempt from the provisions of this article in a situation
deemed to be an emergency by the Town Council.
A.
A store is allowed to draw down and deplete existing inventory of
single-use plastic shopping bags by December 2019.
B.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the primary responsibility of
the enforcement of this article. If the CEO determines that a violation
of the article has occurred, a written warning notice shall be issued to
the store. If an additional violation occurs after a written warning has
been issued, the CEO shall issue a written notice of violation (NOV) and
shall impose a penalty as set forth below.
A.
Violations of this article shall be punishable by fines as follows:
A fine not exceeding $100 for the first written NOV violation in a
one-year period.
(1)
B.
§ 94-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 94-13
85:210
§ 94-14. Appeals.
Any decision, action, or inaction pertaining to this article may be appealed
to the Maine Superior Court (Hancock County) within 30 days of the
decision, action or inaction.
§ 94-15. Severability.
In the event any portion of this article shall be found to be invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of the article shall remain
in effect.
§ 94-16. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective 30 days after the Town
Council's passage.
A fine not exceeding $200 for the second and each subsequent
written NOV in a one-year period. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be considered a subsequent violation.
(2)
Fines are payable within 15 days of receipt of written notice of
violation.
(3)
§ 94-13 FIRE PREVENTION § 94-16
85:211

ARTICLE III
Polystyrene Foam Food Service Containers
[Adopted 1-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-02]
§ 94-17. Purpose.
§ 94-18. Authority.
This article is enacted under the Home Rule Authority of municipalities
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Maine, Article VIII, Part 2,
Section 1, the provisions of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Chapter 141, and the
general power of municipalities to enact police power ordinances.
§ 94-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ESTABLISHMENT — A person or entity engaging in the sale or distribution
of prepared food or beverages to consumers. This includes, but is not
limited to, retail vendors of food or beverages, restaurants, takeouts,
schools, hospitals, religious institutions, governmental institutions,
community centers, markets, temporary and/or seasonal vendors and onsite
events.
FOOD PACKAGER — Any person who places food in packaging materials for
the purpose of retail sale of those products.
POLYSTYRENE FOAM — Expanded and extruded polystyrene foam and
blown polystyrene, generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays,
clamshell containers, meat trays, and egg cartons. This does not include
oriented (clear) polystyrene.
POLYSTYRENE FOAM FOOD SERVICE CONTAINER — Any food container
made, in whole or in part, of polystyrene foam and used to package or hold
food or beverage for on-site or off-site consumption.
PREPARED FOOD — Food or beverages which are served or sold at an
establishment having been either previously prepared elsewhere or
prepared at the establishment.
It is in the best interests of the citizens of and visitors to the Town of Bar
Harbor to protect the environment and natural resources of the Town
and the State of Maine and the bodies of water within and adjacent to
the Town by prohibiting the use and distribution of polystyrene foam
food service containers.
A.
Therefore the purpose of this article is to ban the use of polystyrene
foam food service containers to reduce litter, to minimize impact on
the Town Transfer Station while increasing recyclables, and to reduce
the environmental impact caused by the use of polystyrene foam food
service containers.
B.
§ 94-17 FIRE PREVENTION § 94-20
85:213
§ 94-20. Restrictions.
§ 94-21. Exemptions.
§ 94-22. Violations and enforcement.
No establishment in the Town of Bar Harbor shall serve or sell prepared
food in - and no food packager shall package food in - polystyrene foam
food service containers.
A.
No party shall sell or distribute polystyrene foam food service
containers within the Town of Bar Harbor.
B.
Items prepackaged in polystyrene foam food service containers outside
the Town of Bar Harbor may be sold without repackaging those items.
A.
Uncooked meat and seafood may be sold in polystyrene foam food
service containers.
B.
Items to be shipped to points outside Bar Harbor may be packaged in
polystyrene foam food service containers for shipping.
C.
An establishment or food packager shall be exempt from the provisions
of this article in a situation deemed to be an emergency by the Town
Council, for the immediate preservation of the public health and safety.
D.
An establishment or food packager is allowed to draw down and deplete
existing inventory of polystyrene food service containers by December
2019.
E.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the primary responsibility of
the enforcement of this article. If the CEO determines that a violation of
the article has occurred, a written warning notice shall be issued to the
establishment. If an additional violation occurs after a written warning
has been issued, the CEO shall issue a written notice of violation (NOV)
and shall impose a penalty as set forth below.
A.
Violations of this article shall be punishable by fines as follows:
A fine not exceeding $100 for the first written NOV violation in a
one-year period.
(1)
A fine not exceeding $200 for the second and each subsequent
written NOV in a one-year period. Each day that a violation occurs
shall be considered a subsequent violation.
(2)
Fines are payable within 15 days of receipt of written notice of
violation.
(3)
B.
§ 94-20 BAR HARBOR CODE § 94-23
85:214
§ 94-23. Appeals.
Any decision, action, or inaction pertaining to this article may be appealed
to the Maine Superior Court (Hancock County) within 30 days of the
decision, action or inaction.
§ 94-24. Severability.
In the event any portion of this article shall be found to be invalid by a court
of competent jurisdiction, the remaining portions of the article shall remain
in effect.
§ 94-25. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective 30 days after the Town
Council's passage.
§ 94-23 FIRE PREVENTION § 94-25
85:215
Chapter 102
GENERAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
§ 94-25 BAR HARBOR CODE § 94-25
85:216
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
§ 102-1. Applicability; program policy.
The Municipality of Bar Harbor administers a program of general
assistance (GA) available to all persons who are eligible to receive
assistance in accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided
within this chapter, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)
GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
A.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant
while encouraging self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible
persons achieve self-maintenance by promoting the work incentive.
When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other than financial
through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services.
B.
The general assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions
on the personal rights of the applicant or recipient, nor will there
be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age, race, nationality,
religion, sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed
to including qualified individuals with disabilities in municipal services,
programs, and activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA
program that, when viewed in its entirety, is readily accessible to and
usable by individuals with disabilities. GA applicants with physical or
mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation in order
to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged
to provide the municipality with advance notice regarding the
accommodation request.
C.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all
applications for assistance and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants
will be provided information regarding their rights and responsibilities
under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an application,
the administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether
or not assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for
the decision. The administrator will also provide the applicant written
notice that the applicant may appeal to the municipal fair hearing
authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an applicant is
determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted
except when the administrator issues nonemergency assistance
conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare assignment.
(See § 102-23 of this chapter.)
D.
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records
pertaining to each applicant and recipient. These records are
confidential as a matter of law. (See 22 M.R.S.A. § 4306.)
E.
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the
administrator will be available. The administrator, or other designated
F.
§ 102-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-1
85:217
person/entity, will be available to take applications in the event of an
emergency at all other times. A copy of this chapter and the Maine
General Assistance Law will be readily available to any member of the
public upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
§ 102-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-1
85:218
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 102-2. Word usage.
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this chapter will have
their common meaning.
§ 102-3. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A person who has submitted, either directly or through
an authorized representative, an application for general assistance or who
has, in an emergency, requested assistance without first completing an
application. In addition, all persons on whose behalf an authorized
application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits have been
granted shall be considered applicants.
APPLICATION FORM — A standardized form used by the general assistance
administrator for the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general
assistance and confirming the fact that a person has made application. The
application form must be signed by the applicant to be considered complete.
BASIC NECESSITIES —
Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, nonelective essential medical
services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic
telephone service where it is necessary for medical reasons, property
taxes when a tax lien placed on the property threatens the loss of
the applicant's place of residence, and any other commodity or service
determined essential by the municipality.
A.
"Basic necessities" do not include:
(1) Phone bills.
(2) Cable or satellite dish television.
(3) Mail orders.
(4) Vehicle payments.
Credit card debt. (Note: Repayments of loans or credit will be
treated as having been spent on basic necessities when the
applicant can provide verification of this fact.)
(5)
(6) Furniture.
Loan repayments. (Note: Repayments of loans or credit will be
treated as having been spent on basic necessities when the
applicant can provide verification of this fact.)
(7)
(8) Cigarettes.
B.
§ 102-2 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-3
85:219
CASE RECORD — An official file containing application forms;
correspondence; narrative records and all other communications pertaining
to an applicant or recipient; written decisions regarding eligibility including
reasons for those decisions as well as the types and amounts of assistance
provided; and all records concerning an applicant's request for fair hearing
and those fair hearing decisions.
CATEGORICAL ASSISTANCE — All state and federal income maintenance
programs.
CLAIMANT — A person who has requested a fair hearing.
DEFICIT — An applicant's deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level
of assistance for the household as provided in § 102-34 of this chapter less
the household income as calculated pursuant to § 102-33 of this chapter,
provided that such a calculation yields a positive number. If the household
income is greater than the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance,
the household has no deficit.
DISABLED PERSON — A person who is presently unable to work or
maintain a home due to a physical or mental disability that is verified by a
physician or qualified mental health provider.
DWELLING UNIT — A building or part thereof used for separate living
quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit [22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)].
ELIGIBLE PERSON — A person who is qualified to receive general
assistance from the municipality according to the standards of eligibility
set forth in this chapter [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)]. "Eligible person" does not
include a fugitive from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4).
EMERGENCY — Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the
control of the individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could
reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of a person
at the municipality's option, a situation which is imminent and which may
result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual or
(9) Alcohol.
(10)Pet care costs.
(11)Vacation costs.
(12)Legal fees.
(13)Late fees.
(14)Key deposits.
Security deposits for rental property (except for those situations
where no other permanent lodging is available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver, deferral or installment arrangement
cannot be made between the landlord and tenant to satisfy the
need for the immediate payment of the security deposit or payment
in full) [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)].
(15)
§ 102-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-3
85:220
municipality if not resolved immediately [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(4), 4308(2),
and 4310].
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ADMINISTRATOR — A municipal official
designated to receive applications, make decisions concerning an
applicant's right to receive assistance, and prepare records and
communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an elected
overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director,
or caseworker [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)].
GENERAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM — A service administered by a
municipality for the immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide
the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or their families. A
general assistance program provides a specific amount and type of aid for
defined needs during a limited period of time and is not intended to be a
continuing "grant-in-aid" or "categorical" welfare program. This definition
shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide
general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is
found to be otherwise eligible to receive general assistance [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(5)].
HOUSEHOLD — An individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more
individuals, even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between
individuals residing in the dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive
assistance for no more than their pro rata share of the actual costs of the
shared basic needs of that household according to the maximum levels of
assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata share is
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the
entire household by the total number of household members. The income of
household members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the
applicant only when there is a pooling of income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)].
INCOME —
Any form of income in cash or in kind received by the household
including:
(1) Net remuneration for services performed.
(2) Cash received on either secured or unsecured credit.
(3) Payments received as an annuity, retirement or disability benefits.
(4) Veterans' pensions and/or benefits.
(5) Retirement accounts or benefits.
(6) Workers' compensation.
(7) Unemployment benefits.
(8) Federal and/or state tax returns.
A.
§ 102-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-3
85:221
Benefits under any state or federal categorical assistance program,
such as TANF, supplemental security income, social security and
any other payments from governmental sources (unless specifically
prohibited by any law or regulation).
(9)
(10)Court-ordered support payments, e.g., child support
(11) Income from pension or trust funds.
Household income from any other source, including relatives or
unrelated household members.
(12)
(13)Student loans.
(14)Rental income.
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that
must be liquidated for the purposes of deriving income:
Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade,
governmental entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by
state or federal law;
(1)
Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard
deduction, such as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union
dues, transportation costs to and from work, special equipment
costs and child care expenses; or
(2)
Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are fulltime
students and who are not working full time.
(3)
B.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the
calculation shall be a thirty-day period commencing on the date of
the application. This prospective calculation shall not disqualify an
applicant who has exhausted income to purchase basic necessities,
provided that the income does not exceed the income standards
established by the municipality [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
C.
Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being
counted as income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
(1) Food stamps [7 U.S.C.A. § 2017(b)].
(2) Li-Heap (42 U.S.C.A. § 8624).
(3) Family development accounts (22 M.R.S.A. § 3762).
(4) Americorp VISTA program benefits [42 U.S.C.A. § 5044(f)].
Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness
Credit program, only so long as the money is spent on basic
necessities [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
(5)
(6) Aspire support service payments (10-144 CMR Ch. 323).
D.
§ 102-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-3
85:222
INITIAL APPLICANT — A person who has not applied for assistance in this
or any other municipality is considered an initial applicant.
JUST CAUSE — A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from
complying with one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending a
scheduled fair hearing [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(8) and 4316-A(5)].
LUMP SUM PAYMENT — A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of
money issued to an applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes,
but is not limited to, retroactive or settlement portions of social security
benefits, workers' compensation payments, unemployment benefits,
disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or money
received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards,
property damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment
includes only the amount of money available to the applicant after payment
of required deductions has been made from the gross lump sum payment. A
lump sum payment does not include conversion of a nonliquid resource to
a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been used or is intended to be
used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary expenses [22
M.R.S.A. § 4301 (8-A)].
MATERIAL FACT — A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some
bearing on the determination of an applicant's general assistance eligibility,
and which would, if disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable
effect on the calculation of eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
MAXIMUM LEVELS OF ASSISTANCE — The amount of financial assistance
for a commodity or service as established in § 102-34 of this chapter or the
actual cost of any such basic necessity, whichever is less.
MISCONDUCT — For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A), "misconduct" shall have the same meaning as
"misconduct" defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23). (See Appendix I9 of this
chapter for the official definition of "misconduct.") Generally, employees
are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her duties
or obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer's interest may also
be found guilty of misconduct.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, town or plantation administering a general
assistance program.
MUNICIPALITY OF RESPONSIBILITY — The municipality which is
financially liable for the support of an eligible person at the time of
application [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(9) and 4307].
NEED — The condition whereby a person's income, money, property, credit,
assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for the
individual and the individual's family are less than the maximum levels of
assistance [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(10) and 4308].
9. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-3
85:223
NET GENERAL ASSISTANCE COSTS — Those direct costs incurred by
a municipality in providing assistance to eligible persons according to
standards established by the municipal officers. These do not include the
administrative expenses of the general assistance program [22 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4301(11) and 4311].
PERIOD OF ELIGIBILITY — The time for which a person has been granted
assistance. The period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of
assistance provided; however, in no event shall this period extend beyond
one month [22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)].
POOLING OF INCOME — The financial relationship among household
members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs
any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities
may by ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons
sharing the same dwelling unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are
requesting that the determination of eligibility be calculated as though one
or more household members are not pooling their income have the burden
of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.
REAL ESTATE — Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other
things affixed to the land [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)].
RECIPIENT — A person who has applied for and is currently receiving
general assistance.
REPEAT APPLICANTS — All applicants for general assistance that are
not initial applicants are repeat applicants. For purposes of this chapter,
"repeat" and "subsequent" shall have the same meaning.
RESIDENT — A person who is physically present in a municipality with the
intention of remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish
a home and who has no other residence. A person who applies for assistance
in a municipality who is not a resident of that municipality or any other
municipality is the responsibility of the municipality where the person first
applies. That municipality must take an application and grant assistance to
the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new residence
in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
RESOURCES —
Any program, service, or other sources of support which are an
alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two
kinds of resources: "available" and "potential." Potential resources are
programs, services, nonliquid assets, or trusts that typically require
people to apply in writing and/or wait a period of time before eligibility
is determined or the potential income is released.
A.
Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal
assistance program, employment benefits, governmental or private
pension program, available trust funds, support from legally liable
relatives, child support payments, and jointly held resources where
the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF (previously
B.
§ 102-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-3
85:224
THIRTY-DAY NEED — An applicant's thirty-day need is the sum of the
household's prospective thirty-day costs, from the date of application, for
the various basic necessities. For the purpose of this calculation, the thirtyday
cost for any basic need shall be the household's actual thirty-day
cost for the basic necessity or the maximum thirty-day cost for the basic
necessity as established by this chapter, whichever is less.
UNFORESEEN REPEAT APPLICANTS — Repeat applicants who have not
applied for assistance within the last 12 months and who have been
regularly employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private
source and who have unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault
of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have
ceased through no fault of their own.
UNMET NEED — An applicant's unmet need is the household's thirty-day
need as established by § 102-32 of this chapter less the household income
as calculated pursuant to § 102-33 of this chapter, provided that such a
calculation yields a positive number. If the household income is greater
than the household's thirty-day need, the household does not have an unmet
need.
WORK REQUIREMENTS — Work requirements are those obligations the
municipal administrator places on applicants for general assistance as
directed and/or authorized by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent that such
obligations ensure a continuing potential eligibility for general assistance
when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated, and are not merely
optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include registering
for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers,
maintaining employment, performing workfare, and participating in
training, educational, or rehabilitation programs that will assist the
participant in securing employment.
known as AFDC) program, food stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP),
subsidized housing, and similar programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available
to the applicant or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant
without delay, such as cash on hand or in bank accounts, assets for
which there is an immediate and available market, or support from
relatives which is being made available at the time of application and
for which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to
secure (e.g., relocation beyond the immediate region). At the discretion
of the GA administrator a necessary minimum balance required by a
financial institution in order to obtain free checking or in order to
maintain the account shall not be considered an available resource.
C.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients
of services, commodities or facilities made available by private
organizations or charities. Although GA applicants/recipients may be
informed of the existence of a charitable resource and/or organization,
GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a private
charitable resource(s).
D.
§ 102-3 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-3
85:225

ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
§ 102-4. Establishment.
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general
assistance.
§ 102-5. Confidentiality of information.
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient
of general assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the
general public, unless the applicant or recipient states in writing what
information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306).
§ 102-6. Maintenance of records.
Release of information. Applicants, recipients and their legal
representatives have the right to review their case records. No record
will be released to a third party, however, unless the administrator
receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly authorizing
the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever
the administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation
in the applicant's file stating to whom the record was released and
the date. The administrator may charge a reasonable fee for the
reproduction of any records when appropriate.
A.
Information from other sources; penalty.
Information furnished to the municipality by the Department of
Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314 is confidential. The general
assistance administrator will also comply with laws relating to the
confidentiality of vital statistic records, such as those concerning
birth, marriage and death (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
(1)
Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks)
or any employer of a general assistance applicant who refuses
to provide necessary information to the administrator in order to
verify an applicant's eligibility must state in writing the reason for
the refusal. Any such person who refuses to provide information,
without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$25 nor more than $100. Any person, including the applicant, who
knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a material
fact to the administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A.
§§ 4314 and 4315).
(2)
B.
Misuse of information. Misuse of any information relating to an
applicant or recipient is a punishable offense [22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)].
C.
§ 102-4 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-6
85:227
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate
general assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are
necessary to:
(1) Provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
Document and support decisions concerning an applicant or
recipient; and
(2)
Ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event
of a fair hearing or judicial review of a decision by the general
assistance administrator.
(3)
A.
Case records.
The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case
record, either in paper format or digital format, for each applicant
or recipient. Each case record will include at least:
(a) Household applications.
(b) Budget sheets.
Information concerning the types and amounts of assistance
provided.
(c)
Narrative statements describing the nature of the emergency
situation whenever general assistance is granted in amounts
greater than the applicant's mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need, whichever is less).
(d)
(e) Written decisions.
Requests for fair hearings and the fair hearing authority
decisions.
(f)
(g) Workfare participation records.
(h) Repayments to the municipality.
Narrative writings documenting the need for general
assistance, the results of home visits, collateral information,
referrals, changes in status.
(i)
Client authorization(s) for the release of GA information and/or
reason(s) for the release of confidential information.
(j)
(k) Adjustments in aid, and suspension or termination of eligibility.
(l) Physician's documentation.
Supplemental security income (SSI) interim assistance
reimbursement authorization forms.
(m)
(n) Vendor forms.
(1)
B.
§ 102-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-6
85:228
Case records will not include information or material that is
irrelevant to either the applicant's or recipient's application or the
administrator's decisions.
(2)
Retention of records. General assistance records shall be retained for a
minimum of three full years. The three-year period shall coincide with
the state's fiscal year which begins July 1 and ends on the following
June 30. Records may be destroyed after three years by one of the
two preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/
destruction process. In the event that a client's records contain SSI
reimbursement forms, the client's records should be maintained so that
the municipality may seek reimbursement.
C.
§ 102-6 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-6
85:229

ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
§ 102-7. Right to apply.
Who may apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of
the family, any other responsible household member, or an authorized
representative must apply in person, except in special emergency
situations as provided in § 102-15 of this chapter or except when the
applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the municipality has
made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance [22 M.R.S.A. § 4304(3)].
In such cases, the administrator may require a representative to
present a signed statement documenting that he/she is in fact
authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf of the named
applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the administrator
can determine eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4305 and 4308). With notice,
all members of the household receiving general assistance may be
required to physically present themselves to the administrator. Note
that fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.
A.
Application via telephone. When a person has an emergency but is
unable to apply in person due to illness, disability, lack of child care,
lack of transportation or other good cause, and he/she cannot send an
authorized representative, the administrator will accept an application
by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the
applicant's home with his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
B.
Written application upon each request. Each request for assistance will
be administered in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator
will make an independent determination of eligibility for general
assistance each time a person applies (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4308 and 4309).
C.
Applications accepted; posted notice. Application forms will be
available during regular business hours at the municipal office and
when the general assistance administrator is conducting interviews
with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where people
may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available
to take emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the
posted notice shall include the fact that the municipality must issue a
written decision on all applications within 24 hours, and the DHHS tollfree
telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or complaints.
Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only
during the regular hours established and posted by the administrator.
In an emergency, however, the administrator or his or her designee will
be available to accept applications for assistance whenever necessary
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
D.
§ 102-7 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-8
85:231
§ 102-8. Application interview.
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will
interview each applicant personally before making a decision. The interview
will be conducted in private, although the applicant may be accompanied by
a legal representative, friend or family member.
§ 102-9. Contents of application.
§ 102-10. General assistance administrator's responsibilities at
time of application.
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their
rights and responsibilities as well as the general program requirements
associated with applying for and receiving general assistance, including
At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory
information:
Applicant's name, address, date of birth, social security number
or appropriate United States Customs and Immigration Services
(USCIS) documentation, and phone number;
(1)
Names, date(s) of birth, and social security number(s) or
appropriate USCIS documentation of other household members for
whom the applicant is seeking assistance;
(2)
(3) Total number of individuals living with the applicant;
(4) Employment and employability information;
(5) All household income, resources, assets, and property;
(6) Household expenses;
(7) Types of assistance being requested;
(8) Penalty for false representation;
(9) Applicant's permission to verify information;
(10)Signature of applicant and date.
A.
In the event that an initial applicant is unable to provide identification
records (e.g., social security card/number) because the record may
have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the initial applicant may be
provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in order
to obtain copies of identification records. Provided that the initial
applicant makes a good-faith effort to obtain the item/record sought,
GA required to cure an immediate and/or emergency need shall not
be withheld. In such cases, the municipality may elect to provide only
a prorated amount of GA, e.g., five day's worth, while the applicant
proceeds to obtain the required information.
B.
§ 102-8 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-10
85:232
application requirements, eligibility guidelines, applicant rights, and
applicant reimbursement obligations.
Application requirements. The administrator will help the applicant
fill out the application form as described in the preceding section.
The administrator will inform the applicant of any other information
or documentation that the applicant will have to provide in order for
the administrator to evaluate the applicant's eligibility for assistance.
The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of
information form or reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain
the applicant's signature or written authorization.
A.
Eligibility requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally
or in writing, the applicant of the eligibility requirements of the
program, including:
(1) The income standard of need;
The applicant's ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resourcerelated
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately
below;
(2)
The financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of
spending household income on nonbasic necessities; and
(3)
The disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud,
failing to perform work-related assignments without just cause, or
failing to make a good-faith effort to secure potential resources
when the requirement to attempt to obtain those resources has
been explained to the applicant in writing.
(4)
B.
Applicant rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their
rights to:
Review the municipal General Assistance Ordinance and Maine
General Assistance Law;
(1)
(2) Apply for assistance;
Receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of
applying for assistance;
(3)
(4) Confidentiality;
(5) Contact the DHHS;
(6) Challenge the administrator's decision by requesting a fair hearing.
C.
Reimbursement/recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant
that he/she must reimburse the municipality for the amount of general
assistance he/she has been granted in the event of a subsequent ability
to pay. The municipality may also, as appropriate, contact the client's
legal representative to inform him or her of the client's obligation to
repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
D.
§ 102-10 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-10
85:233
§ 102-11. Responsibilities of applicant at time of application.
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the
amount of assistance granted to a recipient during the previous 12
months from any relative legally liable for the applicant's support
(spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article VIII,
Recovery of Expenses) (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4318 and 4319). Whenever
applicable, the administrator will explain the various liens a
municipality may place against a recipient's real or personal property,
such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the workers'
compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI interim assistance
agreement lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, Recovery of
Expenses.
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application
to provide accurate, complete and current household information and
verifiable documentation concerning:
(1) Income.
(2) Resources.
(3) Assets.
(4) Employment.
(5) Use of income.
Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the
applicant's support.
(6)
Any change in this information from a previous application that
would affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
(7)
A.
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable
documentation that shows the applicant:
Has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work
without just cause or been discharged from employment for
misconduct;
(1)
Has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or
employed on a part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer
of employment, and has satisfactorily performed all workfare
assignments or had just cause not to perform those assignments;
(2)
Has made use of all available and potential resources when
directed in writing to such a program by the administrator,
including, but not limited to, other government benefit programs or
the assistance of liable relatives of sufficient means; and
(3)
Has participated in any training, retraining, educational or
rehabilitative program when appropriate and when directed in
(4)
B.
§ 102-10 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-11
85:234
§ 102-12. Action on applications.
§ 102-13. Withdrawal of application.
An application is considered withdrawn if:
§ 102-14. Temporary refusal to accept application.
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may
temporarily refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include,
but are not limited to, the following:
writing to such a program by the administrator, in order to diminish
the applicant's need for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4316-A
and 4317).
Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a
written decision to the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within
24 hours after the applicant submits a written application. Assistance
will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period except when
the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to § 102-23 of this
chapter) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion
of a workfare assignment (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4305, 4316-A and 4321). A
written decision will be given each time a person applies, whether
assistance is granted, denied, reduced or terminated.
A.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
The type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the
applicant's ineligibility;
(1)
(2) The period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
(3) The specific reasons for the decision;
(4) The applicant's right to a fair hearing; and
The applicant's right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the
municipality has acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
(5)
B.
The applicant requests in writing that his or her application be
withdrawn; or
A.
The applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other
form needed by the general assistance administrator.
B.
When the applicant's conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or
when the applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these
situations, the applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant
refuses to leave, the police may be summoned. The applicant will be
informed that an application will only be accepted when his or her
conduct is under control.
A.
§ 102-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-14
85:235
§ 102-15. Emergencies.
If the administrator believes that an applicant's behavior presents a
threat to the health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee,
or if such behavior is violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive,
disruptive or harassing behavior and has been required to leave on
more than one occasion, then the applicant may be required to
designate a third party to apply for assistance on his or her behalf and
the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal building.
B.
When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant,
that person may be required to provide written verification that he/she
has been duly authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22
M.R.S.A. § 4308).
C.
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a
situation beyond the control of the applicant which, if not alleviated
immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a threat to the
health or safety of the applicant or a member of the household [22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(4)]. Although they may be considered otherwise
ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who apply for
assistance to alleviate an emergency may be granted assistance, except
as provided below, if they do not have sufficient income and resources
to meet an actual emergency need and have not had sufficient income
and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A.
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the
municipality determines that an emergency is imminent and that failure
to provide assistance may result in undue hardship and unnecessary
costs to either the client or the municipality.
B.
Disqualification.
A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General
Assistance due to a violation of §§ 102-22, 102-23, 102-24, 102-25,
102-26 or 102-30 of this chapter is ineligible to receive emergency
assistance [22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)]. However, dependents of a
disqualified person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes
of this section, "dependents" are defined as:
(a) A dependent minor child;
(b) An elderly, ill or disabled person; or
A person whose presence is required to provide care for any
child under the age of six years or any ill or disabled member
of the household [22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)].
(c)
(1)
In the event that one or more members of a household are
disqualified and assistance is requested for the remaining
dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated
(2)
C.
§ 102-14 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-15
85:236
by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire
household by the total number of household members.
Assistance prior to verification. Whenever an applicant informs the
administrator that he/she needs assistance immediately, the
administrator will grant, pending verification, the assistance within 24
hours, provided that:
After interviewing the applicant, the administrator has determined
that the applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a
verification of information is completed; and
(1)
The applicant submits documentation, when possible, to verify his
or her need. The administrator may contact at least one other
person to confirm the applicant's statements about needing
emergency assistance. No further assistance will be authorized
until the applicant's eligibility is confirmed (22 M.R.S.A. § 4310).
(2)
D.
Telephone applications.
If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in person due
to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and
if there is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf
of the applicant, the administrator shall accept an application over
the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
(1)
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of
a telephone application if the applicant refuses to allow the
administrator to verify the information either by visiting his or her
home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her
eligibility through any other means.
(2)
E.
Limitation on emergency assistance.
Applicants are not automatically eligible for emergency assistance.
If applicants had income which could have been used to prevent all
or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which
are not basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general
assistance to replace the misspent money [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4308(2)
and 4315-A].
(1)
All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator
with verifiable documentation demonstrating that the applicant
did not have sufficient income to avert the emergency situation.
According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the
amount of money necessary for the household to avoid the
emergency and the amount of income available to the household
during the applicable time period.
The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the
application for emergency assistance, except in those cases
(a)
(2)
F.
§ 102-15 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-15
85:237
§ 102-16. Residence.
where the emergency was created by a negative account
balance for a commodity or service (such as rent, mortgage
or utility payments), and the negative account balance was
created over a longer period of time. In such cases, the
applicable time period shall be the consecutive length of time
the account balance has been in the negative.
The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information
pertinent to the applicant's ability to provide for his or her
basic necessities for the applicable time period, including
evidence of all income and resources received over that period
of time.
(b)
The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household's
basic necessities during the applicable time period, per month,
in accordance with the maximum levels established by this
chapter for the specific basic necessity or the actual monthly
cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with
averting the particular emergency situation for which the
applicant is seeking assistance.
(c)
From the total household costs for basic necessities during
the applicable time period, the administrator shall subtract
the total income and lump sum payments available to the
household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time
period.
(d)
The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency
assistance to the difference yielded by the computation in
Subsection F(2)(d), even when such a grant will not totally
alleviate the emergency situation.
(e)
The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency
assistance in life-threatening situations or for initial
applicants; that is, persons who have never before applied for
general assistance.
(f)
Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a
municipality from electing to alleviate an emergency situation
in the most cost-effective manner available, provided such a
determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is in
conformance with general assistance law.
(g)
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible
persons applying for assistance who are residents of this municipality.
A resident is a person who has no other residence and is physically
present in this municipality and who intends to remain here and
establish a household.
A.
§ 102-15 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-16
85:238
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance
to eligible persons who apply here and who are not residents of this
municipality or any other municipality. If a person who is not a resident
of any municipality applies in this municipality first, the administrator
will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will grant assistance
until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
B.
Moving/relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or
transporting an applicant or recipient into another municipality unless
the person requests assistance to relocate to another municipality.
If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible and grants
financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this
municipality will be responsible for providing assistance to the
applicant for 30 days after he/she moves, provided that the recipient
remains eligible.
C.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution
located in another municipality (such as a group home, shelter,
rehabilitation center, nursing home, or hospital) and requests
assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the responsibility of
this municipality for up to six months after he/she enters the institution
if the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4307 and 4313 are met. The
municipality thereafter retains responsibility for an applicant in an
institution only if the applicant has maintained a home in this
municipality to which he/she intends to return. The municipality also
recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering
the institution [22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)].
D.
Temporary housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary
lodging are considered institutions if the municipality grants financial
assistance for, makes arrangements for, or advises or encourages an
applicant to stay in temporary lodging. (NOTE: Municipalities which
illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the denial, the
applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant
for up to six months and may be subject to other penalties [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4307(4)].)
E.
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a
resident of another municipality but that municipality disputes its
responsibility, the administrator will notify the DHHS in Augusta
(287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility
and, if eligible, will grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded
which municipality is responsible for providing assistance. If another
municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover the amount due
from the other municipality [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4307(5) and 4307(6)].
F.
§ 102-16 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-16
85:239

ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
§ 102-17. General eligibility.
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has
complied with the eligibility requirements set forth below.
§ 102-18. Initial application; subsequent applicants.
§ 102-19. Eligibility for categorical assistance.
Initial Application.
For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general
rule, as provided by law, applies to all applicants, including initial
applicants, who are disqualified for a defined period for quitting
employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct [22 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23)] (see § 102-22
of this chapter) and to fugitives from justice as defined in 15
M.R.S.A. § 201(4) [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)]. An initial applicant is a
person who has never before applied for general assistance in any
municipality in Maine [22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)].
(1)
"Need" means that the applicant's income (including prorated
income, where applicable), property, credit, assets or other
resources are less than the overall maximum level of assistance
contained in § 102-34 of this chapter or the applicant's thirty-day
need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
(2)
A.
Subsequent applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are
repeat applicants. Repeat applicants are people who have applied for
general assistance at any time in the past. Repeat applicants are also
people on whose behalf a general assistance application was made at
any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant was
not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be
eligible for general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other
eligibility requirements. The eligibility of repeat applicants may also be
adversely affected to the extent that they have not used their income
and resources to secure basic necessities.
B.
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from
receiving general assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible.
Benefits received from other assistance programs will be considered
as income when determining need, with the exception of food stamps,
which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken
into consideration when determining need [7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)].
A.
§ 102-17 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-19
85:241
§ 102-20. Personal property.
In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant
will not be considered as income; that is, the administrator will always
compute the heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP or
ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs associated with his or her fuel
needs [42 U.S.C. § 8624(f)]. The calculation of general assistance for
heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with Subsection C(3) under "Types
of income" at § 102-33 of this chapter. For several additional exceptions
please refer to the definition of "income" in this chapter. (See § 102-3.)
B.
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within
seven days after being advised in writing to do so by the general
assistance administrator. Persons who, without just cause, make no
good-faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be disqualified from
receiving assistance until they make a good-faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
C.
Liquid assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash,
including but not limited to bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates
of deposit, retirement accounts, life insurance policies and other
marketable security, will be eligible for general assistance unless and
until he or she uses these assets to meet his or her basic needs,
and thereby exhausts them. At the discretion of the GA administrator,
liquid assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance necessary for
obtaining free checking. Although one checking account per household
may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free
checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
A.
Tangible assets. No person owning or possessing personal property,
such as but not limited to a motor vehicle (except as provided
immediately below in Subsection C), or a boat, trailer, recreation
vehicle or other assets that are convertible into cash and are
nonessential to the maintenance of the applicant's household, will be
eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when a person
is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant
as defined in § 102-3 or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to
cash at fair market value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock,
farm equipment and other equipment used for the production of income
are exempt from the above category and are not considered available
assets.
B.
Automobile ownership.
Ownership of one automobile per household will not make a person
ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment,
obtaining medical care, rehabilitation or training facilities, or for
any other reason the GA administrator determines reasonable for
the maintenance of the applicant's household. Recipients of
(1)
C.
§ 102-19 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-20
85:242
§ 102-21. Ownership of real estate.
general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8,000 may be required, with written, seven-day
notice, to make a good-faith effort to trade that automobile for an
automobile with a market value of less than $8,000. Any income
received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade down must
be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or
trade down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in
disqualification (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any
car payment or vehicle maintenance cost, including insurance for
which the applicant is responsible. However, provided that the
vehicle value is $8,000 or less and the applicant is utilizing the
vehicle for any of the above mentioned "essential" reasons, the
municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider
reasonable car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable
associated costs of maintenance as "misspent" income. General
assistance for travel-related needs shall be computed in
accordance with § 102-34B(7)(g) and (h), regarding Work-Related/
Travel Expenses.
(2)
Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a
noncontributory basis or that is required as a condition of employment
will not be a factor in determining eligibility for general assistance. Life
insurance with a cash surrender value may, at the discretion of the GA
administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
D.
Transfer of property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair
market value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing
eligibility for general assistance will not be granted general assistance
to replace the uncompensated value of the transferred asset. Assistance
will be denied within a one-hundred-twenty-day limit up to the
uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a onehundred-
twenty-day disqualification will be issued. There will be a
presumption that the applicant transferred his or her assets in order
to be eligible for general assistance whenever property is sold for less
than the fair market value or when the transfer occurred within 30
days prior to applying for general assistance unless the applicant can
demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
E.
Principal Residence.
For purposes of general assistance solely, the applicant's principal
residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment,
job training, education, illness or disaster, provided that there is
demonstrated an intent to return. If the applicant owns land in
excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or district in which
(1)
A.
§ 102-20 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-21
85:243
the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
The applicant has received general assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
(a)
The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any
mortgagee will release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to
the sale, zoning or other land use laws do not render the sale
illegal or impracticable); and
(b)
The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into
a marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any
necessary surveys); and
(c)
The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of
the household; and
(d)
A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land
in question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount
which will aid the applicant's financial rehabilitation; and
(e)
No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be
unduly burdensome or inequitable.
(f)
If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may
condition the receipt of future assistance on the applicant's goodfaith
efforts to sell, or render salable, land which could be used
to provide necessary support for the applicant (e.g., the applicant
owns 100 "excess" acres; sale of 10 of the acres would provide for
the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be sold
at the present time). Assistance shall not be denied during the time
that the applicant is making a good-faith effort to sell or render
salable the land in question.
(2)
Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance, the obligations
under this section shall also cease.
(3)
Other property.
If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will
depend on the applicant making a reasonable effort to:
Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert
the property into cash which can be applied toward meeting
present need; or
(a)
Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet
present need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to
a third party in order to become eligible for general assistance
will be ineligible.
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 102-21 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-21
85:244
§ 102-22. Work requirement.
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for
work, work to the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the
work requirements, unless the applicant is exempt from such requirements
as provided below.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage
payment or capital improvement payment, the municipality may
claim a lien against the property. The lien shall not be enforceable
until the time of sale of the property or upon the death of the
recipient (see also § 102-34 of this chapter) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320).
(2)
Employment; rehabilitation.
All unemployed applicants and members of their households who
are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a fulltime
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school
diploma will be required to accept any suitable job offer and/
or meet with job counselors, attend employment workshops and
rehabilitative services, except as provided below. (See Subsection
I, Exemptions.) Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator
that they are available for work and are actively seeking
employment.
(1)
A "suitable job" means any job which the applicant is mentally
and physically able to perform. "Available for work" means that
applicants must make themselves available for work during normal
business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying
with the work requirement.
(2)
A.
Verification.
Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis
will be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit
of employment at the time of each application. At a minimum, such
documentation shall consist of a list of the employers contacted,
the date and time of the application contact, and the name of
the employer representative contacted. "Pursuit of employment"
means actually submitting a written application or applying for a
job in person when reasonable, or submitting a written application
or letter of inquiry to employers.
(1)
For the duration of any repeat applicant's period of unemployment
or partial employment, the administrator will establish the number
of employers per week to whom each nonexempt applicant shall
be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her work search
requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required
by the administrator shall be reasonably related to the number
of potential employers in the region and the number of hours in
(2)
B.
§ 102-21 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-22
85:245
the week the applicant has available for work search activities
after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing
employment obligations, workfare obligations, and required
classroom or on-site participation in job training, educational, or
rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will not
be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a
condition of eligibility for subsequent assistance.
Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial
application, applicants will be considered ineligible for further
assistance for 120 days if they, without just cause:
(1) Refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
Refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is
reasonable and appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek
work at the same places repeatedly will not be considered to be
performing a diligent work search and will be disqualified;
(2)
(3) Refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
Refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or
rehabilitation program that would assist the applicant in securing
employment;
(4)
(5) Fail to be available for work; or
Refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the
municipal work program. (See § 102-23.)
(6)
C.
Ineligibility due to job quit or discharge for misconduct. No applicant,
whether an initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time
or part-time job without just cause or who has been discharged from
employment for misconduct (see Appendix I,10 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043(23),
for the definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance of any
kind for a one-hundred-twenty-day period from the date of separation
from employment [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(8) and 4316-A(1-A)].
D.
Just cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days
if they refuse to comply with the work requirements of this section
without just cause. With respect to any work requirement, just cause
will be considered to exist when there is reasonable and verifiable
evidence that:
The applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which
prevents him/her from working;
(1)
(2) The work assignment pays below minimum wages;
(3) The applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
E.
10.Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-22 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-22
85:246
The applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required
job tasks, or to meet piece work standards;
(4)
The applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a
training or rehabilitation program;
(5)
The applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care
of ill or disabled family members; or
(6)
Any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of
Labor, or any other verifiable reason the administrator considers
reasonable and appropriate will be accepted as just cause [22
M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)].
(7)
Applicant's burden of establishing just cause. If the administrator finds
that the applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish the presence of
just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
F.
Eligibility regained.
Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they
become employed or otherwise satisfy the administrator that they
are complying with the work requirement by fulfilling the work
requirement or requirements they violated.
(1)
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed,
"employment" shall mean employment by an employer as defined
in 26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 et seq., or the performance of a service for
an employer who withholds from the employee a social security tax
pursuant to federal law.
(2)
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain
eligibility after a disqualification for workfare violations are
detailed in § 102-23 of this chapter, under "Eligibility Regained".
(3)
G.
Dependents.
Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the
person's household who is not capable of working, including:
(a) A dependent minor child;
(b) An elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
A person whose presence is required in order to provide care
for any child under six years of age or for any ill or disabled
member of the household [22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)].
(c)
(1)
In the event that one (or more) member(s) of a household is
disqualified and assistance is requested for those remaining
members of the household who are dependents, the eligibility of
(2)
H.
§ 102-22 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-22
85:247
§ 102-23. Municipal work program.
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working
may be required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a
nonprofit organization, as a condition of receiving assistance [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(2)]. As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can
require recipients to participate in training, education, or rehabilitative
programs that will assist the recipient in securing employment. The work
requirement provisions found in § 102-22 regarding just cause, dependents,
and exemptions also apply to the municipal workfare program.
those dependents will be calculated by dividing the maximum level
of assistance available to the entire household by the total number
of household members.
Exemptions.
The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is
elderly, physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose
presence is required to care for any pre-school age child or for any
ill or disabled member of the household is also exempt from these
requirements.
(1)
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to
interfere with an applicant's existing employment, ability to pursue
a bona fide job offer, ability to attend an interview for possible
employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma,
classroom or on site participation in a training program which
is either approved by the Department of Labor or determined by
the Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant
in securing employment, or classroom participation in a degreegranting
program operated under the control of the Department of
Labor.
(2)
I.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign
a form stating that they understand the requirements of general
assistance and the work program. Prior to signing the form, the
administrator will read it to the applicants, or the applicants will read it
themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants
must work and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of
the work assignment is calculated. In addition, the consent form shall
describe the consequences of failing to adequately perform part or all
of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
A.
Subtracting value of workfare performed from client's GA debt.
Pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, individuals owing the municipality
funds for general assistance provided to them are obligated to repay
the municipality when and if they become able. (See Article VIII.)
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the
workfare performed deducted from any and all GA debt, including GA
B.
§ 102-22 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-23
85:248
liens (e.g., workers' compensation settlement, SSI retroactive payment,
capital improvement, home mortgage) that might exist against their
settlements, payments or other such property.
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following
limitations [22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(3)].
No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any
amount of work that exceeds the value of the net general assistance
that the person receives under municipal general assistance
standards. Any person performing work under this subsection shall
be provided with net general assistance, the value of which is
calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under
state or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
(1)
No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit
organization if that work would violate the participant's basic
religious beliefs.
(2)
In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this
subsection replace regular municipal employees.
(3)
In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with
an eligible person's:
(a) Existing employment;
(b) Ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
(c) Attendance at an interview for possible employment;
Classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational
program intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
(d)
Classroom or on-site participation in a training program which
is approved by the Department of Labor or determined by the
Department of Labor to be reasonably expected to assist the
person in securing employment, or classroom participation in
a degree-granting program administered by the DHHS or the
Department of Labor.
(e)
(4)
In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than
40 hours per week. An eligible person who has full- or part-time
employment shall be exempt from the work requirement to the
extent that the work requirement in combination with his or her
regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
(5)
In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work
beyond his or her capabilities. However, when an illness or
disability is claimed, an eligible person may be required as a
condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor's statement
detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
(6)
C.
§ 102-23 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-23
85:249
If the administrator requires a doctor's statement to verify an
applicant's illness or disability and the applicant is not currently
under the care of a provider, the municipality may pay for the
doctor's evaluation if the applicant has no means to pay for the
exam. However, in such a case, the administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the
municipality may elect to refer the client to such a resource. The
administrator will not require verification of medical conditions
which are apparent or which are of such short duration that a
reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention [22
M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)].
In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e.,
a person in an emergency situation who has not been disqualified
from receiving assistance for committing a program violation) be
required to perform work under this subsection prior to receiving
general assistance. The administrator shall meet immediate needs
upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that he/
she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance.
When the recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation
may be required prior to receiving general assistance in
accordance with the following "workfare first" policy.
(7)
"Workfare first" policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(2)(D), the administrator may, in accordance with the following
guidelines, require a recipient of general assistance to perform a
workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the general
assistance benefit conditionally granted.
In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which
an applicant is eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory
performance of workfare.
(1)
All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a
written decision, as otherwise required by law, within 24 hours
of submitting an application for general assistance and prior to
performing any workfare for the municipality associated with that
request for assistance. That written decision must include:
A specific description of the amount of general assistance
being conditionally granted to the household, and for which
basic needs;
(a)
The period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant
is being issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
(b)
The rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the
prevailing minimum wage), upon which the duration of the
workfare assignment is calculated;
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 102-23 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-23
85:250
The actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be
performed, in hours, before the general assistance grant will
be actually issued;
(d)
The specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the
general nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s)
of work site, date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare
supervisors' names and contact telephone numbers; and
(e)
Any other pertinent information related to the workfare
assignment(s) the recipient will be expected to perform.
(f)
As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants
under this policy must sign a consent form that informs the
participant of his or her workfare-related rights and
responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to perform
all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
(3)
If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily
performed but there has been a failure to perform the remainder
of the assignment, without just cause, the administrator shall issue
a grant of general assistance in the amount of the number of
workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate used
to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition
to any disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value
of the conditionally issued general assistance grant shall be
terminated, and notice of the partial termination, and the reasons
therefor, will be issued to the workfare participant in accordance
with § 102-36 of this chapter.
(4)
Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed
because the workfare participant was temporarily unable to
perform the assignment for just cause reasons shall be reassigned
or excused at the discretion of the GA administrator.
(5)
Work-Related Expenses. A participant's expenses related to work
performed under this section will be added to the amount of net general
assistance to be provided to the person [22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(E)].
The municipality will provide any special clothes or equipment the
recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
E.
Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or
willfully performs below average standards the work assigned by the
municipality, will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(1)]. As soon as the administrator knows that a recipient failed
to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify the recipient
in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days starting from the last
date of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause.
The burden of demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare
assignment falls on the workfare participant.
F.
§ 102-23 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-23
85:251
Eligibility regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving
assistance because they have violated the requirements of the
municipal work program may regain their eligibility under the following
conditions:
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work
assignment they have been given will be disqualified from receiving
assistance during the next 120 days, although dependents in the
household may be eligible. (See § 102-22, Dependents.)
(1)
If during the one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification period the
recipient requests an opportunity to perform the work assignment
which he or she, without just cause, failed to perform, the
disqualified recipient will be given one opportunity to regain
eligibility. The administrator will give the recipient a work
assignment as soon as possible.
(2)
If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an
emergency need and the administrator is unable to schedule a
work assignment in time to alleviate the emergency, the
administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to
avert the emergency. However, the provision of such emergency
assistance will not bar the administrator from subsequently
enforcing the previously issued one-hundred-twenty-day
disqualification if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by
satisfactorily performing the work assignment. The amount of
emergency assistance granted will be considered in the
computation of the total number of hours the recipient must work.
(3)
Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their
eligibility during a one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification period
and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously
failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their
municipal work assignment will be considered to have acted in bad
faith. In such a circumstance, the administrator will enforce the
one-hundred-twenty-day disqualification for the term of its initial
duration.
(4)
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is
subsequently disqualified within the initial one-hundred-twenty-day
period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the municipal work
program, that participant will be ineligible for a new one-hundredtwenty-
day period beginning with the new disqualification date, but
will be provided no opportunity to requalify.
(5)
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property,
harasses or harms other employees or who otherwise conducts
themselves in a disruptive manner and is discharged by the work
supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning
to the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise
becoming employed and meeting the definition of need.
(6)
G.
§ 102-23 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-23
85:252
§ 102-24. Use of resources.
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good-faith effort to utilize
every available or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for
general assistance. (See § 102-3 for the definition of "resources.") People
who refuse or fail to make a good-faith effort to secure a potential resource
after receiving written notice to do so are disqualified from receiving
assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource. Applicants are
required to prove that they have made a good-faith effort to secure the
resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been
provided to persons who work for the municipality in reports to the
DHHS [22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)].
H.
Minors.
A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has
a dependent child or children will be eligible to receive general
assistance only if the minor is residing in the home of his or her
parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the
entire household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this
limitation on eligibility will be made when:
The minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or
other adult-supervised supportive living arrangement; or
(a)
The minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both
parents are unknown; or
(b)
(c) No parent will permit the minor to live in the parent's home; or
The minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one
year before the birth of any dependent child; or
(d)
The DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or
safety of the minor or the minor's dependent child or children
would be jeopardized if the minor and his or her child or
children lived with a parent; or
(e)
The DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that
there is good cause to waive this limitation on eligibility [22
M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)].
(f)
(1)
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently
from his or her parents for general assistance will be informed
that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the applicant's parents
are still legally liable for his or her support and the municipality
has the right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all
assistance granted to such a recipient to the extent his or her
(2)
A.
§ 102-23 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-24
85:253
parents are financially capable of repaying the municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4319).
With regard to such application, the municipality may seek
verification of the applicant's need for general assistance by
contacting his or her parents. If the applicant's parents declare a
willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs
directly, and there is no convincing evidence that the applicant
would be jeopardized by relying on his or her parents for basic
needs, the administrator may find the applicant not to be in need
of general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be
provided by a legally liable relative.
(3)
Mental or physical disability. Any applicant who has a mental or
physical disability must make a good-faith effort to utilize any medical
or rehabilitative services which have been recommended by a
physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant
and would not constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to
the individual.
B.
Written notice; disqualification. The administrator will give each
applicant written notice whenever the applicant is required to utilize
any specific potential resource(s). Any applicant who refuses to utilize
potential resources, without just cause, after receiving written sevenday
notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made
a good-faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General assistance
will not be withheld from the applicant pending receipt of a resource
if the applicant has made, or is in the process of making, a good-faith
effort to obtain the resource.
C.
Forfeiture of benefits.
Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud,
misrepresentation, a knowing or intentional violation of program
rules or a refusal to comply with that program's rules without just
cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to replace
the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be
considered income under general assistance law, the worth of the
forfeited benefits will be considered income that is available to the
applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
(1)
To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form
of income but, rather, in the form of a specific, regularly issued
resource of a calculable value, that resource, up to its forfeited
value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period
of 120 days from the date of the forfeiture, unless the municipality
is prohibited by federal or state law from considering the forfeited
resource as available with respect to local public assistance
programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
(2)
D.
§ 102-24 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-25
85:254
§ 102-25. Period of ineligibility.
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended
prior to being given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. §§ 4321 through 4322). Each person will be notified in writing of
the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any person disqualified for not
complying with the ordinance will be informed in writing of the period of
ineligibility.
§ 102-26. Unemployment fraud.
An applicant who is found ineligible for unemployment compensation
benefits because of a finding of fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant
to 26 M.R.S.A. § 1051(1) is ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited unemployment compensation benefits for the duration
of the forfeiture established by the Department of Labor (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4317).
Work requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a
work requirement are disqualified from receiving assistance for a
period of 120 days (unless they regain their eligibility). (See §§ 102-22
and 102-23.) If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance and does
not comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall
be disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered
by the grant of assistance. The administrator shall give recipients
written notice that they are disqualified as soon as the administrator
has sufficient knowledge and information to render a decision of
ineligibility.
A.
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving
assistance for a period of 120 days. (See § 102-30, Fraud.) The
administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
ineligible as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is
issued before the expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of
ineligibility shall commence on the day following the end of the period
covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered after the
period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period
of ineligibility will commence on the day of the written notice of
ineligibility.
B.
§ 102-25 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-26
85:255

ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
§ 102-27. Recognition of dignity and rights.
Any determination or investigation into an applicant's eligibility will be
conducted in a manner that will not violate the applicant's privacy or
personal dignity or violate his or her individual rights.
§ 102-28. Determination; redetermination.
§ 102-29. Verification.
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of
eligibility each time a person applies or reapplies for general
assistance. The administrator will make a redetermination of eligibility
at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to administer the
program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility
on the basis of a thirty-day prospective analysis, but may elect to
disburse that applicant's assistance periodically, e.g., weekly,
throughout a thirty-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
A.
The administrator may redetermine a person's eligibility at any time
during the period he or she is receiving assistance if the administrator
is notified of any change in the recipient's circumstances that may alter
the amount of assistance the recipient may receive. Once a recipient
has been granted assistance, the administrator may not reduce or
rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient
explaining the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an
opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing authority (22
M.R.S.A. § 4309).
B.
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall
determine eligibility each time a person applies or reapplies for general
assistance. The period of eligibility will not exceed one month. At
the expiration of this period applicants/recipients may reapply for
assistance and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
A.
Applicant's responsibilities.
Applicants and recipients for general assistance are responsible for
providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary
to demonstrate eligibility, the applicant must have the first
opportunity to provide the specific information or documentation
required by the overseer. When information required by the
overseer is unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative
available information, which is subject to verification.
(1)
B.
§ 102-27 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-29
85:257
Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time
of application and continuing thereafter to provide complete,
accurate and current information and documentation concerning
his/her:
(a) Need.
(b) Income.
(c) Employment.
(d) Use of income.
(e) Expenses.
(f) Assets and liabilities.
(g) Use of available resources.
(h) Household composition.
(2)
Initial applicants. Persons who have not applied for assistance in this or
any other municipality are considered initial applicants and must have
their eligibility determined solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants
are not subject to eligibility conditions placed on repeat applicants (see
below). However, such applicants are still responsible for providing the
GA administrator with reasonably obtainable documentation adequate
to verify that there is a need for assistance. In addition, initial
applicants must also comply with both lump sum and relevant work
rules (e.g., job quit).
C.
Repeat Applicants.
All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must
be determined on the basis of need and all other conditions of
eligibility established by law and this municipal ordinance.
(1)
The administrator will require documentation of a repeat
applicant's income, use of income, assets and resources plus actual
bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel, telephone, medical
services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search
results, e.g., provide a list of the employers contacted, the date
and time of the application contact, and the name of the employer
representative contacted, as required by the GA administrator.
(2)
Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes
of information reported on previous applications including changes
in his/her household or income that may affect his/her eligibility.
(3)
D.
Unforeseen repeat applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are
applicants who have not applied for assistance within the last 12
months and who have been regularly employed or receiving support
E.
§ 102-29 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-29
85:258
from a public benefit or private source who have unexpectedly become
unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income and/or
benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through
no fault of their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be
considered initial applicants for purposes of verification requirements
and misspent income if the administrator finds that imposing the
general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed
on repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
Overseer's responsibilities.
In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and
documentation from the applicant. Once the applicant has
presented the necessary information, the overseer is responsible
for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification
necessary to determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility,
the overseer may contact sources other than the applicant for
verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of the
applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records
without the applicant's knowledge and consent.
(1)
Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but
are not limited to:
DHHS and any other department/agency of the state or
nonprofit organizations.
(a)
(b) Financial institutions.
(c) Creditors.
(d) Utility companies.
(e) Employers.
(f) Landlords.
(g) Physicians.
(h) Persons with whom the applicant/recipient is a cohabitant.
(i) Legally and nonlegally liable relatives.
(2)
Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling
to supply the overseer with necessary information, documentation,
or permission to make collateral contacts, or if the overseer cannot
determine that eligibility exists based on information supplied by
the applicant or others.
(3)
F.
Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's
eligibility at any time during the period that person is receiving
assistance if the overseer is informed of any change in the recipient's
circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to which the
G.
§ 102-29 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-29
85:259
§ 102-30. Fraud.
recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided
that once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific
time period, a reduction in assistance for that time period may not be
made without prior written notice to the recipient with the reasons for
the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a fair hearing
upon the proposed change.
Penalty for refusing to release information. Any person governed by
22 M.R.S.A. § 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to
the administrator after it has been requested must state in writing
the reasons for the refusal within three days of receiving the request.
Any such person who refuses to provide the information, without just
cause, commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not
less than $25 nor more than $100, which may be adjudged in any
court of competent jurisdiction. Any person who willfully renders false
information to the administrator is guilty of a Class E crime [22
M.R.S.A. §§ 4314(5), 4314(6) and 4315].
H.
It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false
representation of a material fact to the administrator in order to receive
general assistance or cause someone else to receive general assistance
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4315).
False representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and
willfully:
Making a false statement to the general assistance
administrator, either orally or in writing, in order to obtain
assistance to which the applicant or the applicant's household
is not entitled;
(a)
Concealing information from the general assistance
administrator in order to obtain assistance to which the
applicant or applicant's household is not entitled; or
(b)
Using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that
for which they were intended.
(c)
(1)
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false
representation prior to being given an opportunity for a fair
hearing.
(2)
A.
Period of Ineligibility.
When the general assistance administrator finds that a person
has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the
purpose of making himself or herself eligible for general
assistance, the administrator shall notify that applicant in writing
that he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance
for 120 days. For the purpose of this section, a material
(1)
B.
§ 102-29 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-30
85:260
§ 102-31. Period of eligibility.
misrepresentation is a false statement about eligibility factor in the
absence of which some or all of the assistance would not be or
would not have been granted.
The notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall
inform the applicant of his or her right to appeal the
administrator's decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA) within
five working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall
commence on the day following the end of the period covered by
the grant of assistance fraudulently received or upon the date of
notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
(2)
Right to a fair hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for
making a false representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal
the decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA) in accordance with
Article VII of this chapter. No recipient shall have his or her assistance
reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being notified
and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is
dissatisfied with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to
the Superior Court pursuant to Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure [22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)].
C.
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the
fair hearing authority determines that a recipient did make a false
representation, the recipient will be required to reimburse the
municipality for any assistance received to which he/she was not
entitled.
D.
Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this
section serve to disqualify any eligible dependent in that household
[22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)]. In the event that one or more members of
a household are disqualified and assistance is requested for the
remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the
entire household by the total number of household members.
E.
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a
period that is sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a
grant of assistance cover a period in excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed application the
administrator will determine the applicant's eligibility on the basis of a
thirty-day prospective analysis.
A.
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application,
due to the twenty-four-hour decision requirement placed on the GA
administrator, the GA administrator shall render a notice of ineligibility
and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to reapply as soon as
he or she has the necessary information and/or as soon as is practicable
for the applicant.
B.
§ 102-30 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-31
85:261
§ 102-32. Determination of need.
Although eligibility is determined on a thirty-day basis, for reasons
of administrative efficiency the administrator may elect to disburse
an applicant's assistance for shorter periods of time, such as weekly,
throughout the thirty-day period of eligibility. When the administrator
elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than
30 days, subsequent grants of assistance during that thirty-day period
may be issued pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the
applicant's financial situation changes substantially enough to warrant
a redetermination of eligibility.
C.
Calculation.
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next thirtyday
period from the date of application [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)]. The
administrator will calculate applicants' expenses according to the
actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels for the
specific necessities allowed in § 102-34, whichever is less. The sum
of these expenses, as calculated for a prospective thirty-day period,
is the applicant's thirty-day need. Applicants will not be considered
eligible if their income and other resources exceed this calculation
except in an emergency [22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)]. (See § 102-15 of
this chapter.)
(1)
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance
if their income, property, credit, assets or other resources available
to provide basic necessities for their household are greater than
the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth in
the beginning of § 102-34 [22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(10) and 4305(3-B)].
The difference between the applicant's income and the overall
maximum levels of assistance established by this chapter is the
applicant's deficit.
(2)
Once an applicant's deficit has been determined, the specific
maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity (see
Appendixes A through H11 of this chapter) shall be used by the
administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the
applicant is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for
each basic necessity are intended to be reasonable and sufficient
to help recipients maintain a standard of health and decency [22
M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)].
(3)
A.
Income for basic necessities. Applicants are required to use their
income for basic necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant
is eligible to receive assistance to replace income that was spent within
the thirty-day period prior to an application for assistance on goods and
services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on goods and
services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to
B.
11.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 102-31 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-32
85:262
the applicant and combined with the applicant's prospective thirty-day
income for the purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A).
Applicants who have sufficient income to provide their basic necessities
but who use that income to purchase goods or services which are not
basic necessities will not be considered eligible for assistance. Persons
who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that
their income does not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-income requirements.
The administrator may require that anyone applying for general
assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income.
This documentation can take the form of cancelled checks and/or
receipts which demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all
household income received over the last thirty-day period. Except
as is deemed appropriate by the GA administrator for "unforeseen"
repeat applicants (see § 102-29 of this chapter), repeat applicants
may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic
necessities. Income expended that cannot be verified will generally
be considered available and in such case will be added to the thirtyday
prospective income.
(1)
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/
mortgage); the cost of heating fuel, electricity, and food up to
the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the base rate if the
household needs a telephone for medical reasons; the cost of
nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician which
are not otherwise covered by medical entitlement; hospital free
care or insurance; the reasonable cost of essential clothing and
nonprescription drugs; and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the administrator.
(2)
Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be
allowed in the budget computation include:
(a) Internet services.
(b) Cable or satellite television.
(c) Cellular phones.
(d) Cigarettes/alcohol.
(e) Gifts purchased.
(f) Pet care costs.
(g) Costs of trips or vacations.
(h) Paid court fines.
(i) Repayments of unsecured loans.
(3)
C.
§ 102-32 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-32
85:263
(j) Legal fees.
(k) Late fees.
(l) Credit card debt.
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income
requirements to any applicant, other than an initial applicant, who
fails to use his or her income for basic necessities or fails to
reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the
following manner:
The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all
of his or her income, at the time it becomes available, toward
specific basic necessities. The administrator may prioritize
such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant's income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage),
energy (i.e., heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic
necessities;
(a)
The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the
specific use-of-income requirements placed on them;
(b)
If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how
the applicant's income was spent, or it is determined that some
or all of the applicant's income was not spent as directed
and was also not spent on basic necessities, the applicant will
not be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
(c)
If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed,
but can show with verifiable documentation that all income
was spent on basic necessities up to allowed amounts, the
applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant's
eligibility and need.
(d)
(4)
Calculation of income and expenses.
When determining eligibility, the administrator will subtract the
applicant's net income from the overall maximum level of
assistance found at the beginning of § 102-34. If income is greater
than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant will not
be eligible except in an emergency. (See § 102-15.) If income is less
than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
(1)
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the
deficit to the extent the applicant also has an unmet need and is in
need of basic necessities. The municipality will not grant assistance
in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in § 102-34 of this
chapter for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or
(2)
D.
§ 102-32 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-32
85:264
§ 102-33. Income.
when the administrator elects to consolidate the applicant's deficit,
as provided immediately below.
Consolidation of deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their
deficit, applicants will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity
up to, but not exceeding, the maximum amount allowed for that
necessity in this chapter or the actual thirty-day cost of the necessity,
whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may
consolidate the applicant's deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity
in an amount greater than the ordinance maximum for that necessity.
The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a
basic necessity in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum
shall be the exception rather than the rule;
(1)
The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit
unless the applicant is in an emergency situation; and
(2)
The need for the application of the recipient's consolidated deficit
toward a basic necessity was not created by the recipient's
misspending his or her income or resources in violation of the useof-
income requirements of this chapter.
(3)
E.
Income standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall
maximum level of assistance provided in § 102-34 shall not be eligible
for general assistance except in an emergency. The administrator will
conduct an individual factual inquiry into the applicant's income and
expenses each time an applicant applies.
A.
Calculation of income.
To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next thirtyday
period commencing on the date of application and identify
any assets or resources that would alleviate their need. For all
applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also
consider as available income any income that was not spent during
the previous thirty-day period on basic necessities, as well as any
income that was spent on basic necessities in unreasonable excess
of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household's income exceeds the amount of the household's need for
basic necessities, up to the maximum levels contained in § 102-34,
applicants will not be considered in need.
(1)
Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may
necessitate that the maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4308). (See § 102-15 of this chapter.) To calculate weekly income
and expenses, the administrator will use actual income received or
actual anticipated income.
(2)
B.
§ 102-32 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-33
85:265
Types of income. Income that will be considered in determining an
applicant's need includes:
Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant
through wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether selfemployed
or as an employee, is considered earned income. If a
person is self-employed, total income will be computed by
subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed
will be the income available after taxes, social security and other
payroll deductions required by state, federal, and local law. Rental
income and profit from produce that is sold is considered earned
income. Income that is held in trust and unavailable to the
applicant or the applicant's dependents will not be considered
as earned income. (NOTE: Actual work-related expenses such as
union dues, transportation to and from work, special equipment
or work clothes, and child care costs will be deducted from an
applicant's income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].)
(1)
Income from other assistance or social services programs.
State/federal categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments,
social security payments, VA benefits, unemployment
insurance benefits, and payments from other government
sources will be considered as income, unless expressly
prohibited by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits
food stamps and fuel assistance payments made by the Home
Energy Assistance Program (HEAP and ECIP) from being
considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general
assistance the applicant is eligible to receive. Although
applicants may have only a limited or reduced need for general
assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently received
HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or
otherwise prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective
thirty-day period.
(a)
The administrator's obligation is to always compute the
heating needs of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP
as if that applicant paid for his or her total fuel costs.
Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for
the household's heating energy needs according to actual
usage, up to the ordinance maximums, but the administrator
may, with written notice to the applicant, hold in reserve the
heating energy portion of the applicant's deficit until such a
time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a
demonstrable need for the disbursement of heating energy
assistance; that is, the applicant's fuel tank can accept a
minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a positive
credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality
is not obligated to divert any recipient's heating energy
(b)
(2)
C.
§ 102-33 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-33
85:266
allowance toward non-heating purposes solely on the basis of
the recipient's receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes
of GA eligibility include:
[1] Family development accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762).
[2] Americorp VISTA program benefits [42 USCS § 5044(f)].
Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax
Fairness Credit program, only so long as the money is
spent on basic necessities [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
[3]
(c)
Court-ordered support payments. Alimony and child support
payments will be considered income only if actually received by
the applicant. The general assistance administrator will refer cases
where support payments are not actually received to the State
Department of Health and Human Services' Child Support
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants
being referred to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be
required to follow through with such services. Because child
support payments are considered a resource, applicants must make
a good-faith effort to secure such payments.
(3)
Income from other sources. Payments from pensions and trust
funds will be considered income. Payments from boarders or
lodgers will be considered income as will cash or in-kind
contributions provided to the household from any other source,
including relatives [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)].
(4)
Earnings of a son or daughter. Earned income received by sons
and daughters below the age of 18 who are full-time students and
who are not working full time will not be considered income. The
unearned income of a minor in the household will be considered
available to the household.
(5)
Income from household members. Income from household
members will be considered available to the applicant, whether or
not the household member is legally obligated for the support of
the applicant, if the household members pool or share their income
and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as to provide
support to one another.
(6)
The pooling or non-pooling of income.
When two or more individuals share the same dwelling unit
but not all members of the household are applying for general
assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a
rebuttable presumption that the entire household is pooling
income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-A)].
(a)
(7)
§ 102-33 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-33
85:267
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut
the presumption that all household income is being pooled
by providing the administrator with verifiable documentation
affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for the
duration of the shared living arrangement. Such
documentation would include evidence of the entire household
expenses as well as bank statements, cancelled checks,
receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly
supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently
solely and entirely responsible for his or her pro-rata share of
household costs.
(b)
If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the
municipality's presumption that all household income is being
pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be determined
based on total household income. If the applicant successfully
rebuts the municipality's presumption that all household
income is being pooled, the applicant's eligibility will be
determined on the basis of his or her income and his or her
pro-rata share of actual household expenses.
(c)
Lump sum income.
A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or recipient
prior or subsequent to the date of application for general
assistance will be considered as income available to the
household. However, verified required payments (i.e., any
third-party payment which is required as a condition of
receiving the lump sum payment, or any payments of bills
earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum payment
was made) and any amount of the lump sum payment which
the applicant can document was spent on basic necessities, as
described below, will not be considered available income.
(a)
Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time
prior or subsequent to the date of application for general
assistance, the administrator will assess the need for prorating
an applicant's eligibility for general assistance according to the
following criteria [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7) and (8-A)]:
[1] Identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
Subtract from the lump sum payment all required
payments;
[2]
Subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant
can demonstrate was spent on basic necessities, including
all basic necessities as defined by the general assistance
program, such as reasonable payment of funeral or burial
expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs
related to the illness or death of a family member; repair
or replacement of essentials lost due to fire, flood or other
[3]
(b)
(8)
§ 102-33 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-33
85:268
§ 102-34. Basic necessities; maximum levels of assistance.
natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor vehicle
essential for employment, education, training or other dayto-
day living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit,
the proceeds of which can be verified as having been spent
on basic necessities, and payment of bills earmarked for
the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A)];
Add to the remainder all income received by the household
between the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and
the date of application for general assistance; and
[4]
Divide the sum created in Subsection C(8)(b)[4] by the
verified actual monthly amounts for all of the household's
basic necessities [22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-B)].
[5]
This dividend represents the period of proration determined by
the administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the
lump sum payment. The prorated sum for each month must be
considered available to the household for 12 months from the
date of application or during the period of proration, whichever
is less.
(c)
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible
for emergency assistance may not be denied emergency
assistance to meet an immediate need solely on the basis of the
proration of a lump sum payment (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
(d)
Overall maximum levels of assistance.
Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of assistance for
specific basic necessities listed in Appendices B through H12 of
this chapter, an applicant's eligibility for general assistance will
be first determined by subtracting his or her income from the
overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A13
for the applicable household size [22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)]. The
difference yielded by this calculation shall be the applicant's
deficit.
(1)
Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the
calculated deficit to the extent the applicant is unable to otherwise
provide the basic necessities essential to maintain themselves or
their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for
general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case
eligibility for emergency general assistance will be determined
according to § 102-15 of this chapter.
(2)
A.
12.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
13.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-33 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
85:269
Maximum levels of assistance for specific basic necessities.
The municipality will grant assistance to eligible applicants for
basic necessities according to the maximum levels for specific
types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in
consultation with the applicant, may apply the amount of the
applicant's deficit toward assistance with any one or combination
of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These maximum levels
will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator determines
that there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is
shown to exist, in which case these absolute levels will be waived
in order to meet immediate needs. In all cases either the actual
expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum
amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in
determining need.
In roommate situations, the applicant's need for common living
expenses for rent, fuel, electricity, etc., will be presumed to be
reduced by an amount equal to the other household members'
proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which
has been or will be paid by another person. In addition, as a
general rule the municipality will not provide a benefit toward
a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not
living with the applicant's household or that has otherwise
been incurred by a person who has not been found eligible to
receive assistance.
(a)
Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the
administrator in the following circumstances:
A recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent
absence of a former household member in whose name the
bill was customarily issued;
[1]
The applicant and members of the applicant's household
were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid
with general assistance; and
[2]
The applicant will make a good-faith effort to direct the
vendor to issue future bills in the name of the applicant or
other responsible person residing in the household.
[3]
(b)
(1)
Food.
The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible
persons up to the allowed maximum amounts designated by
the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the appropriate household
size. For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by
reference the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 102-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-34
85:270
Maine Department of Health and Human Services on or about
October of each year. See Appendix B14 of this chapter for the
current year's food maximums.
In determining need for food the administrator will not
consider the value of the food stamps an applicant receives
as income [22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C. § 2017(b)]. The
municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for
approved food products.
(b)
The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary
for households having members with special dietary needs.
The administrator may require a doctor's statement verifying
there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for
food that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
(c)
Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or
mortgage payments that are reasonable and/or within the allowed
maximum levels. See Appendix C15 of this chapter for the current
year's housing maximums. It is the applicant's responsibility to
find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will
inform the applicant of the allowed housing maximums to assist the
applicant in his or her search for housing. The allowed maximum
for any applicant will be the categorical housing maximum
representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to
adequately shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting
assistance for housing that contains more bedrooms than are
necessary for the number of household members will be provided
assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
Rental payments to relatives. The municipality may elect to
not issue any rental payment to an applicant's relatives unless
the rental relationship has existed for at least three months
and the applicant's relative(s) rely on the rental payment for
their basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a "relative"
is defined as the applicant's parents, grandparents, children,
grandchildren, siblings, parent's siblings, or any of those
relative's children [22 M.R.S.A. § 4319(2)].
(a)
Rental payments to nonrelatives.
When applicants are living in private homes with the
owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not
pooling income or who are not legally liable relatives,
the amount allowed as the applicant's shelter expense
will be the applicant's pro rata share of the actual, total
[1]
(b)
(3)
14.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
15.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
85:271
shelter cost, up to the ordinance maximum [22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(6)].
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a
circumstance will be issued, whenever reasonably
possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property; i.e., to a landlord before
a tenant, or to a mortgagee before a mortgagor.
[2]
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600
in rental payments to any landlord in any calendar year, a
1099 form declaring the total amount of rental payments
issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation.
(See § 6041(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.)
[3]
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments
from the municipality on behalf of applicants renting
rooms from the landlord's own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good-faith effort to obtain a lodging
license from the Department of Health and Human
Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to
10-144A Code of Maine Regulations, Chapter 201, as a
condition of that landlord receiving future general
assistance payments on behalf of his or her tenants.
[4]
Mortgage payments.
In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the general assistance administrator will make
an individual factual determination of whether the
applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In making
this determination, the administrator will consider the
extent and liquidity of the applicant's proprietary interest
in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
[a] The marketability of the shelter's equity;
[b] The amount of equity;
The availability of the equity interest in the shelter to
provide the applicant an opportunity to secure a shortterm
loan in order to meet immediate needs;
[c]
The extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant's
financial rehabilitation;
[d]
A comparison between the amount of mortgage
obligations and the anticipated rental charges the
applicant would be responsible for if he/she were to be
dislocated to rental housing;
[e]
[1]
(c)
§ 102-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-34
85:272
The imminence of the applicant's dislocation from
owned housing because of his or her inability to meet
the mortgage payments;
[f]
The likelihood that the provision of housing assistance
will prevent such dislocation; and
[g]
[h] The applicant's age, health, and social situation.
These factors shall be considered when determining
whether the equity in the shelter is an available asset
which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
[2]
The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in
response to the applicant's request for mortgage
assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible
for general assistance if after reviewing the above criteria
the administrator determines that:
The monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance
with the maximum levels of assistance available for
housing appropriate to the applicant's household size;
[a]
There is no capacity in the accumulated equity in
the property, when considered in the context of the
applicant's borrowing capacity with the mortgagee or
the general lending community, to suspend the
mortgage obligation temporarily or reamortize the
mortgage in such a way as to suspend or reduce the
mortgage obligation; and
[b]
The failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely
manner could jeopardize the applicant's continued
right of possession of the property.
[c]
[3]
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will
pay the actual amount due, up to the amount allowed
according to the maximum levels listed below. After an
initial application, assistance with such payments will be
given only after the applicant has made all reasonable
efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her home.
If there is not sufficient equity in the home with which
to secure a loan, and if the monthly mortgage payments
are not realistically in line with the rental rates for similar
housing in the area that could meet the applicant's needs,
the administrator will inform the applicant that he/she
is responsible for finding alternative housing within his
or her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all
reasonable efforts to secure such housing.
[4]
(d) Liens.
§ 102-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
85:273
The municipality may place a lien on the property in order
to recover its costs of granting assistance with mortgage
payments. In addition, a municipality may claim a lien
against the owner of real estate for the amount of money
spent by it to make capital improvements to the real estate
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be enforced against
a recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer
of the property. Further, no lien may be enforced against
a person who is currently receiving any form of public
assistance, or who would again become eligible for general
assistance if the lien were enforced.
[1]
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to
place a lien on a person's property to recover its costs of
providing general assistance for a mortgage payment or
capital improvement it must file a notice of the lien with
the county registry of deeds where the property is located
within 30 days of making the mortgage payment. That
filing shall secure the municipality's or the state's interest
in an amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or capital
improvement payment and all subsequent mortgage or
capital improvement payments made on behalf of the same
eligible person, plus interest and costs.
[2]
Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry,
the municipal officers must send notice to the owner of
the real estate, the general assistance recipient, and any
record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that a lien on the property is going to
be filed with the registry. This notice must clearly inform
the recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the
name, title, address and telephone number of the person
who granted the assistance. The municipal officers must
also give written notice to the recipient each time the
amount secured by the lien is increased because of an
additional mortgage payment. This notice must include the
same information that appeared on the original intent-tofile
notice sent to the recipient.
[3]
The municipality may charge interest on the amount of
money secured by the lien. The municipal officers will
establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate
of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged
against delinquent taxes. The interest will accrue from the
date the lien is filed.
[4]
Property Taxes. In the event that an applicant requests
assistance with his or her property taxes, the administrator
will inform the applicant that there are two procedures on the
local level to request that relief: the poverty abatement process
[36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)] and general assistance. If the applicant
(e)
§ 102-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-34
85:274
chooses to seek property tax assistance through general
assistance, or if the applicant is denied a poverty tax
abatement, the administrator may consider using general
assistance to meet this need only if:
The property tax in question is for the applicant's place of
residence;
[1]
There is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature
within 60 days of the date of application;
[2]
As a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis
of information obtained from the applicant's mortgagee,
if any, it is reasonably certain that a tax lien foreclosure
will result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
[3]
The applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property
tax relief through the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, when available.
[4]
Housing maximums.
The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in
this chapter have been derived either from a locally
accomplished fair market rental survey or the fair market
rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the
maximum levels of housing are derived from the HUD
values made effective as of every October 1 and adjusted
to disregard the current and averaged utility allowances
as developed by the Maine State Housing Authority, those
levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See Appendix
C16 of this chapter for the current year's housing
maximums.
[1]
If and when the maximum levels of housing contained
in this chapter are derived from a locally developed fair
market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the
maximum levels of housing assistance will be incorporated
into this chapter pursuant to the ordinance adoption and
amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
[2]
(f)
Utilities.
General.
Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be
budgeted separately if they are not included in the rent.
[1]
(a)
(4)
16.Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
85:275
Applicants are responsible for making arrangements with
the utility company regarding service, including entering
into a special payment arrangement if necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the
basis of their most recent bill. The municipality is not
obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits.
Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant
to § 102-15.
[2]
Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an
emergency in all cases. The administrator will make an
individual, factual analysis to determine if the termination
of utility service constitutes an emergency. The
administrator will consider the household composition, the
time of year, the age and health of the household members,
and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or
other resources to pay their utility bill when it was
received, but who spent all or part of their income on items
which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to
receive general assistance to replace those funds.
[3]
Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their
income and use of income for the applicable time period
[22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)]. (See §§ 102-15 and 102-29.) The
administrator will notify applicants in writing that they
must give the administrator prompt notice if their utility
service is to be terminated or if their fuel supply is low.
It is the applicant's responsibility to attempt to make
arrangements with the utility company to maintain their
service and to notify the administrator if assistance is
needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
[4]
Electricity.
Electricity maximums for households without electric hot
water. See Appendix D17 of this chapter for the current
year's electricity maximums.
[1]
Electricity maximums for households that use electrically
heated hot water. See Appendix D18 of this chapter for the
current year's electricity maximums.
[2]
(b)
Nonelectric utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer
utility service will be budgeted at a thirty-day reasonable
usage rate.
(c)
(5) Fuel.
17.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
18.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-34
85:276
Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the
actual need for fuel during the heating season (September
through May), provided that such expenses are reasonable,
and at other times during the year when the administrator
determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and
appropriate.
(a)
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis
of their most recent bill. The municipality is not responsible
for back bills except in an emergency as provided in § 102-15.
Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply
and requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply.
When applicants who have been informed of this responsibility
run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just cause for
failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need
for fuel, the administrator shall find that the emergency was
not beyond the applicants' control, and process the emergency
request accordingly, pursuant to § 102-15 of this chapter.
(b)
See Appendix E19 of this chapter for the current year's fuel
maximums.
(c)
Personal care and household supplies. Expenses for ordinary
personal and household supplies will be budgeted and allowed
according to the applicant's actual need for these items. Personal
and household supplies include hand soap, toothpaste, shampoo,
shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies and
costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such
as toilet paper, tissues, and paper towels, garbage/trash bags,
light bulbs and supplies for children under five years of age. See
Appendix F20 of this chapter for the current year's personal care
and household supplies maximums.
(6)
Other basic necessities. Expenses falling under this section will
be granted when they are deemed essential to an applicant's or
recipient's health and safety by the general assistance
administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a physician.
Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the
purchase of adequate clothing. Before assistance will be
granted for clothing, the general assistance administrator
must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all available
resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some
circumstances, clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions
to this would be, for example, if fire, flood or unusually cold
weather makes extra clothing an immediate necessity, special
(a)
(7)
19.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
20.Editor's Note: Appendix F is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
85:277
clothing is necessary for the applicant's employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
Medical.
The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses,
other than hospital bills (see below), provided that the
municipality is notified and approves the expenses and
services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or
services that are determined to be "medically necessary"
by a licensed physician. The municipality will grant
assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the
applicant would not be able to receive necessary medical
care without the municipality's assistance. The applicant
is required to utilize any resource, including any federal or
state program, that will diminish his or her need to seek
general assistance for medical expenses. The municipality
will grant assistance for nonemergency medical services
only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
Provided that there is no cost to the applicant, the
administrator may require a second medical opinion from
a physician designated by the municipality to verify the
necessity of the services.
[1]
Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance
at the established Medicaid rates for all medical services,
prescriptions, or other medical commodities. Before
authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical
service provider of the municipality's intention to pay for
the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and ask to be
billed accordingly.
[2]
Ordinary medical supplies/nonprescription drugs will be
budgeted at the actual amount when the applicant can
demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable supplies
include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic
brand, non-prescription medicines. In addition, the basic
monthly rate for telephone service will be budgeted when
a telephone is essential to the health and safety of the
household. In order for telephone service to be considered
an allowable expense, the applicant must provide a written
statement from a physician certifying that the telephone is
essential.
[3]
(b)
Hospital bills.
In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the administrator within five business
[1]
(c)
§ 102-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-34
85:278
days of the admission. Notification must be by telephone,
confirmed by certified mail, or by certified mail only. If a
hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator, the
municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must
apply to the hospital for consideration under the hospital's
free care program as provided in 22 M.R.S.A. § 1716.
Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital's free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants
must apply for assistance within 30 days of being
discharged from the hospital and provide a notice from
the hospital certifying that they are not eligible for the
hospital's free care program.
[2]
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a
hospital bill as a necessary expense, the applicant must
enter into a reasonable payment arrangement with the
hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon
the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant's eligibility,
the municipality will budget the monthly payment to the
hospital the applicant has agreed to pay. The applicant's
need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered
each time he/she applies by including the amount of the
bill in the applicant's monthly budget, but the recipient
will be responsible for making any necessary payments to
the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements
found at § 102-32 of this chapter.
[3]
Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary
dental services only. As is the case with medical services
generally, the municipality will issue general assistance for
dental services at the established Medicaid rates for those
services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit
for dental services, the administrator will inform the dentist
or dental surgeon of the municipality's intention to pay at
the Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are necessary, the
municipality will pay for dentures, provided that the applicant
has no other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant
will be referred to a dental clinic in the area whenever
possible. The administrator will expect the applicant to bear
a reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant's
ability to pay.
(d)
Eye care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance
for eyeglasses, an applicant must have his or her medical
need certified by a person licensed to practice optometry. The
general assistance administrator will provide assistance for
eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
(e)
§ 102-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-34
85:279
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at
the Medicaid rate.
Telephone charge. A payment for basic telephone will only
be allowed if a telephone is necessary for medical reasons
as verified by a physician. At the discretion of the GA
administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job
search or job-related reasons exist and/or for any other reasons
the administrator deems necessary.
(f)
Work-related expenses. In determining need, reasonable and
actual work-related expenses will be deducted from earned
income. These expenses include childcare costs, work clothes,
supplies and transportation at the actual costs not to exceed
the ordinance maximum. (See Appendix G21 for this year's
maximum mileage allotment.) The applicant is required to
provide documentation substantiating the costs and that the
expenses were necessary.
(g)
Travel expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which
is not work-related will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy
the administrator that the prospective need for travel is
necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly transportation
to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
necessary travel. See Appendix G22 for the current rate at
which such necessary travel will be budgeted. This rate shall
be construed to subsidize all costs associated with automobile
ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires, maintenance,
insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
(h)
Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in
accordance with the procedures and limitations described
below (see § 102-35), the municipality recognizes its
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H23 for the current maximums.
(i)
Capital improvements.
The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally
not be budgeted as a basic necessity. Exceptions can be
made only when the capital improvement/repair has been
pre-approved by the administrator as a necessary expense
and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair
has been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for
example, by means of the applicant entering into an
[1]
(j)
21.Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
22.Editor's Note: Appendix G is included as an attachment to this chapter.
23.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-34
85:280
§ 102-35. Burials; cremations.
installment payment arrangement with the contractor. The
administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
The failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in
emergency circumstances;
[a]
There are no other resources available to effect the
capital repair; and
[b]
There is no more cost-effective alternative available
to the applicant or municipality to alleviate an
emergency situation.
[c]
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital
improvement can be mitigated by the applicant entering
into an installment payment arrangement with a
contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place
a lien on any property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320
when general assistance has been used to effect a capital
improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished in
the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described
in Subsection B(3)(d), Liens, above.
[2]
Funeral director must give timely notice. In order for the municipality
to be liable for a burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must
notify the administrator prior to the burial or cremation or by the end
of three business days following the funeral director's receipt of the
body, whichever is earlier [22 M.R.S.A. § 4313(2)]. This contact by the
funeral director shall begin the process of developing an application
for burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the
funeral director's responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine
if the family or any other persons are going to pay all or part of
the burial expenses. If family members or others are unable to pay
the expenses, and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay
all or part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely
contact to the municipal administrator. In addition, the funeral director
may refer legally liable relatives to the administrator so that a timely
determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
A.
Application for assistance shall be calculated on behalf of the deceased.
For the purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and
issuing general assistance for burial or cremation purposes, an
application for assistance shall be completed by the administrator on
behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for
burial expenses shall be the municipality in which the eligible
(1)
B.
§ 102-34 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-35
85:281
deceased person was a resident at the time of death as residency is
determined under § 102-16 of this chapter.
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living
expenses, that information will not be construed as an application
for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible
for burial assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally
liable relatives have a financial responsibility to pay for the burial
or cremation of their relatives, that financial responsibility only
exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible
for general assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal
obligation to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives. For
these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial or cremation
purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the
deceased.
(2)
Financial responsibility of certain family members. Grandparents,
parents, children and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine
or own property in Maine, are financially responsible for the burial or
cremation of the deceased to the extent those relatives, individually or
as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation
either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement
with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator,
all legally liable relatives must provide the municipal administrator with
any reasonably requested information regarding their income, assets,
and basic living expenses.
C.
Consideration of the financial responsibility of family members.
Generally, when the administrator can make a finding that one or
more of the deceased's legally liable relatives have an obvious and
demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, by
lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation
assistance. When the administrator is unable to make such a finding,
the following proration of familial responsibility will be implemented.
D.
Proration of familial responsibility. A proration of familial financial
responsibility will be used when no legally liable relative possesses an
obvious and demonstrable capacity to pay for the burial or cremation,
but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found to have
a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the
administrator is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or
more of said relatives. Under these circumstances, each legally liable
relative is considered to be responsible for his or her pro rata share
of the total municipal contribution that would exist if no legally liable
relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as
long as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality
will provide as a burial or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro
rata shares less the share of any legally liable relative who refuses
E.
§ 102-35 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-35
85:282
to cooperate with the administrator by providing information or
documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative's
financial capacity, and less any share or part of a share attributable
to a legally liable relative who can financially contribute or partially
contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent of that relative's
share.
Eight days to determine eligibility. The administrator may take up to
eight days from the date of contact by the funeral director to issue a
written decision regarding the amount of the municipal contribution
toward the burial or cremation. The eight-day eligibility determination
period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of
legally liable family members and determine their respective financial
capacities to contribute to the burial or cremation, contact the personal
representative of the deceased's estate, if any, and other related
administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this eight-day
period allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality's
decision.
F.
Municipal obligation to pay when legally liable relatives or others can
contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum
benefits provided by the municipality when no contributions toward
the burial or cremation are available from any other source. To the
extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a financial
capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity
shall be deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this
section. In addition, any other benefits or resources that are available,
such as social security burial benefits, veterans' burial benefits, or
contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the maximum
amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from
the municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided
for the purpose of publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate
contribution limit for this purpose of $75 when a paid receipt
demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to the
administrator.
G.
Burial expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family
members with regard to whether the deceased is interred by means
of burial or cremated. See Appendix H24 for the maximum levels of
assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
H.
Cremation expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family
members of the deceased, or when neither the administrator nor the
funeral director can locate any family members, the administrator may
issue general assistance for cremation services. See Appendix H25 for
the maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of
cremations.
I.
24.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
25.Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102-35 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-36
85:283
§ 102-36. Notice of decision.
Written decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each
applicant after making a determination of eligibility each time a person
applies. The decision will be given to the applicant within 24 hours of
receiving a completed and signed application [22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3)].
(See Article IV, § 102-12.)
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application,
due to the twenty-four-hour decision requirement placed on the GA
administrator, the GA administrator may decide to render a notice
of ineligibility and provide the applicant with another application
to submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
(1)
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the
responsibility of the general assistance administrator to explain the
applicant's right to a fair hearing in the written notice of decision.
(2)
A.
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be
given written notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for
assistance. In addition to the contents of a written decision listed in
§ 102-12 of this chapter, the notice will state that applicants:
Have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may
obtain a fair hearing; and
(1)
Have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality
has violated the law. The decision will state the method for
notifying the department.
(2)
B.
Disbursement of general assistance. Except when determined
impractical by the administrator, all general assistance will be provided
in the form of a voucher or purchase order payable to a vendor or
through direct municipal payment to a provider of goods or services.
General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment
to an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash
payment, in which case the administrator shall document the
circumstances for issuing general assistance in the form of cash [22
M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)].
C.
§ 102-36 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-36
85:284
ARTICLE VII
Fair Hearing
§ 102-37. Right to fair hearing.
Within five working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction
or termination of assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act
or failure to act, the applicant or his or her authorized representative has
the right to request a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review
a decision of the general assistance administrator is a basic right of the
applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a review
of the decision.
§ 102-38. Method of obtaining fair hearing.
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance
administrator, all claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a
fair hearing. All complaints that are not clear requests for a fair hearing
will be answered by a personal interview or in writing by the general
assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the adjustment or
explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and file
any correspondence involved.
Written request.
To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within five working
days of receiving the administrator's decision to grant, deny,
reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10 working days after any
other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available
a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the
claimant in completing it if necessary. On the printed form, the
claimant will give the following information:
(a) The decision on which review is sought;
The reason(s) for the claimant's dissatisfaction and why the
claimant believes he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
(b)
(c) The relief sought by the claimant.
(1)
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing
unless it has been withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
(2)
A.
Scheduling the fair hearing.
Upon receipt of the completed written request, the fair hearing
authority must meet and hold the hearing within five working days.
The administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and
where the hearing will be held (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to
the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice of fair hearing
(1)
B.
§ 102-37 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-38
85:285
§ 102-39. Fair hearing authority.
§ 102-40. Fair hearing procedure.
sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant's
rights to:
Be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be
represented by legal counsel or other spokesperson at the
hearing, at the claimant's own expense;
(a)
Confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the
hearing against the claimant; and
(b)
(c) Present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take
into consideration the convenience of the claimant and hearing
authority. The claimant will be given timely notice to allow for
preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary
information about the hearing procedure to allow for effective
preparation of his or her case.
(2)
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that
will determine, based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing,
whether the claimant(s) were eligible to receive assistance at the time
they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with the responsibility of
ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with the
state law and local ordinance.
A.
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or
more persons appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA,
or, if designated, the board of appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the organization of the fair
hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following criteria.
The person(s) serving as FHA must:
Not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the
appeal;
(1)
(2) Be impartial;
Be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to
obtain evidence and the facts necessary to make a fair
determination; and
(3)
Be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically,
explaining to the claimant the laws and regulations under which
the administrator operated, and interpreting to the administrator
any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate policies, practices
or actions.
(4)
B.
§ 102-38 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-40
85:286
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date,
time, and place of the hearing in writing, he/she will also be given
adequate preliminary information about the hearing procedure to allow
for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant shall be
permitted to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum,
the claimant will be told the following information, which will govern all
fair hearings. All fair hearings will:
Be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant,
witnesses, legal counsel, or others whom the claimant wants
present, and the general assistance administrator, his or her
agents, counsel and witnesses;
(1)
Be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing
authority;
(2)
Be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but
subject to the requirements of due process;
(3)
Allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present
their positions for themselves or with the aid of others, including
legal counsel;
(4)
Give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written
testimony or documentary evidence; offer rebuttal; question
witnesses presented at the hearing; and examine all evidence
presented at the hearing;
(5)
Result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony
presented at the hearing; and
(6)
Be tape-recorded, and result in a written decision that is given
to the claimant and filed with evidence introduced at the hearing.
The fair hearing authority will allow the claimant to establish all
pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any arguments
without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair
hearing decision or made part of the hearing record. Any material
reviewed by the fair hearing authority must be made available to
the claimant or his or her representative. The claimant will be
responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
(7)
A.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of
evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the
conduct of serious affairs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322).
B.
Claimant's Failure to Appear.
In the event that the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will send a
written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator's decision
was not altered due to the claimant's failure to appear.
(1)
C.
§ 102-40 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-40
85:287
§ 102-41. Fair hearing decision.
Furthermore, the notice shall indicate that the claimant has five
working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
administrator information demonstrating just cause for failing to
appear. For the purposes of a claimant's failure to appear at a fair
hearing, examples of just cause include:
(a) A death or serious illness in the family;
A personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
(b)
An emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents
the party from attending the hearing;
(c)
An obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in
the conduct of his or her affairs could reasonably conclude
takes precedence over the attendance at the hearing; or
(d)
Lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect,
excusable inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
(e)
If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the
request for the hearing will be reinstated and a hearing
rescheduled.
(2)
In the event that a claimant who is represented by legal counsel
fails to appear at a fair hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in
place of the claimant on matters of fact but may cross examine
witnesses and make legal arguments on behalf of the claimant.
(3)
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general
assistance administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the
claimant within five working days after completion of the hearing.
Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
(1) A statement of the issue;
(2) Relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
Pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance
related to the decision; and
(3)
(4) The decision and the reasons for it.
A.
A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The
hearing record and the case record will be maintained by the general
assistance administrator.
B.
The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is
dissatisfied with the fair hearing decision, he/she has a further legal
right to appeal the decision pursuant to the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant must
C.
§ 102-40 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-41
85:288
file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of
receipt of the fair hearing decision.
When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes
assistance to the claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24
hours.
D.
§ 102-41 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-41
85:289

ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
§ 102-42. Recipients.
§ 102-43. Recipients anticipating workers' compensation benefits.
§ 102-44. Recipients of SSI.
All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
supplemental security income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and
which therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date,
will be required to sign a statement on an interim assistance agreement
form distributed by the DHHS that authorizes the Social Security
Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI payment to the
The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to
a person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the
recipient, or his or her executors or administrators in a civil action.
However, prior to recovering assistance granted, the municipality shall
offset the value of any workfare performed by a GA recipient, at a rate
not less than minimum wage.
A.
Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance,
the municipality will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by
notifying him/her in writing and discussing it with the recipient. The
municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs if, as a result of
the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
B.
The municipality shall claim a lien for the value of all general assistance
payments made to a recipient on any lump sum payment made to that
recipient under the Workers' Compensation Act or similar law of any
other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318 and 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing
any general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is
receiving workers' compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of
the municipal lien with the general assistance recipient and the Office
of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code Division.
A.
The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be
signed by the recipient of general assistance who has applied for or
is receiving workers' compensation. Any general assistance applicant
who has applied for or who is receiving workers' compensation benefits
and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be found
ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the
required signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that
filing to the recipient's worker's compensation attorney, if known, the
applicant's employer or the employer's insurance company, and, at the
administrator's discretion, to the Workers' Compensation Board. The
lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum workers' compensation
benefit is issued.
B.
§ 102-42 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-44
85:291
municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance
granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may
be applying for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to
22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and who refuses to sign the interim agreement SSI
authorization form will be found ineligible to receive general assistance
until he or she provides the required signature (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
§ 102-45. Relatives.
The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age
of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In
addition, grandchildren, children, parents and grandparents are liable for
the burial costs of each other. The municipality considers these relatives
to be available resources and liable for the support of their relatives in
proportion to their respective ability. The municipality may complain to any
court of competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the behalf
of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4319).
§ 102-44 BAR HARBOR CODE § 102-45
85:292
ARTICLE IX
Severability
§ 102-46. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of the ordinance.
§ 102-46 FIRE PREVENTION § 102-46
85:293
Chapter 109
HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 18.
Disorderly houses — See Ch. 64.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 85.
Food and merchandise sales — See Ch. 94.
Parks and public places — See Ch. 147.
Sewers — See Ch. 165.
Water — See Ch. 201.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMBUSTIBLE RUBBISH — Paper, cartons, boxes and barrels, wood and
excelsior, small tree trimmings, wood furniture which has been broken up,
and bedding.
GARBAGE — Waste from the preparation, cooking and serving of food, as
well as market refuse and waste from the handling, storage and sale of food.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat, or other domesticated animal which is
kept by its owner for his or her own personal pleasure, but not dogs used in
guiding the blind.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE RUBBISH — Bottles and cans, metal furniture,
bedsprings, glass, crockery, mineral refuse, ashes, sweepings, dirt, leaves,
stumps, abandoned automobiles, and industrial waste resulting from
manufacturing processes.
§ 109-2. Duties of Health Officer.
The Health Officer for the Town of Bar Harbor shall perform the duties
enumerated in this Code and Chapter 153 of Title 22, Maine Revised
Statutes.26
§ 109-3. Communicable diseases.
The periods of quarantine, isolation, control and observation of a person
who has or is suspected of having a communicable disease shall be those
prescribed from time to time by the State Department of Health.
§ 109-4. Animal diseases.
Every owner or custodian of an animal afflicted with glanders, anthrax,
rabies, trichinosis, foot and mouth disease, tuberculosis, or any other
26.Editor's Note: See 22 M.R.S.A. § 451 et seq.
§ 102-46 BAR HARBOR CODE § 109-4
109:294
disease which may be transmitted to human beings, and every veterinarian
treating such animal, shall report the existence of the disease to the Health
Officer. The Health Officer may cause the animal to be isolated and to be
given such care as may be necessary to prevent the transmission of the
disease to other animals or to human beings. No animal afflicted with any
of these diseases shall be allowed upon any highway or in any public place.
If an animal having such a disease dies, its body shall be destroyed under
the direction of the Health Officer in such a manner that the disease shall
be prevented from spreading.
§ 109-5. Unhealthy dwelling conditions.
No building that is in such a dilapidated condition or state of filthiness or
uncleanness as to endanger the health or life of any person that occupies it,
or that is not furnished with a safe water supply or with toilet facilities, shall
be used as a dwelling or rented for that purpose. The Health Officer may
investigate such dwelling, and if conditions are found to be, in his judgment,
dangerous to health or life, he may declare the building unfit for human
habitation.
§ 109-6. Inspection of sewer and water systems.
§ 109-7. Garbage collection and disposal.
As often as he deems it to be necessary, the Health Officer shall
examine or cause to be examined by a competent engineer the
sewerage system or water supply of the Town of Bar Harbor. A report
of such inspection and examination shall be made to the Town Council.
A.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized to require the opening of any or
all dead ends in the system owned by the Bar Harbor Water Company
for the purpose of making these inspections.
B.
Collection from hotels, stores, markets, etc. The proprietors of hotels
and the owners or tenants of markets, shops or stores or eating places
shall convey all garbage and decaying matter upon their premises to
the municipal solid waste collection center. Such garbage and decaying
matter shall be conveyed every day from hotels and markets and every
two days from shops, stores, eating places and residences. The owner
or occupant of any premises where swill or garbage shall accumulate
shall provide a covered, watertight receptacle on said premises for
such swill or garbage and shall deposit or cause to be deposited all
such swill or garbage in said receptacle. No person shall deposit any
garbage in any other place than such a garbage receptacle as is hereby
prescribed. All wastepaper, excelsior, rags, old clothes, bedding or
other combustible rubbish or refuse which will scatter if loose shall be
fastened together securely by tying or otherwise and be so placed on
the premises as to be easily collected.
A.
B. Method of conveyance and penalty.
§ 109-4 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 109-7
109:295
All conveyances for transporting garbage in the form of swill,
decaying meats, fish, or vegetables or other decaying matter must
be lined with zinc or iron and made watertight and have covered
tops, or the garbage must be put into covered barrels. All such
conveyances or barrels must be kept clean and in a sanitary
condition. Such conveyances must not stop in the streets for other
purposes than the collection of garbage, and not longer than is
necessary to collect the same, and must then proceed to the
municipal solid waste collection center. Whoever transports within
the limits of said Town any garbage, ashes, waste matter, rubbish,
or refuse of any kind, except in conveyances covered with canvas
or other material to prevent the contents of said conveyance from
scattering, shall be punished in accordance with the general
provisions of this Code.27
(1)
Any penalty for the violation of this Subsection B may be imposed
on either the person transporting or whoever requires or knowingly
permits such transportation, or may be imposed on both.
(2)
Offensive odors. No person shall deposit or maintain any garbage,
refuse, sewage, or other substance which gives off offensive odors upon
any highway or public place or in any place from which the odors may
escape and become offensive to human beings.
C.
Rodent breeding places. No collection of rubbish shall be maintained in
such a state that it is a breeding place for rats and mice.
D.
Unlawful deposit of waste. No person shall deposit any refuse from
lawns, gardens or buildings or any waste, offal or garbage of any kind
upon any shore, beach or bar or in the waters of the harbor between
the north side of Hulls Cove and Bear Brook.
E.
Dumping prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code
for any person, firm, association or corporation to dump or cause to
be dumped any combustible rubbish or garbage at any place in the
Town of Bar Harbor other than the municipal solid waste collection
center, unless another disposal area is designated by the municipal
officers. No person shall dump or cause to be dumped any combustible
or noncombustible rubbish or any garbage at the municipal solid waste
collection center at any time when the municipal refuse incinerator
plant is not open and operating, except by express permission from
the superintendent in charge of said municipal solid waste collection
center.
F.
Dumps prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code for
any person, firm, association or corporation to establish or cause to
be established a dump for the disposal of garbage and combustible
rubbish, but said garbage and combustible rubbish shall be disposed of
at the municipal solid waste collection center as provided in Subsection
G.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, § 1-18.
§ 109-7 BAR HARBOR CODE § 109-7
109:296
§ 109-8. Junked motor vehicles.
F of this section. Violations shall be punished in accordance with § 1-18
of this Code.
Cleanliness of municipal solid waste collection center. The direction
and maintenance of the municipal solid waste collection center shall be
under the control of the Town Manager. The Health Officer shall inspect
said municipal solid waste collection center and the premises used in
connection with the same from time to time and report to the Town
Manager the sanitary condition thereof.
H.
Finding of fact; purpose.
It is found and declared that:
There exist throughout the Town of Bar Harbor abandoned,
unserviceable, junked, discarded or worn-out motor vehicles
or parts thereof which are presently being permitted to
accumulate and to remain on privately owned property;
(a)
Said motor vehicles or parts thereof which are in close
proximity to dwelling houses, stores, public areas of recreation
or any other places to which persons have access are injurious
to the comfort, happiness and well-being of individuals and the
public;
(b)
Said motor vehicles or parts thereof constitute an attraction to
children and pose a threat to their physical well-being;
(c)
Said motor vehicles or parts thereof are unsightly and detract
from the natural scenery of Bar Harbor; and
(d)
The maintenance of said motor vehicles or parts thereof
depreciates the value of surrounding property.
(e)
(1)
The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and
prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a
matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is
further declared that the provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of
securing and promoting the public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Bar Harbor.
(2)
A.
Junked vehicles prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to maintain or permit to exist on property either owned,
possessed or otherwise controlled by him or it any abandoned,
unserviceable, junked, discarded or worn-out motor vehicle, vehicles,
or part or parts thereof within a distance of 500 feet from any building
or structure in, on or around which any person may reside, congregate
or frequent.
B.
C. Scope.
§ 109-7 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 109-8
109:297
§ 109-9. Plumbing work.
§ 109-10. Eating and lodging places and camps.
All eating and lodging places, recreation and overnight trailer camps shall
conform to the rules and regulations as prescribed from time to time by the
state.
§ 109-11. Sale of food.
No food shall be sold or offered for sale in any grocery, butcher shop, or fish
market or other food shop in which any marked condition of uncleanness or
filthiness exists.
Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to such
motor vehicles or parts thereof which are not contained within a
building or structure which completely or substantially conceals
them.
(1)
Limitations on applicability. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to those persons, firms or corporations who or which hold
valid licenses or permits to maintain such motor vehicles or parts
thereof pursuant to the laws, rules and regulations of the State of
Maine or the federal government.
(2)
"Motor vehicle" defined. For the purposes of this section, the term
"motor vehicle" shall mean any self-propelled vehicle not operated
exclusively on tracks, including motorcycles but not including
snowmobiles as defined by the laws of Maine.
D.
Additional remedy; injunction. Any violation of this section or any
provision thereof shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be subject
to abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction in addition to the general penalty set forth in
§ 1-18 of this Code.
E.
Testing. Plumbing work shall not be used unless the same has been
tested in the presence of the Plumbing Inspector. Water shall be used
for said test where practicable. If not practicable, peppermint or other
reliable tests may be made and approved by him in writing.
A.
Plumbing standards. All plumbing installed throughout the Town of Bar
Harbor shall conform to the basic plumbing principles prescribed by
the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health in relation
to plumbing work done within the state, with the following amendment:
No pipes, tanks, faucets, valves, or other fixtures through which waste
or sewage is used and carried shall be installed in any building except
in accordance with plans approved by the Inspector of Plumbing, and
no plumbing shall be done, except to repair leaks, without a permit
being first issued therefor.
B.
§ 109-8 BAR HARBOR CODE § 109-12
109:298
§ 109-12. Activities on Eagle Lake and Bubble Pond. [Added
3-17-1992]
Chapter 125
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Board — See Ch. 31, Art. I.
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 31, Art. II.
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 85.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 90.
No person shall operate trucks, automobiles, or other similar motor
vehicles designed for use on the public highway on the ice of either
Eagle Lake or Bubble Pond.
A.
No person shall utilize an ice fishing shelter on either Eagle Lake or
Bubble Pond unless the same is equipped with solid, nonremovable
floors without a trap door, or other device or design permitting access
to the ice or water below from within the shelter.
B.
No person shall wind surf or utilize a surfboard of any kind on the
waters of either Eagle Lake or Bubble Pond. No person shall swim,
bathe, or engage in any sport or water activity in which more than 1/3
of his or her body is submerged in either Eagle Lake or Bubble Pond.
C.
The penalty for violation of this section shall be not less than $100 nor
more than $2,500 for each offense.
D.
§ 109-12 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 109-12
109:299

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 125-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Ordinance
of the Town of Bar Harbor, Maine," and will be referred to herein as "this
chapter."
§ 125-2. Authority. [Amended 11-5-1991]
This chapter is adopted pursuant to home rule powers as provided for
in Article VIII, Part Second, of the Maine Constitution and 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 2101 et seq. and § 450328 and also pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 435 to 449.
§ 125-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is the implementation of the Bar Harbor
Comprehensive Plan and the promotion of the health, safety, and general
welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Town of Bar Harbor in
a manner that serves to balance the interests of the general public of Bar
Harbor and those of individual property owners by:
Giving effect to policies and proposals of the Bar Harbor
Comprehensive Plan;
A.
Preserving and protecting the character of Bar Harbor by dividing
the Town into neighborhood districts according to the use of land and
buildings, the intensity of such use, including bulk and height, and
surrounding open space;
B.
Guiding growth in the Town of Bar Harbor over the next twenty-year
period, concentrating development in areas where adequate water and
sanitary facilities, roads, schools and other municipal services can be
provided and limiting development in areas where facilities are not and
should not be provided;
C.
Protecting and enhancing the natural, cultural and historic resources of
the Town of Bar Harbor;
D.
Providing standards for all types of dwelling units so that all the people
of Bar Harbor may have access to decent, sound and sanitary housing
in accordance with the goals of the Federal Housing Act of 1949, among
which is the provision of adequate zoning to meet a fair share of the
Town's housing needs;
E.
Lessening the danger and congestion of traffic on the roads and
highways, limiting excessive numbers of intersections, driveways, and
other friction points, minimizing other hazards, and ensuring the
F.
28.Editor's Note: Section 4503 of Title 30-A was repealed by Chapter 104 of the Laws of 1989.
§ 125-1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-3
109:301
§ 125-4. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all land within the Town of Bar Harbor. All
buildings or structures hereinafter constructed, reconstructed, altered,
enlarged, or moved, and the uses of buildings and land, including the
division of land, in the Town of Bar Harbor shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. No building, structure, land or water area shall
continued usefulness of all elements of the existing highway system for
their planned function;
Providing standards to control the intensity of development in areas of
sensitive or significant natural resources in order to reduce or eliminate
adverse environmental impacts;
G.
H. Promoting safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers;
I. Providing adequate privacy, light and air;
Protecting the tax base by facilitating cost-effective development within
the Town of Bar Harbor;
J.
K. Promoting economy in local governmental expenditures;
L. Conserving the values of property throughout the Town of Bar Harbor;
Protecting landowners from adverse impacts of adjoining
developments;
M.
N. Preventing and controlling water pollution; [Added 11-5-1991]
Protecting fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, and bird and other
wildlife habitat; [Added 11-5-1991]
O.
Protecting buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion;
[Added 11-5-1991]
P.
Q. Protecting archaeological and historic resources; [Added 11-5-1991]
Protecting commercial fishing and maritime industries; [Added
11-5-1991]
R.
S. Protecting freshwater and coastal wetlands; [Added 11-5-1991]
Controlling building sites, placement of structures and land uses;
[Added 11-5-1991]
T.
Conserving shore cover, visual as well as actual points of access to
inland and coastal waters, natural beauty, and open space; [Added
11-5-1991]
U.
Anticipating and responding to the impacts of development in
shoreland areas. [Added 11-5-1991]
V.
§ 125-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-4
109:302
be used for any purpose or in any manner except as provided for in this
chapter.
§ 125-5. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of this chapter.
§ 125-6. Conflicting ordinances or laws.
In general, this chapter is complementary to other Town ordinances
affecting the use, height, area and location of buildings and the use of land,
but where there is a conflict between this chapter and any other federal,
state or local rule, regulation, ordinance, statute or other restriction, the
more restrictive provision shall control. Violations of any ordinance in effect
prior to the adoption of this chapter shall not be considered null and void as
a result of the adoption of this chapter.
§ 125-7. Omitted uses prohibited.
It is the intent of this chapter that any use not specifically allowed as either
a permitted use or a permitted use with site plan approval is specifically
prohibited.
§ 125-8. When effective; filing; repealer. [Amended 11-5-1991;
5-4-1992]
The effective date of this chapter or any amendments thereto shall be
30 calendar days following its/their adoption at a regular or special
Town Meeting; provided, however, that those portions of this chapter
related to shoreland regulation shall not be effective unless approved
by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A
certified copy of this chapter, attested and signed by the Town Clerk,
shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act
on this chapter within 45 days of his/her receipt of this chapter, it shall
be deemed approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the
Town within such forty-five-day period shall be governed by the terms
of this chapter if the chapter is approved by the Commissioner of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
A.
A certified copy of this chapter shall also be filed with the Hancock
County Registry of Deeds.
B.
The adoption of this chapter hereby repeals and supersedes all
conflicting land use provisions of all ordinances adopted prior to the
effective date of this chapter.29
C.
29.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, Repeal of municipal timber harvesting regulation,
added 11-4-2008, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-4 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-9
109:303
§ 125-9. Amendment. [Amended 11-5-1991; 5-4-1992; 5-4-1998;
11-2-2010; 11-8-2011]
There shall be four methods for proposing amendments to Bar Harbor's
Land Use Ordinance, as follows:
Amendments.
Citizen petition. Upon the written petition of a number of
registered voters equal to at least 10% of the number of votes cast
in the Town at the last gubernatorial election, but in no case fewer
than 10 registered voters, the Town Council shall automatically
insert in the warrant for a regular or special Town Meeting an
article to amend this chapter.
(1)
Property owner. A property owner may submit a written request
to the Planning Board to consider an amendment and the Planning
Board shall consider this request at a public hearing. Notice of the
public hearing shall be provided as set forth in § 125-9C below.
The Planning Board, may, upon a written request from a
property owner, submit a written request to the Town Council
to insert in the warrant for a regular Town Meeting an article
to amend this chapter.
(a)
Such request shall contain at a minimum the following
materials:
[1] An application form from the Planning Department;
A map showing the existing neighborhood districts for the
subject property and for properties within 600 feet;
[2]
A map showing the existing land uses at the time of
application for the above-mentioned subject property and
area;
[3]
A narrative and evidence of how the requested change
meets the policies and strategies in the most recently
adopted Comprehensive Plan (including the Land Use
Plan);
[4]
Other information necessary to illustrate the need for a
change in the district or other standards in this chapter.
[5]
(b)
Within 30 days of submission of the written request, together
with fees and materials, the Planning Board shall meet to
determine if the application is complete for their review. A
public hearing will be held within 45 days of the Planning
Board finding the application complete.
(c)
(2)
A.
§ 125-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-9
109:304
Notification to abutters within 600 feet of the subject property
and a notice to a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
of Bar Harbor shall occur at least 10 days prior to the hearing.
(d)
At the public hearing, the Planning Board shall hear the
request, accept public comment on the request and deliberate
to determine which of the following courses of action they will
perform:
Recommend to the Town Council the written request as
submitted as per § 125-9A.
[1]
Recommend with amendments or conditions that would
bring the proposal into conformance with the most
recently adopted Comprehensive Plan.
[2]
[3] Take no action.
(e)
If the Planning Board takes no action on the written request,
the subject property owner may seek other alternatives
outlined in § 125-9A. Planning Board action under § 125-9 is
not the subject of appeal under § 125-103.
(f)
The Planning Board shall submit its decision to the Town
Council within 30 days of the close of the public hearing.
(g)
Planning Board. The Planning Board may propose an amendment
and the Planning Board shall consider this amendment at a public
hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided as set forth
in § 125-9C below.
(3)
Town Council. The Town Council may submit a written request to
the Planning Board to consider an amendment, and the Planning
Board shall consider this request at a public hearing. Notice of the
public hearing shall be provided as set forth in § 125-9C below.
(4)
Final public hearing. Following the conclusion of the Planning Board's
public hearings, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing to accept
or reject final amendments for the warrant. Notice of the public hearing
shall be provided as set forth in § 125-9C below.
B.
Notice requirements.
Notice of the hearing shall be posted in the municipal office at least
13 days prior to such hearing.
(1)
Notice of the hearing shall be published at least two times in
a newspaper that complies with 1 M.R.S.A. § 601 and that has
a general circulation in the municipality. The date of the first
publication must be at least 12 days before the hearing, and the
date of the second publication must be at least seven days before
the hearing.
(2)
C.
§ 125-9 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-9
109:305
In addition to the notice required by the preceding two subsections,
when an amendment is proposed to the existing Land Use
Ordinance or the Neighborhood Districts Map of Bar Harbor that,
within a geographically specific portion of the Town, will have the
effect of either prohibiting all industrial, commercial or retail uses
where any of such uses is permitted, or permitting such uses where
any of such uses is prohibited, the following is required:
The notice must contain a copy of the map indicating the
portion of the Town affected by the proposed amendment.
(a)
For each parcel within the Town that is in or abutting the
portion of the Town affected by the proposed amendment,
the notice must be mailed by first-class mail at least 13 days
prior to the public hearing to the last-known address of the
person to whom property tax on each parcel is assessed. The
municipal officers shall prepare and file with the Town Clerk a
written certificate indicating those persons to whom the notice
was mailed and at what addresses, when it was mailed, by
whom it was mailed and from what location it was mailed. This
certificate shall constitute prima facie evidence that notice
was sent to those persons named in the certificate. Notice
is not required under this subsection for any type of zoning
ordinance adopted under the laws governing growth
management contained in Chapter 187, Subchapter II of 30-A
M.R.S.A., as amended, or the laws governing shoreland zoning
contained in Title 38, Chapter 3, Subchapter I, Article 2-B, as
amended.30
(b)
(3)
Following a hearing conducted pursuant to the preceding subsection,
the Planning Board shall, by majority vote, make a recommendation as
to whether the proposed amendment ought to be adopted or ought not
to be adopted. Such recommendation shall be printed on the warrant.
D.
If the Planning Board recommends a proposed amendment, such
amendment may be adopted by a majority vote at a duly constituted
Town Meeting. If the Planning Board does not recommend a proposed
amendment, such amendment may be adopted only by a two-thirds
majority vote at a duly constituted Town Meeting.
E.
Copies of amendments to this chapter related to shoreland regulation,
attested and signed by the Town Clerk, shall be submitted to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection following
adoption by the Town Meeting and shall not be effective unless
approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on any
amendment within 45 days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the
amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted to the Town within the forty-five-day period shall be
F.
30.Editor's Note: See 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4312 et seq. and 38 M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq., respectively.
§ 125-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-9
109:306
§ 125-10. Availability. [Added 11-5-1991]
A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall
be accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available
to the public at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of
availability shall be posted at such locations as notices of public meetings
are typically posted.
governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is
approved by the Commissioner.
§ 125-9 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-10
109:307

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
§ 125-11. Policy statements for establishing districts.
It is the policy of the Town of Bar Harbor to guide public and private
land use decisions in accordance with state law and the wishes of the
citizens of Bar Harbor as set forth in the Bar Harbor Comprehensive Plan,
to preserve, enhance and protect the character of the Town, the social
way of life desired for the next 20 years and the cultural, historic and
natural resources of Bar Harbor. To implement this policy, the Town of Bar
Harbor is hereby divided into districts of such number and character as
are necessary to achieve compatibility of uses within each district. Each
district is intended to preserve the character of existing neighborhoods and
developments under construction at the time of the adoption of this chapter
in order to prevent these neighborhoods from becoming nonconforming
under the terms of this chapter. It is also intended to provide for limited
development of existing neighborhoods consistent with their zoning and
character at the time of enactment of this chapter. Such neighborhoods are
relatively uniform in character and stable. The regulations permit future
development consistent with the existing character. Areas identified as
having a stable and fixed character will be allowed to continue to exist
and develop under the general regulations governing their design and
construction or the actual plot plans previously approved. The general
classifications of districts shall be as follows:
Residential district. The residential district is intended to provide an
area that restricts intensive uses so that residents may enjoy a measure
of quietness and privacy in their homes.
A.
Corridor district. The corridor district is intended to provide
landscaped transportation linkages between neighborhood districts
and to accommodate part of the future growth in the commercial/
business sector. This district provides regulations which permit
development of a generally suburban character. It provides for
moderate-density residential development and for highway-oriented
commercial, institutional and light industrial uses. Excluded from this
district are uses of higher density or intensity, or major industrial
activities.
B.
Business district. The business district is intended to serve as the
community focal point for cultural, business and service activities. In
general, the district provides for uses of regional importance. This
district is intended to be an area of high-intensity use on which a
full range of public facilities, including water, sewer, schools, police
and fire protection, will be focused. The standards and high densities
prescribed for this district are designed to optimize utilization of inplace
facilities and thus to reduce the fiscal burden of new
infrastructure construction on all citizens of Bar Harbor.
C.
§ 125-11 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-11
109:309
Shoreland general development district. [Amended 11-5-1991;
5-4-1992]
The purpose of the shoreland general development district is to
promote and encourage the maintenance of the established
commercial activities which have traditionally been associated with
the Bar Harbor and Hulls Cove waterfronts. These districts are
designed to accommodate a variety of tourist-oriented and
waterfront recreational opportunities in close proximity to the
downtown and Hulls Cove areas.
(1)
The shoreland general development district includes the following
types of areas:
Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial,
industrial or intensive recreational activities, or a mix of such
activities, including but not limited to the following:
Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other
industrial activities;
[1]
Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade
and service activities, or other commercial activities;
[2]
Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and
activities, such as, but not limited to, amusement parks,
racetracks and fairgrounds.
[3]
(a)
Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive
commercial, industrial or recreational uses.
(b)
(2)
Portions of the shoreland general development district may also
include residential development. However, no area shall be
designated as a shoreland general development district based
solely on residential use.
(3)
In areas adjacent to great ponds classified GPA and adjacent to
rivers flowing to great ponds classified GPA, the designation of an
area as a shoreland general development district shall be based
upon uses existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter. There
shall be no newly established shoreland general development
districts or expansions in area of existing shoreland general
development districts adjacent to great ponds classified GPA or
adjacent to rivers which flow into ponds classified GPA.
(4)
D.
Historic and historic corridor districts. The purpose of the historic
and historic corridor districts is to promote, encourage and assist the
educational, cultural, economic and general welfare and amenity of
Bar Harbor through the preservation and protection of historic sites,
buildings, corridors and neighborhoods through their maintenance as
landmarks in the history and architecture of Bar Harbor, and through
E.
§ 125-11 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-11
109:310
the protection and development of appropriate settings for such
buildings, places and neighborhoods.
Industrial district. The purpose of the industrial district is to provide
land which is conveniently located with respect to transportation
corridors and where municipal services are available and other
conditions are favorable to the development of industry, and which at
the same time is so located as to prevent undesirable conflict with
residential and other types of business uses. Processing,
manufacturing, warehousing and other industrial uses which are not
injurious or noxious by reason of noise, smoke, vibration, gas, fumes,
odor, dust, fire or explosion hazard are typical permitted uses with site
plan approval, but not residential uses.
F.
Resource protection district. The purpose of the resource protection
district is to preserve wetlands, stream corridors and areas subject to
flooding, and other areas in which development would adversely impact
water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic or
natural values, and to provide a minimum setback from these
significant natural areas. This district shall include the following areas
when they occur within the limits of the shoreland zone, exclusive of
the stream protection district, except that areas which are currently
developed and areas which meet the criteria for the shoreland general
development district need not be included within the resource
protection district: [Amended 11-5-1991]
Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands, salt marshes and salt meadows, and wetlands
associated with great ponds and rivers, which are rated "moderate"
or "high" value waterfowl and wading bird habitats, including
nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife that are depicted on a geographic
information system (GIS) data layer maintained by either the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the Department as
of May 1, 2006. For the purposes of this subsection, "wetlands
associated with great ponds and rivers" shall mean areas
characterized by nonforested wetland vegetation and hydric soils
that are contiguous with a great pond or river and have surface
elevation at or below the water level of the great pond or river
during the period of normal high water. Wetlands associated with
great ponds or rivers are considered to be part of that great pond
or river. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(1)
Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed
great ponds along rivers, defined by the one-hundred-year
floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these,
by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils. This district shall
also include one-hundred-year floodplains adjacent to tidal waters
(2)
G.
§ 125-11 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-11
109:311
as shown on FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps.
Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of
20% or greater.
(3)
Areas of two or more contiguous acres supporting wetland
vegetation and hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater or
coastal wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected
to a water body during the period of normal high water. (Inasmuch
as these types of areas are not adequately mapped by any federal,
state or local agency, it may not be possible to identify them prior to
the detailed evaluation of a specific site.) [Amended 11-4-2008]
(4)
Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion,
undercutting, or river bed movement, and lands adjacent to tidal
waters which are subject to severe erosion or mass movement,
such as steep coastal bluffs.
(5)
Rural district. The rural district is intended to preserve areas which
are presently rural or agricultural in character and use. This district
is designed to accommodate a variety of residential development
opportunities for those who desire low-density living and are willing to
live in more remote locations and to assume the costs of providing many
of their own services and amenities.
H.
Shoreland limited residential district. The shoreland limited residential
district includes those areas suitable for residential and recreational
development. It includes areas other than those in the resource
protection or stream protection districts and areas which are used less
intensively than those in the shoreland general development district.
[Amended 11-5-1991]
I.
District for scientific research and eleemosynary purposes. The purpose
of this district is to promote and encourage the continuation of
scientific research and development activities on land owned by
eleemosynary and charitable entities and/or used solely for nonprofit
purposes, or, if used for profit purposes, then said profits are in turn
devoted to eleemosynary and charitable purposes. This district provides
for a diversity of uses associated with comprehensive scientific and
educational institutions and/or activities.
J.
Stream protection district. The stream protection district includes all
land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water
line of a stream, exclusive of those areas within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water line of a great pond or river or within
250 feet, horizontal distance, or the upland edge of a freshwater or
coastal wetland. Where a stream and its associated shoreland area are
located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies
or wetlands, that land area shall be regulated under the terms of the
K.
§ 125-11 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-11
109:312
§ 125-12. Neighborhood districts. [Amended 11-5-1991; 5-1-1995;
11-4-2003; 5-3-2004; 6-8-2010; 11-2-2010; 11-8-2011]
For the purposes of this chapter, all land and water areas in the Town of Bar
Harbor are hereby divided into the following districts:
Bar Harbor Gateway District
Downtown Village I
Downtown Village II
Downtown Residential
Educational Institution
Emery
Hulls Cove Business
Hulls Cove Residential Corridor
Hulls Cove Rural
Indian Point Residential
Indian Point Rural
Industrial
Ireson Hill Corridor
Ireson Hill Residential
Marine Research
McFarland Hill Residential
McFarland Hill Rural
Mount Desert Street Corridor District
Otter Creek
Resource Protection
Salisbury Cove Corridor
Salisbury Cove Residential
Salisbury Cove Rural
Salisbury Cove Village
Schooner Head
Scientific Research for Eleemosynary Purposes
Shoreland General Development I
Shoreland General Development II
Shoreland General Development III
Shoreland General Development IV
shoreland district associated with that water body or wetland. [Added
11-5-1991; amended 11-4-2008]
§ 125-11 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-12
109:313
Shoreland Limited Residential
Stream Protection
Town Hill Business
Town Hill Residential Corridor
Town Hill Residential
Town Hill Rural
Village Historic
Village Residential
Village Transitional
§ 125-13. Official Neighborhood Districts Map.
Neighborhood districts established by this chapter are bounded and defined
as shown on the Official Neighborhood Districts Map of Bar Harbor, which,
together with all explanatory materials contained thereon, is hereby made a
part of this chapter. The official map shall be signed by the Town Clerk and
Chairman of the Planning Board at the time of adoption or amendment of
this chapter, certifying the date of such adoption or amendment, and shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 125-14. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to boundary lines of districts as shown on the
Official Neighborhood Districts Map of Bar Harbor the following rules shall
apply:
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of
streets, highways, public utilities or rights-of-way shall be construed as
following such center lines.
A.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following established lot lines or
Town boundaries shall be construed as following such lines.
B.
Boundaries indicated as approximately following shorelines of any
water body or wetland shall be construed as following the normal
high-water line or upland edge of a wetland. [Amended 11-3-2009;
6-8-2010]
C.
31Boundaries indicated as being parallel to or extensions of features
listed above shall be so construed.
D.
Distances not specifically indicated on the official map shall be
determined by the scale of the map.
E.
31.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, which provided for interpretation of boundaries
indicated as approximately following the center lines of continuously flowing
watercourses, was repealed 6-8-2010. Said ordinance also redesignated former
Subsections E through G as Subsections D through F, respectively.
§ 125-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-14
109:314
§ 125-15. Division of lots by district boundaries.
When a lot is transected by a district boundary, the regulations set forth
in this chapter applying to the larger part by area of such lot may also
be deemed to govern in the smaller part beyond such district boundary,
but only to an extent of not more than 50 linear feet in depth beyond said
district boundary, except that no such encroachment shall be permitted into
a shoreland district or a resource protection district.
Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the official map, or in other
circumstances where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of
a boundary, the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries;
provided, however, that in all cases the determination of any shoreline
setback shall be determined by actual site measurement. [Amended
11-5-1991; 11-3-2009]
F.
§ 125-14 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-15
109:315

ARTICLE III
Land Use Activities and Standards
[Amended 5-7-1991; 11-5-1991]
§ 125-16. General. [Amended 5-4-1992; 6-12-2018]
All land use activities, regardless of whether they require a permit from
the Code Enforcement Officer or site plan approval, shall comply with all
applicable standards set forth in this article and in §§ 125-67, 125-68 and
125-69. All distances and heights in this article, unless otherwise stated, are
in feet.32
§ 125-17. Bar Harbor Gateway. [Amended 11-2-2010; 6-14-2011;
6-9-2015; 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
32.Editor's Note: At the Town's request, the editor has added “[feet]” to the text of Art. III as
appropriate for the convenience of users of the Code.
§ 125-16 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-17
109:317
Purpose. The Bar Harbor Gateway District largely consists of a mix of
historically significant properties, various transient accommodations,
and commercial uses, including a ferry terminal. It is situated along
Route 3 and represents the primary point of access for visitors to
downtown Bar Harbor and Acadia National Park. New development,
redevelopment, and infill development shall respect the following
standards to assure that the design and use of properties within this
district are compatible to nearby properties.
A.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet with sewer; 150
feet elsewhere.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 50 feet on Route 3; 25 feet elsewhere.
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 feet.
Minimum area per family: 5,000 square feet with sewers; 10,000
square feet without sewers.
(8)
B.
Allowed uses.
Principal uses allowed by building permit or a change of use permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer: artist studio; child care family;
gallery; government facility; home occupation (NOTE: Home
occupations in properties with lot frontage or access on Route 3
shall be required to obtain minor site plan approval.); municipal
facility; municipal school; public or private park with minimal
structural development; vacation rentals; single-family dwelling
and two-family dwelling.
(1)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(2)
C.
Uses allowed by site plan.
The following uses shall be permitted by site plan review in any
part of this district: bank; bed-and-breakfast I; bed-and-breakfast
II; bed-and-breakfast III; bed-and-breakfast IV; bed-and-breakfast
V; child-care center; commercial boat yard; commercial fish pier;
ferry terminal; farmers' market; hotel; marina; multifamily dwelling
(1)
D.
§ 125-17 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-17
109:318
I; multifamily dwelling II; motel; nursing or convalescent homes
or congregate housing; parking lot; parking deck; parking garage,
also subject to Design Review Board certificate of appropriateness;
private compulsory school; professional office building; restaurant;
retail; road construction; services; take-out restaurant; wind
turbines, and wireless communication facilities.
(2) Uses allowed by conditional use permit: public utility facility.
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a building permit, provided that they
comply with all provisions of Chapter 125: activities necessary
for managing/protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less
than 16 cubic yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring
structures; public utility installation/essential services.
(1)
Activities allowed by building permit and requiring approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; filling/
earthmoving activity of 16 cubic yards or more.
(2)
E.
Other requirements.
Parking lots shall require buffering and vegetative screening if
visible from Route 3. [Also see parking requirements found in
§ 125-67B(4), Off-street parking.]
(1)
Lots with road frontage on Route 3 may be required to provide
streetscape improvements, such as trees, sidewalks, bike paths,
benches, and/or other related improvements as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board in the case of major site plan,
or the Planning Department in the case of a minor site plan. Such
improvements shall be exempt from setback requirements.
(2)
F.
§ 125-17 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-18
109:319
§ 125-18. Village Historic. [Amended 6-13-2006; 6-8-2010;
11-2-2010; 6-14-2011; 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
Purpose. The Village Historic District consists of mostly single-family
homes and historically significant estates. New development,
redevelopment, and infill development shall respect and reflect the
following standards to assure that the design and use of properties
within this district are compatible with any nearby properties.
A.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet with sewers; 150
feet without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 30 feet.
B.
§ 125-18 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-18
109:320
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(8) Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet.
Allowed uses.
Principal uses allowed by building permit or a change of use permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer: home occupation; public or
private park with minimal structural development; vacation
rentals; single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling;
noncommercial greenhouse, and government facility/use.
In addition to the above uses, the following uses are allowed
for properties with lot frontage or access to the Baymeath
Road, Lookout Point Road, and the Syndicate Road only:
[1] Agricultural homesteads.
(a)
(1)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(2)
C.
Uses allowed by site plan.
Except for lots with road frontage on or access to Harbor Lane, and
only so long as the use is located in a building constructed before
June 8, 2010, the following uses shall be permitted in the district:
bed-and-breakfast I; eleemosynary; private club.
(1)
In addition to the above-noted uses, the following uses shall be
permitted for properties with road frontage or access to the
Baymeath Road, Lookout Point Road, and the Syndicate Road only:
municipal schools, museums, multifamily I, two-family dwellings.
(2)
In addition to the above-noted uses, road construction shall be
permitted anywhere in the district.
(3)
D.
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a building permit: activities necessary
for managing/protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less
than 16 cubic yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring
structures; public utility installation and essential services.
(1)
E.
§ 125-18 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-18
109:321
Activities allowed by building permit and which require approval
of the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; filling/
earthmoving activity of 16 cubic yards or more.
(2)
Other requirements.
All new construction and/or changes to facades and signs shall
require Design Review Board approval if visible from a public
way. Single-family homes are exempt from this provision unless
otherwise included in Appendix A or B of this chapter.
(1)
The Planning Board shall ensure that parking for bed-and-breakfast
I shall be shielded from the view of neighboring properties located
to the side and rear of the property where the bed-and-breakfast
is located. Shielding shall consist of vegetative screening. [Also see
parking requirements found in § 125-67B(4).]
(2)
Accessory structures shall be located in the side and rear yard of
the property.
(3)
F.
§ 125-18 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-19
109:322
§ 125-19. Mount Desert Street Corridor District. [Added 11-2-2010;
33 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
Purpose. The Mount Desert Street Corridor District is part of an
important historic entry corridor into the village business district.
Existing developments of bed-and-breakfasts should be encouraged to
remain, whereas property that is redeveloped and/or infill development
should be reviewed carefully to retain the historic character of this
corridor.
A.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet.
B.
33.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 125-19, Bar Harbor Historic Corridor,
as amended.
§ 125-19 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-19
109:323
(3) Minimum front setback: 25 feet.
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum side and rear setback for accessory structures: 10 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
(8) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(9) Minimum area per family: 10,000 square feet.
Allowed uses.
Principal uses allowed with a building permit or a change of use
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer: art gallery, home
occupation, museum, place of worship; public or private park,
single- or two-family dwelling; vacation rentals.
(1)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(2)
C.
Uses allowed by site plan.
Principal uses allowed by minor site plan approval: wind turbines,
offices, all types of schools, bed-and-breakfast I and II.
(1)
Principal uses allowed by major site plan: convalescent home;
multifamily I and II; theaters.
(2)
Principal uses allowed by conditional use permit: retail;
restaurants; bed-and-breakfast III and IV.
(3)
D.
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a permit, provided that the activity
complies with all provisions of Chapter 125: activities necessary
for managing/protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less
than 16 cubic yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring
structures; public utility installations/essential services.
(1)
Activities allowed by a building permit and which require approval
of the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; filling/
earthmoving activity of 16 cubic yards or more.
(2)
E.
Other requirements.
Design Review Board approval shall be required for all changes to
existing or new facades if the subject property is listed in Appendix
(1)
F.
§ 125-19 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-19
109:324
§ 125-20. Village Residential. [Added 6-8-2010; amended
11-2-2010; 34 6-14-2011; 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
A or B of this chapter. [Also see parking requirements found in
§ 125-67B(4).]
Design Review Board approval shall be required for all signage as
stipulated in § 125-67BB.
(2)
Purpose. The Village Residential District encompasses the wellestablished
residential neighborhoods that surround the traditional
downtown area of Bar Harbor. It consists mostly of single-family homes,
but also includes condominium, multifamily, and nonintensive
commercial uses. New development, redevelopment, and infill
A.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 125-20, Bar Harbor Residential, as
amended, and renumbered former § 125-20.1, Village Residential, as § 125-20.
§ 125-19 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-20
109:325
development shall respect and reflect standards to assure the uses are
compatible with any nearby properties.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet.
(3) Minimum front setback for structures: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum side setback for principal structures: 10 feet.
Minimum side setback for accessory, nonresidential structures: five
feet.
(5)
(6) Minimum rear setback for principal structures: 10 feet.
Minimum rear setback for accessory, nonresidential structures: five
feet.
(7)
(8) Maximum lot coverage: 50% with sewers; 25% without sewers.
(9) Maximum height: 40 feet.
Minimum area per family: 10,000 square feet with sewers; or
20,000 square feet without sewers.
(10)
B.
Allowed uses.
Principal uses allowed by building permit or a change of use permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer: government facility with road
frontage on Route 3 or Eagle Lake Road; home occupation;
municipal school; public or private park; single- and two-family
dwelling; roadside stand; vacation rentals.
(1)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal use.
(2)
C.
Uses allowed by site plan.
The following uses shall be permitted by site plan review in any
part of this district: multifamily I; nursing/convalescent home in a
building constructed before June 8, 2010, road construction.
(1)
Uses allowed by conditional use permit for properties with road
frontage on or access to Route 3 or 233: all bed-and-breakfast
designations; art gallery; cabins; farmers' market; museum; private
school; professional office building; take-out restaurant;
undertaking establishment; veterinary clinic or hospital.
(2)
D.
§ 125-20 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-20
109:326
Uses allowed by planned use development.
(1) Multifamily II.
E.
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a permit, provided that it complies with
all provisions of Chapter 125: activities necessary for managing/
protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less than 16 cubic
yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring structures; public
utility installation.
(1)
Activities allowed by building permit and requiring approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; filling/
earthmoving activity of 16 cubic yards or more; noncommercial
greenhouse; and wind turbine.
(2)
F.
Other requirements:
Accessory structures shall be located in the side and rear yard of
the property.
(1)
The Planning Board shall ensure that parking lots are shielded
from the view of neighboring properties by requiring parking lots
to provide buffering and vegetative screening. [Also see parking
requirements found in § 125-67B(4).]
(2)
G.
§ 125-20 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-21
109:327
§ 125-21. Downtown Village I. [Amended 11-4-2003; 5-2-2005;
6-8-2010; 35 11-5-2013; 6-9-2015; 6-14-2016; 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
Purpose. The Downtown Village I District is the primary growth area
for commercial development and is part of the defining character of
the central business district. It is also the center for social and cultural
activity for both the visitor and the resident. Mixed use developments
that encourage commercial activity at the street level are desired.
New development, redevelopment and infill development shall respect
A.
35.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall not apply to any proceedings or
applications approved prior to the effective date of 7-8-2010, or to any proceedings or
applications deemed to be "pending" within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 as of
7-8-2010 It also provided that it shall not apply to any application for construction or
development-related permits for any project that received final subdivision and/or site
plan approval from the Town prior to 7-8-2010 or for which an application or proceeding
for subdivision and/or site plan approval was deemed "pending" within the meaning of 1
M.R.S.A. § 302 as of 7-8-2010.
§ 125-21 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-21
109:328
and reflect standards to assure that the uses are compatible with any
nearby properties.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 1,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 20 feet.
(3) Minimum front setback: zero feet.
Minimum side setback: 25 feet on any side yard that abuts a
residential or historic district; zero feet elsewhere.
(4)
Minimum rear setback: 25 feet on any rear yard that abuts a
residential or historic district; zero feet elsewhere.
(5)
(6) Maximum allowable lot coverage: 100%, exclusive of setbacks.
Maximum height: 45 feet and within 15 feet of the front property
line, the building height shall be no more than 35 feet. Beyond
15 feet of the front property line, the building may extend to a
maximum height of 45 feet. The building shall contain no more
than three stories above mean original grade unless the following
conditions are met, in which case the building may contain a fourth
story above mean original grade:
An amount of space equal to the square footage of the floor
area that extends above 35 feet is dedicated somewhere in the
building for dwelling units only;
(a)
These dedicated dwelling units shall be rented for periods of
no fewer than 90 consecutive days; and
(b)
The building must provide a minimum number of dwelling
units (See Table 3.36) which qualify as affordable housing as
defined or otherwise provided.
(c)
(7)
(8) Minimum lot area per family: 750 square feet.
B.
Allowed uses:
Uses allowed by a building permit or a change of use permit
with the Code Enforcement Officer: all retail; public information,
municipal and government uses; restaurants and bars; theaters;
galleries; services, professional offices; vacation rentals; all bedand-
breakfasts; food-processing establishment; theaters; singleand
two-family dwelling units; laundry and dry cleaning; artist
studio, eleemosynary institution, place of worship; farmers market;
home occupation.
(1)
C.
36.Editor's Note: Table 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 125-21 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-21
109:329
Uses allowed by site plan review: hotel; motel; conference centers;
multifamily dwelling I and II; all types of child-care facilities, all
types of schools; medical and dental clinics; banks; automobile
service stations; hospitals; parking lot; parking deck; road
construction; automobile sales lot; automobile repair garage;
retirement community.
(2)
(3) Uses allowed by conditional use permit: public utility facility.
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(4)
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a permit, provided that they comply
with all provisions of the Chapter 125: activities necessary for
managing/protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less than
10 cubic yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring
structures; public utility installation/essential services.
(1)
Activities allowed by building permit and requiring approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; filling/
earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more.
(2)
D.
Other requirements.
All changes to facades and signs require Design Review Board
approval.
(1)
Parking requirements. [Also see parking requirements found in
§ 125-67B(4).]
All transient accommodations shall provide one space per
room.
(a)
Schools as the principal use on a lot shall provide one parking
space per classroom plus one space for every four employees.
(b)
(c) Other uses shall not be required to provide parking.
(2)
E.
§ 125-21 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-21.1
109:330
§ 125-21.1. Downtown Village II. [Added 11-4-2003; amended
5-2-2005; 6-8-2010; 37 6-9-2015; 6-14-2016; 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
Purpose. The purpose of the Downtown Village II Zone is to provide a
commercial and visual transition between the core business district to
the scenic byway of Route 3.
A.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 1,000 square feet.
B.
37.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall not apply to any proceedings or
applications approved prior to the effective date of 7-8-2010, or to any proceedings or
applications deemed to be “pending” within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 as of
7-8-2010 It also provided that it shall not apply to any application for construction or
development-related permits for any project that received final subdivision and/or site
plan approval from the Town prior to 7-8-2010 or for which an application or proceeding
for subdivision and/or site plan approval was deemed “pending” within the meaning of 1
M.R.S.A. § 302 as of 7-8-2010.
§ 125-21.1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-21.1
109:331
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 20 feet.
Minimum front setback:
(a) Ten feet for buildings up to 30 feet in height.
Twenty feet for buildings over 30 feet and up to 45 feet in
height.
(b)
Ten feet for buildings up to 45 feet in height, provided that the
portion of the building above 30 feet in height meets all three
of the following conditions:
The portion of the building which is above 30 feet in height
shall be set back no fewer than 20 feet from the front
property line;
[1]
The dedicated dwelling units shall be rented for periods of
no fewer than 90 consecutive days; and
[2]
The building must provide a minimum number of
residential units (See Table 3.38) which qualify as
affordable housing as defined or as otherwise provided.
[3]
(c)
(3)
(4) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
Minimum rear setback: 20 feet for buildings on any yard that abuts
a residential district; 10 feet for accessory structures and parking
on any yard that abuts a residential district; five feet elsewhere.
(5)
Maximum lot coverage:
(a) Ninety percent for buildings up to 30 feet in height.
Eighty percent for buildings over 30 feet and up to 35 feet in
height.
(b)
Seventy percent for buildings over 35 feet and up to 45 feet in
height.
(c)
(6)
Maximum height: 45 feet and: within 15 feet of the front property
line, the building height shall be no more than 35 feet. Beyond
15 feet of the front property line, the building may extend to a
maximum height of 45 feet. The building shall contain no more
than three stories above mean original grade unless the following
conditions are met, in which case the building may contain a fourth
story above mean original grade:
An amount of space equal to the square footage of the floor
area that extends above 35 feet is dedicated somewhere in the
building for dwelling units only;
(a)
(7)
38.Editor's Note: Table 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 125-21.1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-21.1
109:332
These dedicated dwelling units shall be rented for periods of
no fewer than 90 consecutive days; and
(b)
The building must provide a minimum number of dwelling
units (See Table 3.39) which qualify as affordable housing as
defined or otherwise provided.
(c)
(8) Minimum lot area per family: 750 square feet.
Allowed uses.
Uses allowed by a building permit or a change of use permit
with the Code Enforcement Officer: all retail, public information;
municipal and government uses; restaurants and bars on lots with
frontage on Cottage Street, Main Street, Mount Desert Street or
West Street; theaters; galleries; artist studios; banks; services,
vacation rentals; theaters; all bed-and-breakfasts; food-processing
establishment; professional office buildings; laundry and dry
cleaning; artist studio; farmers market; single-family dwelling; twofamily
dwelling; home occupation.
(1)
Uses allowed by site plan review: hotel, motel; multifamily dwelling
I and II; parking lot; parking deck; all types of child-care facilities;
all types of schools; hospitals, medical and dental clinics;
automobile service stations; redemption centers; automobile sales
lot; automobile repair garage; retirement community, veterinary
clinic.
(2)
(3) Uses allowed only by conditional use permit: public utility facility.
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(4)
C.
Allowed activities:
Activities allowed without a permit, provided that they comply with
all provisions of Chapter 125: activities necessary for managing/
protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic
yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring structures; public
utility installation.
(1)
Activities allowed by building permit and requiring approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; road
construction (after subdivision approval has been granted); filling/
earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more; essential services.
(2)
D.
E. Other requirements.
39.Editor's Note: Table 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 125-21.1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-21.1
109:333
All changes to facades and signs require Design Review Board
approval.
(1)
Parking requirements. [Also see parking requirements found in
§ 125-67B(4).]
(a) Transient accommodations shall provide one space per room.
Schools as the principal use on a lot shall provide one parking
space per classroom plus one space for every four employees.
(b)
Professional offices, medical clinics and hospitals shall provide
parking for the number of employees on the largest shift plus
adequate parking for visitors and patients as reviewed by the
Planning Board.
(c)
(d) Other uses shall not be required to provide parking.
(2)
§ 125-21.1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-21.2
109:334
§ 125-21.2. Downtown Village Transitional. [Added 6-8-2010; 40
amended 6-14-2016; 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
Purpose. The Downtown Transitional Zone is to govern areas that are
adjacent to Downtown Village Districts to give a transition from the
commercial cores to the residential neighborhoods.
A.
Dimensional standards:
(1) Minimum lot size: 2,500 square feet.
B.
40.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall not apply to any proceedings or
applications approved prior to the effective date of 7-8-2010, or to any proceedings or
applications deemed to be "pending" within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 as of
7-8-2010 It also provided that it shall not apply to any application for construction or
development-related permits for any project that received final subdivision and/or site
plan approval from the Town prior to 7-8-2010 or for which an application or proceeding
for subdivision and/or site plan approval was deemed "pending" within the meaning of 1
M.R.S.A. § 302 as of 7-8-2010.
§ 125-21.2 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-21.2
109:335
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 30 feet.
(3) Minimum front side and rear setback: five feet.
(4) Maximum allowable lot coverage: 80% exclusive of setbacks.
(5) Maximum height: 35 feet and three habitable floors of space.
Allowed uses.
Uses allowed by a building permit or a change of use permit
with the Code Enforcement Officer: all retail; public information;
municipal uses; galleries; services; professional office buildings;
vacation rentals; bed-and-breakfast I, II and III; single- and twofamily
residential; family child-care; food-processing
establishments; laundry and dry cleaning; artist studio; farmers
market; home occupation.
(1)
Uses allowed by site plan review: multifamily dwelling I and II;
parking lot; all other types of child-care facilities; medical clinics;
automobile sales lot; automobile repair garage; retirement
community.
(2)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(3)
C.
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a permit, provided that they comply with
all provisions of Chapter 125: activities necessary for managing/
protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic
yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring structures; public
utility installation.
(1)
Activities allowed by building permit and requiring approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; road
construction; filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more.
(2)
D.
Other requirements.
All changes to facades and signs require Design Review Board
approval.
(1)
Parking requirements [Also see parking requirements found in
§ 125-67B(4).]:
(a) Transient accommodations shall provide one space per room.
Schools as the principal use on a lot shall provide one parking
space per classroom plus one space for every four employees.
(b)
(2)
E.
§ 125-21.2 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-21.2
109:336
§ 125-22. Downtown Residential. [Amended 6-13-2006; 41
6-12-2018]
Professional offices, medical clinics shall provide parking for
the number of employees on the largest shift plus adequate
parking for visitors and patients as reviewed by the Planning
Board.
(c)
(d) Other uses shall not be required to provide parking.
A. Purpose.
B. Dimensional standards.
41.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-21.2 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-22
109:337
(1) Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 50 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 15 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: five [feet].
Minimum side setback for accessory, nonresidential structures: five
[feet].
(5)
(6) Minimum rear setback for principal structures: 15 [feet].
Minimum rear setback for accessory, nonresidential structures: five
[feet].
(7)
(8) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(9) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(10)Minimum area per family: 2,500 square feet.
Maximum floor area ratio: the greater of either the median or the
mean value of the FARs for all of the lots within the district within
300 feet of the subject property.
(11)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Child-care center
Hospital
Multifamily dwelling I
Parking garage and parking lot
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
D.
§ 125-22 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-22
109:338
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Medical clinic
Museum
Nursing/convalescent home or congregate housing
Professional office building
(4)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees:
Home occupation
(5)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(6)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
E.
§ 125-22 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-22
109:339
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Undertaking establishment
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Medical clinic
Museum
Nursing/convalescent home or congregate housing
Professional office building
(4)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
F.
§ 125-22 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-22
109:340
§ 125-23. Emery District. [Amended 6-13-2006; 42 6-12-2018]
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
B.
42.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-22 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-23
109:341
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 10%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Commercial boatyard
Commercial stable
Kennel, boarding
Municipal school
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
D.
§ 125-23 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-23
109:342
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(2)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Kennel
Noncommercial greenhouse
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(2)
E.
§ 125-23 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-23
109:343
§ 125-24. Hulls Cove Business. [Amended 5-1-1995; 6-13-2006; 43
6-12-2018]
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(3)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
43.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-23 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-24
109:344
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 150
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 15 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: five [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 15 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 75%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 5,000 square feet with sewers; 20,000
square feet without sewers.
(8)
B.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Bank
Commercial boatyard
Commercial fish pier
Commercial stable
Ferry terminal
Hospital
Light manufacturing/assembly plant
Marina
Multifamily dwelling I
D.
§ 125-24 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-24
109:345
Multifamily dwelling II
Municipal school
Parking lot
Recreational boating facility
Research facility
Research production facility
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Transient accommodations (TA-2)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
Lumberyard or sawmill
(2)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Commercial structure
Gift shops
Grocery stores
(5)
§ 125-24 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-24
109:346
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishment
Liquor store
Medical clinic
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial stable
Private school
Professional office building
Restaurant
Restaurant, takeout
Retail business establishment not otherwise listed
Seafood market
Undertaking establishment
Upholstery shop
Veterinary clinic
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees:
Home occupation
(6)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial art gallery or pottery barn
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
E.
§ 125-24 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-24
109:347
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
Lumberyard or sawmill
(2)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Commercial structure
Gift shops
Grocery stores
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishment
Liquor store
Medical clinic
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial stable
Private school
Professional office building
Restaurant
Restaurant, takeout
Retail business establishment not otherwise listed
(5)
§ 125-24 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-24
109:348
§ 125-25. (Reserved)44
Seafood market
Undertaking establishment
Upholstery shop
Veterinary clinic
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(6)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(7)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 125-25, Hulls Cove Historic, was repealed 11-2-2010.
§ 125-24 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-26
109:349
§ 125-26. Hulls Cove Residential Corridor. [Amended 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 200
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
B.
§ 125-26 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-26
109:350
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 10,000 square feet with sewers; 20,000
square feet without sewers.
(8)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Campground
Cemetery
Multifamily dwelling I
Multifamily dwelling II
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Municipal facility and grounds
(2)
D.
§ 125-26 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-26
109:351
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Municipal facility and grounds
(2)
E.
§ 125-26 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-26
109:352
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-26 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-27
109:353
§ 125-27. Hulls Cove Rural. [Amended 5-3-1999; 6-13-2006; 45
6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
B.
45.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-27 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-27
109:354
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet; 10,000 square feet
with sewers and 20,000 square feet without sewers for a
retirement community.
(8)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Campground
Cemetery
Mineral extraction
Mineral extraction and processing
Mobile home park
Municipal school
Place of worship
Retirement community
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
(1)
D.
§ 125-27 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-27
109:355
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Commercial stable
Driveway construction
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Lumberyard or sawmill
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
E.
§ 125-27 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-27
109:356
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Veterinary clinic
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-27 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-28
109:357
§ 125-28. Indian Point Residential. [Amended 6-13-2006; 46
6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
B.
46.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-28 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-28
109:358
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses, not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Cemetery
Road construction
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
D.
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
E.
§ 125-28 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-28
109:359
Accessory dwelling
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-28 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-29
109:360
§ 125-29. Indian Point Rural. [Amended 6-13-2006; 47 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
B.
47.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-29 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-29
109:361
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Cemetery
Road construction
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Lumberyard or sawmill
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
D.
§ 125-29 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-29
109:362
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Kennel
Noncommercial greenhouse
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Lumberyard or sawmill
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structures
(3)
E.
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-29 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-30
109:363
§ 125-30. Industrial. [Amended 5-3-1999; 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 200
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 100 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 40 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
B.
§ 125-30 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-30
109:364
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 10,000 square feet with sewers; 20,000
square feet without sewers.
(8)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses, not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Automobile repair garage
Bulk oil and fuel tank storage
Commercial boatyard
Food processing and freezing (excluding slaughterhouse)
Food processing and freezing
Light manufacturing/assembly plant
Mineral extraction
Mineral extraction and processing
Newspaper or printing facility
Other processing and manufacturing facility
Research facility
Research production facility
Retirement community
Road construction
Terminal yard and trucking facility
Transportation facility
Upholstery shop
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
D.
§ 125-30 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-30
109:365
Warehousing or storage facility
Wholesale business establishment
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Lumberyard or sawmill
Municipal facility and grounds
(2)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishment
Professional office building
Repair services (other than auto)
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
CEO permit required for uses or structures with total developed
area not exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Lumberyard or sawmill
Municipal facility and grounds
(1)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
(2)
E.
§ 125-30 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-30
109:366
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
Retirement community. Single-family dwelling and two-family
dwelling permitted only as part of a retirement community on the
south side of Crooked Road:
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Laundry or dry-cleaning establishment
Professional office building
Repair services (other than auto)
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
Activity or structure requires conditional use permit. Activity or
structure requires conditional use permit before it may be commenced,
built, enlarged, or modified:
Public utility facility
G.
§ 125-30 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-31
109:367
§ 125-31. Ireson Hill Corridor. [Amended 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 200
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
B.
§ 125-31 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-31
109:368
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 5,000 square feet with sewers; 10,000
square feet without sewers.
(8)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Bank
Campground
Mineral extraction
Mineral extraction and processing
Multifamily dwelling I
Multifamily dwelling II
Municipal school
Parking lot
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Transient accommodations (TA-2)
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Transient accommodations (TA-5)
Transient accommodations (TA-6)
Transient accommodations (TA-7)
Transient accommodations (TA-8)
D.
§ 125-31 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-31
109:369
Warehousing or storage facility
Wholesale business establishment
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
Municipal facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Liquor store
Medical clinic
Professional office building
Restaurant
Restaurant, takeout
Retail business establishment not otherwise listed
(4)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(5)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(6)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
E.
§ 125-31 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-31
109:370
Accessory dwelling
Commercial art gallery or pottery barn
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Grocery stores
Noncommercial greenhouse
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
Municipal facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Liquor store
Medical clinic
Professional office building
Restaurant
Restaurant, takeout
Retail business establishment not otherwise listed
(4)
§ 125-31 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-31
109:371
§ 125-32. Ireson Hill Residential. [Amended 6-12-2018]
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
A. Purpose.
B. Dimensional standards.
§ 125-31 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-32
109:372
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot widths: 100 [feet] with sewers; 200
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback with sewers: 25 [feet].
(4) Minimum front setback without sewers: 50 [feet].
Minimum side setback for principal structures with sewers: 10
[feet].
(5)
Minimum side setback for accessory, nonresidential structures with
sewers: five [feet].
(6)
Minimum side setback for principal structures without sewers: 25
[feet].
(7)
Minimum side setback for accessory, nonresidential structures
without sewers: five [feet].
(8)
Minimum rear setback for principal structures with sewers: 15
[feet].
(9)
Minimum rear setback for accessory, nonresidential structures
with sewers: five [feet].
(10)
Minimum rear setback for principal structures without sewers: 25
[feet].
(11)
Minimum rear setback for accessory, nonresidential structures
without sewers: five [feet].
(12)
(13)Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(14)Maximum height: 40 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 10,000 square feet with sewers; 20,000
square feet without sewers.
(15)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
§ 125-32 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-32
109:373
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Cemetery
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Multifamily dwelling I
Municipal school
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board
approval required for uses or structures with total developed area
of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Commercial structure
(5)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(6)
D.
§ 125-32 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-32
109:374
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(7)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
(5)
E.
§ 125-32 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-32
109:375
§ 125-33. McFarland Hill Residential. [Amended 6-12-2018]
Commercial structure
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(6)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
A. Purpose.
§ 125-32 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-33
109:376
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 10%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 80,000 square feet.
B.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Cemetery
Commercial stable
Municipal school
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Veterinary clinic
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
(1)
D.
§ 125-33 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-33
109:377
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Medical clinic
Nursing/convalescent home or congregate housing
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
E.
§ 125-33 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-33
109:378
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Medical clinic
Nursing/convalescent home or congregate housing
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
Activity or structure requires conditional use permit. Activity or
structure requires conditional use permit before it may be commenced,
built, enlarged, or modified:
Only if constructed prior to January 1, 2015:
Public utility facility
(1)
G.
§ 125-33 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-34
109:379
§ 125-34. McFarland Hill Rural. [Amended 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 80,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
B.
§ 125-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-34
109:380
(8) Minimum area per family: 80,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Cemetery
Commercial stable
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Municipal school
Place of worship
Road construction
Veterinary clinic
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
(3)
D.
§ 125-34 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-34
109:381
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Kennel
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
E.
§ 125-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-34
109:382
§ 125-35. Otter Creek. [Amended 6-12-2018]
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-34 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-35
109:383
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 10%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 20,000 square feet.
B.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Cemetery
Commercial stable
Municipal facility and grounds
Place of worship
Road construction
Veterinary clinic
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
(1)
D.
§ 125-35 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-35
109:384
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required.
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
E.
§ 125-35 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-35
109:385
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-35 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-36
109:386
§ 125-36. Resource Protection. [Amended 6-13-2006;48 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet, or same as nearest adjacent
upland district, whichever is greater.
(1)
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum shore frontage: 200 [feet].
(4) Minimum front setback: 100 [feet].
B.
48.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-36 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-36
109:387
(5) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(8) Maximum height: 35 [feet].
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board approval required for
uses or structures with total developed area of more than 2,000
square feet:
Small, nonresidential facility for educational, scientific or nature
interpretation purposes
(1)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Except as provided in § 125-68B(8)(g):
Driveway construction
Road construction
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
D.
§ 125-36 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-36
109:388
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Agriculture, avocational
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Small, nonresidential facility for educational, scientific or nature
interpretation purposes
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
E.
§ 125-36 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-37
109:389
§ 125-37. Salisbury Cove Corridor. [Amended 11-3-1992;
6-13-2006;49 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
Minimum front setback: 150 [feet] for lots with frontage on Route
3; 75 [feet] elsewhere.
(3)
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
B.
49.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-37 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-37
109:390
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 20,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Cemetery
Kennel, boarding
Multifamily dwelling I
Multifamily dwelling II
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Transient accommodations (TA-2)
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Transient accommodations (TA-5)
Transient accommodations (TA-6)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
(1)
D.
§ 125-37 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-37
109:391
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(2)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Commercial structure
Museum
Private school
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Kennel
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
E.
§ 125-37 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-37
109:392
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(2)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Commercial structure
Museum
Private school
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-37 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-38
109:393
§ 125-38. Salisbury Cove Residential. [Amended 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
B.
§ 125-38 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-38
109:394
(8) Minimum area per family: 20,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing/protecting land
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Kennel, boarding
Multifamily dwelling I
Road construction
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required.
Wind turbine
(5)
D.
§ 125-38 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-38
109:395
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Kennel
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
E.
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-38 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-39
109:396
§ 125-39. Salisbury Cove Rural. [Amended 6-13-2006;50 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
B.
50.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-39 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-39
109:397
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Campground
Cemetery
Commercial boatyard
Commercial stable
Place of worship
Road construction
Veterinary clinic
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
D.
§ 125-39 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-39
109:398
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Kennel
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
E.
§ 125-39 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-39
109:399
§ 125-40. Salisbury Cove Village. [Amended 11-8-2011; 6-12-2018]
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
A. Purpose.
B. Dimensional standards.
§ 125-39 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-40
109:400
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 200
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 35%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 10,000 square feet with sewers; 20,000
square feet without sewers.
(8)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Marina
Multifamily dwelling I
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Transient accommodations (TA-2)
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Transient accommodations (TA-5)
D.
§ 125-40 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-40
109:401
Transient accommodations (TA-6)
Transient accommodations (TA-7)
Transient accommodations (TA-8)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
E.
§ 125-40 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-40
109:402
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-40 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-41
109:403
§ 125-41. Schooner Head. [Amended 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: five acres.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 5%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
B.
§ 125-41 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-41
109:404
(8) Minimum area per family: five acres.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Home occupation
Road construction
Wireless communications facility
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(1)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(2)
D.
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
E.
§ 125-41 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-41
109:405
§ 125-42. Scientific Research for Eleemosynary Purposes. [Amended
6-12-2018]
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(1)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
A. Purpose.
B. Dimensional standards.
§ 125-41 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-42
109:406
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet with sewers; 200
feet without sewers.
(2)
(3) Minimum front setback: 100 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 40 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: not applicable.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Parking deck
Parking lot
Road construction
Wireless communications facility
Parking garage. Also subject to Design Review Board certificate of
appropriateness:
Parking garage
(1)
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(2)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
(3)
D.
§ 125-42 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-42
109:407
Nonresidential facility for education and scientific purposes
Research facility
Research production facility
Residential facility for use by employees, students, trainees or
visiting scientists and academicians, such facilities being necessary
for the furtherance of the institutional mission
Small, nonresidential facility for educational, scientific or nature
interpretation purposes
Transient accommodations, nonprofit
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Museum
(5)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(6)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Nonresidential facility for education and scientific purposes
Research facility
(2)
E.
§ 125-42 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-42
109:408
Research production facility
Residential facility for use by employees, students, trainees or
visiting scientists and academicians, such facilities being necessary
for the furtherance of the institutional mission
Small, nonresidential facility for educational, scientific or nature
interpretation purposes
Transient accommodations, nonprofit
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Museum
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-42 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-43
109:409
§ 125-43. Town Hill Business. [Amended 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 50%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
B.
§ 125-43 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-43
109:410
(8) Minimum area per family: 10,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses, not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Automobile repair garage
Automobile sales lot
Automobile service station
Bank
Campground
Commercial boatyard
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Food processing and freezing (excluding slaughterhouse)
Food processing and freezing
Hospital
Light manufacturing/assembly plant
Mobile home park
Multifamily dwelling I
Multifamily dwelling II
Municipal school
Newspaper or printing facility
Parking garage and parking lot
Research facility
D.
§ 125-43 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-43
109:411
Research production facility
Road construction
Terminal yard and trucking facility
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Transient accommodations (TA-2)
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Transient accommodations (TA-5)
Transient accommodations (TA-6)
Transient accommodations (TA-7)
Transient accommodations (TA-8)
Upholstery shop
Warehousing or storage facility
Wholesale business establishment
Wireless communications facility
Lumber yard only:
Lumberyard or sawmill
(1)
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(2)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
Municipal facility and grounds
(3)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
§ 125-43 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-43
109:412
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Commercial structure
Gift shops
Liquor store
Medical clinic
Museum
Private school
Professional office building
Repair services (other than auto)
Restaurant
Restaurant, takeout
Retail business establishment not otherwise listed
Seafood market
(5)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(6)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(7)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial art gallery or pottery barn
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Grocery stores
E.
§ 125-43 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-43
109:413
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Undertaking establishment
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Veterinary clinic
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
Municipal facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Commercial structure
Gift shops
Liquor store
Medical clinic
Museum
Private school
Professional office building
(4)
§ 125-43 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-43
109:414
Repair services (other than auto)
Restaurant
Restaurant, takeout
Retail business establishment not otherwise listed
Seafood market
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-43 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-44
109:415
§ 125-44. Town Hill Residential Corridor. [Amended 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
B.
§ 125-44 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-44
109:416
(8) Minimum area per family: 20,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Campground
Cemetery
Multifamily dwelling I
Multifamily dwelling II
Municipal school
Municipal facility and grounds
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
(2)
D.
§ 125-44 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-44
109:417
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(4)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(5)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(6)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Undertaking establishment
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
E.
§ 125-44 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-44
109:418
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Private school
(4)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-44 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-45
109:419
§ 125-45. Town Hill Residential. [Amended 6-13-2006;51 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
B.
51.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-45 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-45
109:420
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 20,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Campground
Cemetery
Commercial stable
Marina
Mobile home park
Multifamily dwelling I
Municipal facility and grounds
Municipal school
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Wireless communications facility
Transient accommodations. Only from the north side of Route 3
shoreward for 500 feet from the Trenton Town line to Jones Marsh
Resource Protection District:
Transient accommodations (TA-2)
(1)
D.
§ 125-45 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-45
109:421
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Transient accommodations (TA-5)
Transient accommodations (TA-6)
Transient accommodations (TA-7)
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(2)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Lumberyard or sawmill
(3)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(4)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(5)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(6)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(7)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
E.
§ 125-45 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-45
109:422
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Undertaking establishment
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Lumberyard or sawmill
(2)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the
water.
(3)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
Home occupation. Minor site plan for lots with frontage on Route
3 and Route 102 for home occupations with nonfamily members as
employees; otherwise, Code Enforcement Officer permit:
Home occupation
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-45 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-46
109:423
§ 125-46. Town Hill Rural. [Amended 6-13-2006;52 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 200 [feet].
(3) Minimum front setback: 75 [feet].
(4) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(5) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
B.
52.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-46 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-46
109:424
(6) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(7) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(8) Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Agriculture, homestead
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Agriculture, commercial
Cemetery
Commercial boatyard
Commercial stable
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Kennel, boarding
Mineral extraction
Mineral extraction and processing
Municipal school
Place of worship
Road construction
Transient accommodations (TA-1)
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
D.
§ 125-46 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-46
109:425
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Agriculture, avocational
Commercial garden, greenhouse or nursery
Driveway construction
Farmers' market
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Home occupation
Kennel
Noncommercial greenhouse
Noncommercial kennel
Noncommercial stable
Private school
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Roadside stand
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Veterinary clinic
E.
§ 125-46 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-46
109:426
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
Activity or structure requires conditional use permit. Activity or
structure requires conditional use permit before it may be commenced,
built, enlarged, or modified:
Only if constructed prior to January 1, 2015:
Public utility facility
(1)
G.
§ 125-46 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-47
109:427
§ 125-47. Shoreland General Development I. [Amended 11-3-2009;
6-8-2010; 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet per residential dwelling unit
in tidal areas and 40,000 square feet per residential dwelling unit
in nontidal areas; 60,000 square feet per governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure adjacent to
nontidal areas; 40,000 square feet for all other uses or structures.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 20 [feet] from a point
opposite Rodick Street on the northerly side of West Street easterly
to the Municipal Pier; 50 [feet] elsewhere.
(2)
B.
§ 125-47 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-47
109:428
Minimum shore frontage: 150 [feet] per residential dwelling unit
adjacent to tidal areas; 300 [feet] per governmental, institutional,
commercial or industrial structure adjacent to nontidal area; 200
[feet] for all other uses or structures.
(3)
Minimum front setback: zero feet for that part of the district
situated on the north side of West Street between the Municipal
Pier and the point opposite the center line of Main Street; 15 feet
elsewhere.
(4)
(5) Minimum side setback: zero feet.
Minimum rear setback: zero feet for that part of the district
situated on the north side of West Street between the Municipal
Pier and the point opposite the center line of Main Street, provided
that structures may be built out over the water subject to site
plan review and all state and federal regulatory approvals; 15 feet
elsewhere, provided that structures may be built out over the water
subject to site plan review and all state and federal regulatory
approvals.
(6)
Maximum lot coverage: 50% adjacent to tidal areas and rivers
which do not flow to great ponds classified GPA; 20% elsewhere.
(7)
Maximum height: 15 [feet] for structures on piers, pilings or
wharves west of the Municipal Pier seaward for 90 feet; for
structures on piers, pilings or wharves west of the Municipal Pier
and more than 90 feet offshore, the maximum height shall be no
greater than the grade level of the sidewalk on the shoreward side
of West Street, provided that transparent fencing may be installed
on a flat roof to a maximum height of four feet above said grade
level; 20 [feet] elsewhere.
(8)
(9) Minimum area per family: 30,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Cocktail lounge
D.
§ 125-47 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-47
109:429
Commercial fish pier
Commercial structure
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
Ferry terminal
Gift shops
Marina
Multifamily dwelling I
Multifamily dwelling II
Municipal facility and grounds
Recreational boating facility
Road construction
Ships chandlery
Transient accommodations (TA-2)
Transient accommodations (TA-3)
Transient accommodations (TA-4)
Transient accommodations (TA-5)
Transient accommodations (TA-6)
Transient accommodations (TA-7)
Transient accommodations (TA-8)
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Restaurant
Seafood market
(3)
§ 125-47 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-47
109:430
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Restaurant
Seafood market
(3)
E.
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-47 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-48
109:431
§ 125-48. Shoreland Limited Residential. [Amended 6-13-2006;53
6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet per dwelling unit with sewer
adjacent to tidal areas; 40,000 square feet, or same as nearest
adjacent upland district, whichever is greater, for all other uses and
structures.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 150
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
B.
53.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-48 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-48
109:432
Minimum shore frontage: 150 [feet] per dwelling unit adjacent to
tidal areas; 200 [feet] for all other uses and structures.
(3)
(4) Minimum front setback: same as nearest adjacent upland district.
(5) Minimum side setback: same as nearest adjacent upland district.
(6) Minimum rear setback: same as nearest adjacent upland district.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(8) Maximum height: 35 [feet].
(9) Minimum area per family: 30,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
Road construction
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
(4) Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
D.
§ 125-48 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-48
109:433
Wind turbine
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Small, nonresidential facility, without structures, for educational,
scientific or nature interpretation purposes
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
E.
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-48 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-49
109:434
§ 125-49. Shoreland General Development II (Hulls Cove).
[Amended 11-5-1996; 11-3-2009; 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet per residential dwelling unit
in tidal areas and 40,000 square feet per residential dwelling unit
in nontidal areas; 60,000 square feet per governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure adjacent to
nontidal areas; 40,000 square feet for all other uses or structures.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 150
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
Minimum shore frontage: 150 [feet] per residential dwelling unit
adjacent to tidal areas; 300 [feet] per governmental, institutional,
(3)
B.
§ 125-49 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-49
109:435
commercial or industrial structure adjacent to nontidal area; 200
[feet] for all other uses or structures.
Minimum front setback: 75 [feet] from the center of Route 3, and
25 [feet] from the front lot line elsewhere.
(4)
(5) Minimum side setback: five [feet].
(6) Minimum rear setback: 15 [feet].
Maximum lot coverage: 70% adjacent to tidal areas and rivers
which do not flow to great ponds classified GPA; 20% elsewhere.
(7)
(8) Maximum height: 40 [feet].
(9) Minimum area per family: 30,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses, not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Commercial fish pier
Commercial structure
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
Ferry terminal
Marina
Multifamily dwelling I
Multifamily dwelling II
Road construction
Single-family dwelling
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
(1)
D.
§ 125-49 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-49
109:436
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
Uses or structures greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning Board/
Planning Department approval required for uses or structures with
gross leasable area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Gift shops
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Accessory dwelling
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Small, nonresidential facility, without structures, for educational,
scientific or nature interpretation purposes
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Government facility and grounds
(2)
E.
§ 125-49 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-49
109:437
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(3)
Uses or structures less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with gross leasable area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Gift shops
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-49 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-49.1
109:438
§ 125-49.1. Shoreland General Development III. [Added 11-2-2010;
amended 6-13-2017; 6-12-2018]
Purpose. The Shoreland General Development III District seeks to allow
for corridor development that provides transient services and other
commercial services along the Town's prominent entry corridor. Care in
screening, landscaping, and building design should be taken to respect
the National Scenic Byway (Eden Street) as well as the historic
waterfront.
A.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 30,000 square feet per residential dwelling unit
in tidal areas and 40,000 square feet per residential dwelling unit
in nontidal areas with sewer; 60,000 square feet per governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure adjacent to
(1)
B.
§ 125-49.1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-49.1
109:439
nontidal areas; 40,000 square feet for all other uses or structures
without sewer.
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet with sewers; 150
feet without sewers.
(2)
Minimum shore frontage: 150 feet for residential use or dwelling
unit adjacent to tidal areas; 300 feet per governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure adjacent to
nontidal area; 200 feet for each other use, dwelling unit or
structure for all other uses or structures.
(3)
Minimum front setback: 100 feet from the center of Route 3, and
75 feet from the front lot line elsewhere.
(4)
(5) Minimum side setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum rear setback: 25 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet.
Minimum area per family: 30,000 square feet on sewers; 40,000
square feet without sewers.
(9)
Allowed uses.
Principal uses allowed by building permit or a change of use permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer: artist studio, child care, family,
gallery, government facility, home occupation (NOTE: Home
occupations in properties with lot frontage or access on Route 3
shall be required to obtain minor site plan approval.); municipal
facility, municipal school; public or private park with minimal
structural development; all vacation rentals; single-family dwelling
and two-family dwelling.
(1)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(2)
C.
Uses allowed by site plan.
The following uses shall be permitted by site plan review in any
part of this district: bank; bed-and-breakfast I; bed-and-breakfast
II; bed-and-breakfast III; bed-and-breakfast IV; bed-and-breakfast
V; child-care center; commercial boat yard; commercial fish pier;
ferry terminal; farmers' market; hotel; marina; multifamily dwelling
I; multifamily dwelling II; motel; nursing or convalescent homes or
congregate housing; parking lot; parking deck; private compulsory
school; professional office building; restaurant; retail; road
(1)
D.
§ 125-49.1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-49.1
109:440
construction; services; take-out restaurant; wind turbines, and
wireless communication facilities.
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a building permit, provided that they
comply with all provisions of Chapter 125: activities necessary
for managing/protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less
than 16 cubic yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring
structures; public utility installation/essential services.
(1)
Activities allowed by building permit and requiring approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; filling/
earthmoving activity of 16 cubic yards or more.
(2)
E.
Other requirements.
Parking lots shall require buffering and vegetative screening if
visible from Route 3.
(1)
Lots with road frontage on Route 3 may be required to provide
streetscape improvements, such as trees, sidewalks, bike paths,
benches, and/or other related improvements as deemed
appropriate by the Planning Board in the case of major site plan,
or the Planning Department in the case of a minor site plan. Such
improvements shall be exempt from setback requirements.
(2)
F.
§ 125-49.1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-49.2
109:441
§ 125-49.2. Shoreland General Development IV. [Added 11-8-2011;
amended 6-12-2018]
Purpose. The Shoreland General Development IV District seeks to
support the historic rural village character of the Salisbury Cove area
by maintaining the existing business uses and by allowing needed
maintenance, expansion, and siting of new facilities necessary for
continued economically viable operations in this area. This area of
Salisbury Cove includes light commercial uses that have their own
unique visual characteristics, such as cabin and cottage rentals, as
well as motel rentals, which contribute to the rural village character
of Salisbury Cove. Care in buffering, screening, landscaping, rooftop
gardens, and building design should be taken to respect the rural
village character for this area of Salisbury Cove.
A.
B. Dimensional standards.
§ 125-49.2 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-49.2
109:442
Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet for all principal uses and all
principal structures on a lot. Note: This minimum lot size applies to
the total of all principal uses and all principal structures on a lot.
(1)
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet.
Minimum setback from shoreline: zero for functionally waterdependent
uses; 75 feet for all other uses.
(3)
Minimum shore frontage: 150 feet per dwelling unit ; 200 feet of
shore frontage for all other principal uses. Note: For purposes of
this requirement, dwelling units do not include cabins or other
transient accommodations.
(4)
(5) Minimum front setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum side and rear setback: 25 feet.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(9) Minimum lot area per family: 20,000 square feet per family.
Allowed uses.
Principal uses allowed by building permit or a change of use permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer: single-family dwelling, twofamily
dwelling, cabins and cottages, all vacation rentals, artist
studio, home occupation, government facility and grounds, and
temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting
into the water.
(1)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure.
(2)
C.
Uses allowed by site plan. The following uses shall be permitted by
site plan review in any part of this district: motels accessory to cabins
and cottages (with such motel providing for no more than 10 sleeping
accommodations for transient uses), marina, retail (provided the
structure is no greater than 5,000 square feet in floor area), gallery,
multifamily dwelling I, museum, recreational boating facility,
permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into
the water, and road construction.
D.
Allowed activities.
Activities allowed without a building permit, provided that they
comply with all provisions of Chapter 125: activities necessary
for managing/protecting land; filling/earthmoving activity of less
(1)
E.
§ 125-49.2 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-49.2
109:443
§ 125-49.3. Shoreland Maritime Activities District. [Added
6-13-2017; amended 6-12-2018]
than 16 cubic yards; nonintensive recreation uses not requiring
structures; public utility installation/essential services.
Activities allowed by building permit and requiring approval of
the Code Enforcement Officer: driveway construction; filling/
earthmoving activity of 16 cubic yards or more.
(2)
Purpose. The Shoreland Maritime Activities District seeks to support
maritime activities related to the reuse of Bar Harbor Tax Map 231, Lot
004, the ferry terminal for both cruise ship and ferry activities. This
district includes all land currently occupied by or suitable for active
water-dependent uses, taking into consideration:
(1) Shelter from prevailing winds and waves;
A.
§ 125-49.2 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-49.3
109:444
Slope of the land within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
shoreline;
(2)
Depth of the water within 150 feet, horizontal distance, of the
shoreline;
(3)
Available support facilities, including utilities and transportation
facilities; and
(4)
(5) Compatibility with adjacent upland uses.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: none.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: none.
Minimum setback from shoreline for functionally water-dependent
uses: none; minimum setback from shoreline for all other uses: 75
feet.
(3)
(4) Minimum shore frontage: none.
Minimum front setback: 50 feet (measured from center line of
Route 3).
(5)
(6) Minimum side 25 feet and rear setback: none.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
(8) Maximum height: 35 feet.
B.
Allowed uses.
Principal uses allowed by building permit or a change of use permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer: government facility and
grounds, and temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use
projecting into the water.
(1)
Accessory uses that are usual and normal to a principal use are
allowed if they are typically permitted by the Code Enforcement
Officer or site plan review for the district in which the use is
proposed. Accessory uses are allowed by review of the same
permitting authority that approved the principal structure and
shall include bank; farmers market; hotel; multifamily dwelling
I; multifamily dwelling II; parking deck; parking lot; professional
office building; restaurant; retail; take-out restaurant and wireless
telecommunications facility.
(2)
C.
The following uses shall be permitted by site plan review in any part
of this district: functionally water-dependent uses, including permanent
piers, wharfs and docks; commercial boat yard; commercial fish pier;
passenger terminal; ferry terminal; marina; services.
D.
E. Allowed activities.
§ 125-49.3 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-49.3
109:445
§ 125-50. Stream Protection. [Amended 6-13-2006;54 6-12-2018]
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
fishing and hiking.
(1)
(2) Emergency operations.
Other requirements.
Multifamily I and multifamily II uses are limited to employee
housing.
(1)
F.
A. Purpose.
B. Dimensional standards.
54.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-49.3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-50
109:446
Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet, or same as nearest adjacent
upland district, whichever is greater.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 150
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
Minimum shore frontage: 150 [feet] per dwelling unit adjacent to
tidal areas; 200 [feet] for all other uses and structures.
(3)
(4) Minimum front setback: same as nearest adjacent upland district.
(5) Minimum side setback: same as nearest adjacent upland district.
(6) Minimum rear setback: same as nearest adjacent upland district.
(7) Maximum lot coverage: 20%.
(8) Maximum height: 35 [feet].
Minimum area per family: 40,000 square feet, or same as nearest
adjacent upland district, whichever is greater.
(9)
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Road construction
Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained
from the Board of Appeals:
Driveway construction
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
D.
§ 125-50 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-50
109:447
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(3)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(1)
Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained
from the Board of Appeals:
Small, nonresidential facility, without structures, for educational,
scientific or nature interpretation purposes
(2)
E.
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-50 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-51
109:448
§ 125-51. Marine Research. [Added 5-1-1995; amended 11-3-2009;
6-8-2010; 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet with sewers; 40,000 square
feet without sewers.
(1)
Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 [feet] with sewers; 200
[feet] without sewers.
(2)
Minimum shore frontage: 150 feet per dwelling unit adjacent to
tidal areas; 200 feet for all other uses and structures, excluding
functionally water-dependent structures.
(3)
(4) Minimum front setback: 25 [feet].
B.
§ 125-51 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-51
109:449
(5) Minimum side setback: 25 [feet].
(6) Minimum rear setback: 25 [feet].
Minimum setback from shoreline: zero feet for functionally waterdependent
uses; 75 feet for all other uses.
(7)
(8) Maximum lot coverage: 25%.
(9) Maximum building coverage: 12.5%.
Maximum height: 35 feet within 250 feet of the shoreline or upland
edge of a wetland; 40 feet elsewhere.
(10)
(11)Minimum area per family: 20,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Nonresidential facility for education and scientific purposes
Parking deck
Parking lot
Research facility
Residential facility for use by employees, students, trainees or visiting
scientists and academicians, such facilities being necessary for the
furtherance of the institutional mission
Road construction
Transient accommodations, nonprofit
Wireless communications facility
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
(1)
D.
§ 125-51 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-51
109:450
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Permanent pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. Planning Board approval
required for permanent structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for services accessory to uses or structures
requiring Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(4)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Public or private park with minimal structural development
Single-family dwelling
Two-family dwelling
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Temporary pier, dock, wharf, breakwater. CEO permit required for
temporary structures:
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
E.
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-51 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-51.1
109:451
§ 125-51.1. Educational Institution. [Added 5-3-2004; amended
11-3-2009; 6-8-2010; 6-12-2018]
A. Purpose.
Dimensional standards.
(1) Minimum lot size: 40,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum road frontage and lot width: 100 feet.
Minimum shore frontage: 150 feet per dwelling unit adjacent to
tidal areas; 200 feet for all other uses and structures, excluding
functionally water-dependent structures.
(3)
(4) Minimum front setback: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum side setback: 25 feet.
B.
§ 125-51.1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-51.1
109:452
Setback from district boundary line: 25 feet; 110 feet along the
eastern boundary of the district; 200 feet along the eastern
boundary of the district for student housing, as defined.
(6)
Minimum setback from Shoreline: zero for functionally waterdependent
uses; 75 feet for all other uses.
(7)
(8) Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
(9) Maximum height: 40 feet.
(10)Minimum area per family: 20,000 square feet.
Allowed activity or structure. Activity or structure allowed without a
permit, provided that it complies with all provisions of this chapter:
Activities necessary for managing and protecting the land, such as
surveying, fire protection, emergency operations, etc.
Filling/earthmoving activity of less than 10 cubic yards
Nonintensive recreational uses not requiring structures, such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
Public utility installation
C.
Activity or structure requires site plan approval. Activity or structure
requires approval through site plan review process before it may be
commenced or built:
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution
Museum
Parking deck
Parking lot
Pier, dock, wharf, breakwater or other use projecting into the water
Road construction
Student housing
Wireless communications facility
Parking garage. Also subject to Design Review Board certificate of
appropriateness:
Parking garage
(1)
Accessory uses or structures. Planning Board/Planning Department
approval required for uses or structures accessory to uses or
structures requiring Planning Board/Planning Department
approval:
(2)
D.
§ 125-51.1 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-51.1
109:453
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
Total developed area greater than 2,000 square feet. Planning
Board approval required for uses or structures with total developed
area of more than 2,000 square feet:
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(3)
Accessory essential services. Board/Planning Department approval
required for services accessory to uses or structures requiring
Planning Board approval:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(4)
Wind turbine. Minor site plan review required:
Wind turbine
(5)
Activity or structure requires permit from Code Enforcement Officer.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO) before it may be commenced or built:
Driveway construction
Filling/earthmoving activity of 10 cubic yards or more
Noncommercial greenhouse
Single-family dwelling
Vacation rentals
Accessory uses or structures. CEO permit required for uses or
structures accessory to uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Uses or structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(1)
Total developed area less than 2,000 square feet. CEO permit
required for uses or structures with total developed area not
exceeding 2,000 square feet:
Uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses or structures
(2)
Accessory essential services. CEO permit for services accessory to
uses or structures requiring CEO permit:
Essential services accessory to a permitted use or structure
(3)
E.
Activity or structure requires permit from local Plumbing Inspector.
Activity or structure requires permit issued by local Plumbing Inspector
before it may be commenced or built:
Private sewage disposal system accessory to permitted uses
F.
§ 125-51.1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-51.1
109:454
ARTICLE IV
Nonconformity
§ 125-52. Defined.
A legally existing (grandfathered) nonconforming lot, structure or use is
a lot, structure or use that lawfully existed immediately prior to the
enactment of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment, and which, as
a result of the enactment of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment,
presently fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter or
its amendments, including, but not limited to, the use restrictions and lot
standards for the district in which it is located, or any standards set forth in
Article V. Any other lot, structure or use that fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter or its amendments is an illegal nonconformity.
§ 125-53. General policies.
All nonconformities shall be encouraged to convert to conformity
whenever possible and, when required by this chapter, shall convert to
conformity.
A.
Any nonconformity not expressly allowed to exist by this article is
hereby deemed illegal and shall cease or be corrected immediately.
B.
The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is a legal
nonconformity shall, in all cases, be upon the owner of such
nonconformity and not upon the Town of Bar Harbor.
C.
Any legally existing nonconformity may be transferred and the new
owner may, subject strictly to the requirements of this article, continue
such nonconformity; provided, however, that nothing contained herein
shall be construed to permit any person or entity to occupy or use any
lot or structure or to continue any use in violation of any other federal,
state or municipal statute, ordinance or regulation.
D.
Once converted to conformity, no lot, structure or use shall revert to
nonconformity.
E.
Nothing herein shall require any change in the plans, construction, size
or designated use for any building, structure or part thereof for which
a completed application for a local permit is pending, or for which a
permit has been issued and upon which construction has been lawfully
commenced, prior to the adoption of this chapter or any amendment.
F.
Any relief sought under this article to the Board of Appeals shall adhere
to the process found in Article IX, § 125-102C(1), (2), and (3),
respectively, as well § 125-102D, E, F, and G, respectively. [Added
6-10-2008]
G.
Any relief sought under this article to the Planning Board shall adhere
to the process outlined in Article V, Site Plan Review, as may be
applicable. [Added 6-10-2008]
H.
§ 125-52 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-54
109:455
§ 125-54. Nonconforming uses of land or structures.
The use of any land or structure which is made nonconforming as a result
of the enactment of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment, may be
continued, but only in strict compliance with the following:
No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, or extended to
occupy a greater area of land than such use occupied when it became
nonconforming.
A.
No existing structure devoted partially or entirely to a nonconforming
use shall be extended or enlarged.
B.
Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which, at the time such use became a nonconformity, were
arranged or designed for such use; provided, however, that no
nonconforming use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
building.
C.
Any nonconforming use of land or a structure may be changed to
another nonconforming use provided first that the Board of Appeals
finds that the proposed use will have no greater adverse impact on
the subject and adjacent properties and resources, including waterdependent
uses, than the existing use, and second that the Planning
Board grants site plan approval upon a finding that the proposed use
meets all standards set forth in Article V except those that cause
the existing use to be nonconforming. In determining that no greater
adverse impact will occur, the Board of Appeals, in dealing with uses
in resource protection, shoreland limited residential, shoreland general
development and stream protection districts, shall, at a minimum,
require written documentation from the applicant regarding the
probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and sedimentation,
water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual and
actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain
management, archaeological and historic resources, and commercial
fishing and maritime activities, and other functionally water-dependent
uses. [Amended 11-5-1991]
D.
If any nonconforming use of land or of a structure housing a
nonconforming use ceases or is discontinued for any reason for a period
of 12 or more consecutive months, any subsequent use of such land
or structure shall conform to the requirements of this chapter in all
respects. [Amended 11-4-2003]
E.
A nonconforming use or a structure housing a nonconforming use may
be moved within a lot provided that the Board of Appeals finds that the
proposed new location and design are more appropriate with regard to:
(1) Location, character, and natural features;
(2) Fencing and screening;
F.
§ 125-54 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-54
109:456
§ 125-55. Nonconforming structures.
Any structure which is made nonconforming as a result of this chapter,
or any subsequent amendment, may be continued, but only in strict
compliance with the following:
(3) Landscaping and topography;
(4) Traffic and access;
(5) Signs and lighting; and
(6) Potential nuisance.
55Transient accommodations.
Transient accommodations that are nonconforming uses may be
enlarged, extended and occupy a GREATER area of land, provided
that no additional guest rooms are added and that the Board of
Appeals finds that: [Added 6-13-2006]
(a) There will be no greater adverse impacts; and
The proposed construction is appropriate with regard to:
[1] Location, character and natural features;
[2] Fencing and screening;
[3] Landscaping and topography;
[4] Traffic and access;
[5] Lighting; and
[6] Potential nuisance.
(b)
(1)
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Board
of Appeals, in dealing with transient accommodation in resource
protection, shoreland limited residential, shoreland general
development and stream protection districts, shall, at a minimum,
require written documentation from the applicant regarding the
probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and
sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative
cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural
beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and historic
resources, and commercial fishing and maritime activities, and
other functionally water-dependent uses.
(2)
G.
No structure shall be enlarged, altered or extended in any way that
increases its nonconformity. Any enlargement, alteration or extension
that does not project past existing walls, foundations or eaves that
A.
55.Editor's Note: Former Subsection G, Nonconforming vacation rentals, added 6-13-2006, as
amended, was repealed and former Subsection H redesignated Subsection G on 6-14-2011.
§ 125-54 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-55
109:457
already encroach into the required setback area shall not be considered
to increase a structure's nonconformity. However, the following
limitations shall apply to nonconforming structures within 75 feet of the
normal high water line of a water body, tributary stream, significant
vernal pool or upland edge of a wetland and 100 feet from the normal
high water line of a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to
a great pond classified GPA: [Amended 5-7-1991; 6-13-2006;
11-4-2008; 11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is
constructed under a nonconforming structure, the structure and
new foundation must be placed such that the setback requirement
is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the
Planning Board or its designee, basing its decision on the criteria
specified in § 125-55C(3) below. If the completed foundation does
not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure, except
for expansion in conformity with § 125-55A(3) below, and the
foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more
than three additional feet as measured from the uphill side of the
structure (from original ground level to the bottom of the first-floor
sill), it shall not be considered to be an expansion of the structure.
]
(1)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection A(1), no structure
which is less than the required setback from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland
shall be expanded toward the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland.
(2)
After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure is less than the
required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body
or tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland, that portion
of the structure shall not be expanded, as measured in floor area
or volume by 30% or more during the lifetime of the structure.
If a replacement structure conforms with the requirements of §
125-55B below, and is less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream or wetland, the replacement structure may
not be expanded if the original structure existing on January 1,
1989, had been expanded by 30% in floor area and volume since
that date.
(3)
Any structure may be razed and rebuilt up to the dimensions (length,
width and height) of the individual structure that was razed plus any
enlargements, alterations or extensions permitted by Subsection A(1),
provided rebuilding is begun within one year and completed within
two years after the structure is razed; provided, however, that such
rebuilding of any nonconforming structure which is located less than
the required setback from the normal high water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland is in compliance with
the water setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the purposes of
B.
§ 125-55 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-55
109:458
this chapter. In no case shall a structure rebuilt under this subsection
be combined with another structure or be reconstructed or replaced
so as to increase its nonconformity. [Amended 5-7-1991; 11-5-1991;
5-6-1996; 11-2-1999; 11-4-2003; 11-7-2006; 11-4-2008]
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from the normal high water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland and which is removed
by 50% or less of the market value or damaged or destroyed by
50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding normal
maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit
is obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer within one year of
such damage, destruction, or removal.
(1)
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the
required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland
and which is removed, or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the
cause, by more than 50% of the market value of the structure
before such damage, destruction or removal may be reconstructed
or replaced, provided that a permit is obtained within one year
of the date of said damage, destruction, or removal, and provided
that such reconstruction or replacement is in compliance with the
water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to
the greatest practical extent, as determined by the Planning Board
or its designee in accordance with the § 125-55C below and the
physical condition and type of foundation present, if any. In no case
shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase
its nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure
is less than the required setback, it shall not be any larger than
the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to § 125-55A(1)
above, as determined by the nonconforming floor area and volume
of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If
the total amount of floor area and volume of the original structure
can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required setback
area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall
be replaced or constructed at less than the setback requirement
for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove vegetation
in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with § 125-55C. [Amended 11-3-2009;
6-8-201056]
(2)
A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries
of the lot on which the structure is located, provided that the Board
of Appeals finds that the proposed new location and design are more
appropriate with regard to location, character and natural features;
fencing and screening; landscaping and topography; traffic and access;
signs and lighting; and potential nuisance, provided that the site of
C.
56.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Subsection B(3), which immediately
followed and set forth criteria for determining whether building reconstruction and
replacement met setback to the greatest practical extent.
§ 125-55 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-55
109:459
relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest
practical extent, as determined by the Board of Appeals, and provided
that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of state law and the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules (rules), or that a new
system can be installed in compliance with the law and said rules.
In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes
the structure to be more nonconforming. In determining whether the
building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical extent,
the Board of Appeals shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of
the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures
on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the septic
system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the type
and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland
setback area in order to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall
require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed
vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure
was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be
required as follows: [Amended 11-5-1991; 11-4-2008]
Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted
with at least one native tree, three feet in height, for every tree
removed. If more than five trees are planted, no one species of
tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted.
Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or
wetland than the trees that were removed. Other woody and
herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that is removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be reestablished.
An area at least the same size as the area where vegetation and/
or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or removed must be
reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or
ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or
ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or removed.
(1)
Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel, the
original location of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation
which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof.
(2)
The use of a nonconforming structure located in any shoreland district
may not be changed to another use unless the Board of Appeals, after
receiving a written application, determines that the new use will have
no greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources, than
the existing use. In determining that no greater adverse impact will
occur, the Board of Appeals shall require written documentation from
the applicant regarding the probable effects on public health and safety,
erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitats,
vegetative cover, visual and actual points of public access to waters,
D.
§ 125-55 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-55
109:460
§ 125-56. Nonconforming lots. [Amended 11-5-1991; 5-4-1992;
5-2-1994; 6-13-2006; 11-7-2006; 11-3-2009]
A single parcel of land, the legal description or dimensions of which are
recorded on a document or map on file at the Hancock County Registry
of Deeds, which lawfully existed immediately prior to the enactment of
this chapter or any subsequent amendment and which, as a result of the
enactment of this chapter or any amendment, does not meet the lot size,
minimum area per family, road frontage, floor area ratio, lot coverage, shore
frontage, or lot width requirements, or all seven, in the district in which
it is located, and which does not adjoin another vacant parcel in common
ownership, may be built upon without the need for a variance, but only
subject to the following:
natural beauty, floodplain management, archaeological and historic
resources, and commercial fishing and maritime activities and other
functionally water-dependent uses. [Added 11-5-1991; amended
11-4-2008]
Single-family, two-family dwellings. [Added 6-13-2006]
Single- and two-family dwellings, except in the Shoreland
District(s), are not subject to the above limitations in this section.
(1)
An existing nonconforming single-family or two-family dwelling or
structures accessory thereto which are nonconforming with
respect to a dimensional requirement may be enlarged or extended
in any other direction in compliance with this chapter, by issuance
of a building permit. That part of an existing nonconforming
dwelling which is nonconforming with respect to a dimensional
requirement may be enlarged or extended in that direction,
provided the Board of Appeals grants a finding that all of the
following conditions are met:
The existing or proposed degree of nonconformity is not
greater than 50% of the dimensional requirement in Article III
of the chapter.
(a)
The Board of Appeals determines that the extension or
enlargement is appropriate in scale and mass for the
neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting
properties.
(b)
(2)
E.
Such building or construction shall, in all other respects, comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
A.
No construction shall be commenced until the owner demonstrates
to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer that there is
reasonable access to the site for emergency vehicles.
B.
Two or more nonconforming vacant parcels of land in common
ownership shall be consolidated to form one or more lots conforming
C.
§ 125-55 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-56
109:461
so far as possible to the lot standards of the district in which the
parcels are located. If possible, the lots shall be consolidated so that no
nonconforming lot or lots are formed.
One or more nonconforming vacant parcels of land that adjoin a
conforming parcel containing a building or structure shall be
consolidated to the extent necessary to bring the lots into conformity
so far as possible. If the remaining portion of the vacant parcel(s)
constitutes a conforming lot, said remaining portion shall constitute a
separate lot; otherwise combined lots shall constitute one lot. [Added
6-8-201057]
D.
One or more vacant parcels of land that adjoin a nonconforming lot
in common ownership and containing a building or structure shall be
consolidated with said improved lot to the extent necessary to bring the
improved lot into conformity so far as possible. If the remaining portion
of the vacant parcels constitutes a conforming lot, said remaining
portion shall constitute a separate lot. Otherwise, the combined lots
shall constitute one lot.
E.
If two or more principal uses or structures exist on a single lot of
record, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the State
Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. §§ 4807-A through 4807-D) and
the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied
with. [Added 6-8-201058]
F.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no nonconforming
lot within any shoreland district may be built on unless that lot has
at least 100 feet of shore frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area
and can meet State Plumbing Code requirements for on-site sewage
disposal or is served by a public sewer. The requirements of this
subsection may not be modified by variance.
G.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D as Subsection E.
58.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection E as Subsection G.
§ 125-56 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-56
109:462
ARTICLE V
Site Plan Review
§ 125-57. Purpose. [Amended 5-3-1999]
Site plan review regulations are established to promote the public health,
safety and general welfare by requiring to be submitted to the Planning
Board's review plans for certain uses or structures which have a significant
impact on the neighborhood or the environment but which, when properly
designed with respect to their surroundings, can become uses or structures
that are compatible with the neighborhood and environment. The provisions
set forth in this chapter are intended to protect the public health and
safety, promote the general welfare of the community, and conserve the
environment by assuring that development subject to site plan review is
designed and developed in a manner that assures that adequate provisions
are made for traffic safety and access; emergency access; water supply;
sewage disposal; management of stormwater, erosion and sedimentation;
protection of groundwater; protection of the environment, wildlife habitat,
fisheries and unique natural areas; protection of historic and archaeological
resources; minimizing the adverse impacts on adjacent properties; and
fitting the project harmoniously into the fabric of the community.
§ 125-58. Site plan review required. [Amended 5-5-2003]
Except as provided in Subsection B(1), (2), (3), and (4) below, major site
plan review and approval by the Planning Board shall be required for:
[Amended 6-8-2010]
(1) Any use designated in Article III as requiring site plan review;
Construction, substantial alteration or external enlargement of any
building or structure devoted to a use requiring site plan approval;
(2)
Creation of any subdivision as defined by the laws of the State of
Maine, provided that such review shall be modified in accordance
with the provisions of Article VI.
(3)
A.
Minor site plan review and approval by the Planning Department shall
be substituted for major site plan review in cases of:
Modifications to a previously approved site plan not involving
substantial alteration to the site plan or substantial external
enlargement of any building or structure, or to a previously
approved subdivision plan where no additional lots are proposed
to be created or where no more than two additional units are
proposed to be added; [Amended 6-13-200659]
(1)
B.
59.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-57 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-58
109:463
§ 125-59. Site plan review not required.
Unless specifically required by Article III, site plan review shall not be
required for:
§ 125-60. Prohibition. [Amended 5-5-2003]
No activity or use described in § 125-58 shall be commenced unless and
until the property owner has received site plan approval from the Planning
Board, or the Planning Department, as applicable, has provided to the Town
any required performance guarantees, and has received any necessary
permits from the Code Enforcement Officer under Article VII.
§ 125-61. Review procedure.
Uses designated in Article III as requiring site plan review with no
changes to foundation or footprint area of existing structures as
proposed; [Amended 6-12-2018]
(2)
Construction of a foundation area not exceeding 400 square feet,
provided that only one such new construction project shall be
permitted in any five-year period without site plan review on a lot;
or [Amended 6-13-200660]
(3)
Those projects which, in the opinion of the Planning Board, will
not have a significant impact on the neighborhood or on the
environment and meet the purpose of site plan without public
review. [Added 6-13-200661]
(4)
Home occupations on lots with frontage on Routes 3 and 102.
[Added 11-3-2009]
(5)
(6) Wind turbines. [Added 11-3-2009]
Uses designated in Article III as requiring only a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer or as requiring no permit at all;
A.
Change of a one-story building that is to be externally changed for the
sole purpose of closing an entrance or creating a new one.62
B.
Preapplication meeting. [Amended 5-5-2003]
Major site plans. At least seven business days prior to submitting
a formal application for site plan review to the Planning Board,
(1)
A.
60.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
61.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
62.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding extension of a principal building or
construction of an accessory building, as amended, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 5-5-2003.
§ 125-58 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-61
109:464
an applicant shall meet with the Planning Department for the
purpose of reviewing such application. Following said meeting the
applicant may either revise the application in accordance with
any recommendations of the Planning Department and thereafter
repeat this step or may request the application be submitted to the
Planning Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting occurring
at least 15 business days after the meeting with the Planning
Department.
Minor site plans. At least five business days prior to submitting an
application for a minor site plan review, an applicant shall meet
with the Planning Department for the purpose of reviewing such
application.
(2)
Projects to be reviewed by the Planning Board for eligibility under §
125-58 B(4) shall be submitted to the Planning Board at least seven
business days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting. [Added
6-13-200663]
(3)
Submissions generally. [Amended 5-6-1996]
Submissions by applicants. At such time as an applicant requests
an application to be submitted to the Planning Board, the applicant
shall pay all fees required by § 125-65 and shall provide to the
Planning Department 10 copies of all application materials,
including all plans and supporting documentation that are
submitted as part of the review process. Beginning with the
application form provided by the Planning Department, each
submission shall be conspicuously labeled "Applicant's Exhibit 1,"
"Applicant's Exhibit 2," and so on, in consecutive fashion. Each
submission consisting of more than one page shall be clearly
paginated and stapled together. All submissions provided by an
applicant at any later stage of the review process shall be provided
in the same quantity and shall be similarly labeled, paginated and
stapled.
(1)
Submissions by opponents and others. At least two days prior
to any public hearing, any other person wishing to present
documentary evidence to the Planning Board shall provide to the
Planning Department copies of all such evidence in form and
quantity described in Subsection B(1), except that each submission
shall be conspicuously labeled with that person's surname followed
by "Exhibit 1," "Exhibit 2," and so on, in consecutive fashion. At
such time as a person provides such documentary evidence to
the Planning Board, he/she shall also provide one copy of such
evidence to the applicant or the applicant's representative.
[Amended 11-4-2008]
(2)
B.
63.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-61 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-61
109:465
Submission deadlines.
Under no circumstances shall submissions be accepted from
any party or considered by the Planning Board after an
application has been deemed complete and a hearing has
commenced unless:
[1] All parties agree to the submission;
The Planning Board has accepted submissions from the
applicant on the same day on which the hearing is
scheduled, in which case any other persons shall be given
seven days to present any documentary evidence in
response to such submissions; or
[2]
The Planning Board has, pursuant to § 125-66Y, requested
the submission of additional information, in which case all
parties shall be allowed to submit evidence relating to the
Board's request.
[3]
(a)
For purposes of this section, a minor modification or
clarification of a previous submission shall not constitute a
new submission. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to prohibit testimony relating to an application's compliance
with review standards, notwithstanding whether there is a
submission on the issue.
(b)
After an application has been deemed complete, all parties
shall have a minimum of seven days to review new
submissions. [Added 11-4-2008]
(c)
(3)
Receipt. Upon receipt of all required fees and the requisite number
of copies of application materials, the Planning Director shall issue
the applicant a dated receipt and shall submit the application to the
Planning Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at
least 10 days and not later than 30 days thereafter.
C.
Mailed notice of receipt of application. [Amended 5-6-1996]
Time of mailing. Within three business days of issuing a receipt
pursuant to the previous section, written notice of the receipt of
an application and the date of the initial completeness review shall
be mailed by first-class mail to the owners of all property within
300 feet of the outer boundary of the property in question and, if
the proposed development is within 500 feet of a Town line, to the
Town Clerk and Chairperson of the Planning Board of the adjacent
Town. The owners of property shall be considered to be those
shown on the Town's tax list as the persons against whom taxes
are assessed. The Planning Board shall, in each case, maintain a
list of property owners so notified. Notice shall be deemed received
if mailed to an owner's last known address according to the Town
tax records. Failure of any property owner to be sent or actually to
(1)
D.
§ 125-61 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-61
109:466
receive notice shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate
any actions of the Planning Board taken in good faith.
Content of notice. Notice of said hearing shall identify the applicant
and the property involved, describe the specific nature of the
proposal, state the date, time and place of the initial completeness
review and explain how the recipient of the notice may review the
application, attend the completeness review and hearing, present
evidence and otherwise participate in the process. [Amended
11-4-2008]
(2)
Completeness review for major site plan. [Amended 5-6-1996;
5-5-2003]
Generally. Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Board shall
conduct an initial review for the sole purposes of determining
whether the application is complete and establishing the initial
amount of any technical assistance fee to be assessed pursuant
to § 125-65D. If the application is deemed complete, it shall be
deemed pending, and the Planning Board shall set the matter for
a public hearing to take place within 45 days of the initial review.
If the application is deemed incomplete, the Planning Board shall,
within 10 days, notify the applicant, in writing, of the specific
additional material needed to complete the application. Upon the
applicant's submission of such additional material, all parties shall
be given at least seven days to review the additional submissions
before the Planning Board again reviews the application to
determine completeness. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(1)
Waiver of submission requirements. At the time of its initial review
of an application, the Planning Board shall, at the applicant's
request, attempt to clarify any of the procedural requirements of
this chapter and act on any request to waive any of the submission
requirements of this chapter that it is authorized to waive pursuant
to § 125-63. Refusal of the Planning Board to grant a waiver shall
require the applicant to submit the material for which a waiver was
requested and to repeat the procedures outlined in Subsections A
and E(1). In no event shall an application be deemed to be pending
until and unless it has been deemed to be complete, nor shall
the Planning Board conduct a substantive review, a review of the
application to determine whether it complies with the standards set
forth in this chapter and with other applicable requirements of law,
until the application has been deemed complete.
(2)
E.
Hearing for major site plan. Within 45 days of the Planning Board's
certification that an application for site plan review is complete, the
Planning Board shall conduct a public hearing on said application
in accordance with the following: [Amended 5-4-1992; 5-6-1996;
5-5-2003]
F.
§ 125-61 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-61
109:467
Notice of hearing. Notice of said hearing shall be given to the
applicant and shall be published at least twice in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town of Bar Harbor, with the first
publication occurring at least seven days prior to the hearing date.
Notice to abutters shall be mailed by first-class mail as per
§ 125-61D(1), except such mailing shall occur within 10 business
days from the public hearing. Such notice shall contain the same
language as the newspaper notice. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(1)
Scope of hearing. The only issue to be considered at the hearing is
whether the application and the proposed development will comply
with the review standards set forth in §§ 125-67, 125-68 and
125-69. The Board shall exclude any evidence not relevant to that
issue.
(2)
Rules. Said hearing shall be conducted according to rules adopted
by the Planning Board.
(3)
Representation. At any hearing a party may be represented by
an agent or attorney; provided, however, that if any party is not
present, any person acting as that party's agent or attorney shall
provide written evidence of such authority.
(4)
Continuation. Any hearing may be continued or recessed to another
time for good cause shown.
(5)
Staff support. The Code Enforcement Officer and Planning Director
may attend all hearings and present to the Planning Board plans,
photographs or other materials they deem appropriate for the
clearer understanding of a pending application.
(6)
Deliberation and decision. Within 30 days after the public hearing
on an application, the Planning Board shall deliberate to determine
whether the proposed plan complies with all applicable review
standards set forth in §§ 125-67, 125-68 and 125-69. If the Planning
Board finds that the proposed plan complies with all such standards
it shall issue an order granting site plan approval subject to the
applicant's providing to the Town of Bar Harbor a performance
guarantee in accordance with Article IX and to such other
reasonable terms and conditions, including the provision by the
applicant of improvements not located on the proposed
development site, that the Board considers advisable to ensure
compliance with site plan review standards or to protect the
public's health, safety, or general welfare. If the Planning Board
finds that the proposed plan does not comply with all applicable
review standards, it shall issue an order denying site plan approval.
In either case the Planning Board shall, within 10 working days
after the completion of its deliberations, issue specific written
findings of fact supporting its decision.
(7)
§ 125-61 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-61
109:468
Minor site plans and subdivision modifications. The Bar Harbor
Planning Department shall review a minor site plan application or
a subdivision modification application under § 125-58B(3), as follows:
[Added 5-5-200364; amended 11-2-2004; 6-13-200665]
Within five business days after the preapplication meeting required
by § 125-62A(2), the Planning Department shall provide the
applicant with a list of those materials set forth in § 125-66 which
the Planning Department determines will be required for minor site
plan or subdivision modification review.
(1)
Mailed notices as per § 125-61D shall occur. Public comment will
be received and reviewed by the Planning Department up to 10
business days after mailing of notice.
(2)
Within 15 business days after receipt of the minor site plan
application, the Planning Department shall determine if the
submission complies with §§ 125-67, 125-68, and 125-69, to the
extent the Planning Department determines such provisions are
applicable to the proposal. The Planning Department may impose
conditions necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements
of this chapter and shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer in
writing of any such conditions. If the Planning Department does
not act on an application for minor site plan review within 15
business days after receipt of an application, such application shall
be deemed denied.
(3)
Within 15 business days after receipt of the minor subdivision
modification application, the Planning Department shall determine
if the submission complies with §§ 125-67, 125-68, and 125-69, to
the extent the Planning Department determines such provisions
are applicable to the proposal. The Planning Department then
places a recommendation for endorsement, if applicable, on the
next available regular meeting of the Planning Board. The Planning
Board may impose conditions necessary to ensure compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and shall notify the Code
Enforcement Officer in writing of any such conditions. If the
Planning Board does not act on an application for subdivision
modification within 25 business days after receipt of an application,
such application shall be deemed denied. The provisions of §§
125-72, 125-73 and 125-74 do not apply to a subdivision
modification under §125-58B(3).
(4)
At the applicant's election, applications eligible for minor site plan
review may be submitted to the Planning Board for consideration
under major site plan review.
(5)
G.
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections G through I as H
through J, respectively.
65.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-61 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-61
109:469
§ 125-62. Standard conditions.
All activities, uses or developments approved pursuant to this Article V shall
comply with the standard conditions set forth in Article VIII.
§ 125-63. Waiver of submissions.
The Planning Board may, for good cause shown and only upon the written
request of an applicant specifically stating the reasons therefor, waive
any of the application requirements set forth in § 125-66 provided such
waiver will not unduly restrict the review process. The Planning Board
may condition such a waiver on the applicant's compliance with alternative
requirements. Good cause may include the Board's finding that particular
submissions are inapplicable, unnecessary, or inappropriate for a complete
review. Notwithstanding the waiver of a submission requirement, the
An applicant may submit one minor site plan or minor subdivision
plan in any three-year period per parcel of land. If an applicant
wishes to submit more than one minor site plan or minor
subdivision plan on the same parcel of land within a three-year
period, the Planning Board shall be consulted to determine the
appropriate review per § 125-58B(4). [Added 11-4-2008]
(6)
Other permits. The granting of site plan approval does not relieve
the applicant from the need to obtain any other permits or approvals
required prior to the commencement of any activity or use described
in §125-58. Such other required permits or approvals may include,
but are not limited to, subdivision approval, building, plumbing and
electrical permits, licenses granted pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. §1022,
Maine Department of Environmental Protection and United States
Army Corps of Engineers' approvals, subsurface wastewater disposal
permits, sewer connection permits, Maine Department of
Transportation approvals, and the like. The fact that the applicant may
have obtained or may have been granted such permits or approvals
prior to site plan review may be considered by the Planning Board as
evidence as to the plan's compliance with applicable review standards
but shall not be deemed conclusive evidence as to compliance. Site plan
approval shall not be granted, however, until zoning compliance has
been confirmed or any necessary relief and/or finding from the Board of
Appeals has been received or certificates of appropriateness reviewed
by the Design Review Board pursuant to Article XIII, Design Review,
as applicable, have been granted. [Amended 11-2-1999; 5-5-2003;
6-13-2006]
H.
Recording. All proceedings of the Planning Board, including public
hearings and deliberations, but except proceedings legally conducted in
executive session, shall be electronically or stenographically recorded.
I.
Failure to act. Failure of the Planning Board to act within any of the
time requirements set forth herein shall constitute a denial of the
application.
J.
§ 125-61 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-63
109:470
Planning Board may, at any later point in the review process, rescind such
waiver if it appears that the submission previously waived is necessary for
an adequate review. A request for a submission previously waived shall not
affect the pending status of an application.
§ 125-64. Modification of standards. [Amended 5-5-2003]
The Planning Board may, only upon the written request of an applicant
specifically stating the reasons therefor, modify the site plan review
standards when necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare
or to address particular site characteristics. In no event shall the Planning
Board grant a modification that has the effect of altering or nullifying
the purpose or intent of municipal zoning, the Comprehensive Plan, or
Article III of this chapter. In granting modifications under this section, the
Planning Board may impose performance conditions reasonably necessary
to promote the purposes, goals and objectives of the Land Use Ordinance
and the Comprehensive Plan.
§ 125-65. Fees.
General. No application for site plan review shall be deemed complete
until the applicant has paid all fees as required by this section. All fees
shall be payable to the Town of Bar Harbor and shall be for the cost
of processing the site plan review application and, except as otherwise
specifically provided, shall not be refundable regardless of the final
decision to grant or deny site plan approval.
A.
Administrative and notice fees. Each application for site plan review
shall be accompanied by an administrative fee and a public notice fee,
which fees shall, from time to time, be set by the Bar Harbor Town
Council.
B.
Late fees. Each application for site plan review submitted after a
violation of this chapter has occurred on the property in question shall
be accompanied by a late fee which shall, from time to time, be set by
the Bar Harbor Town Council.
C.
Technical assistance fees. Because of the complexity of development
requirements today, it is often desirable for the Town to employ
independent expert assistance in reviewing a development. Costs
thereof shall be paid by the developer. In addition to such other fees
as are otherwise imposed by this chapter, the Town shall assess to
an applicant fees sufficient to cover 100% of its costs related to
independent geotechnical, hydrologic, engineering, planning,
architectural, legal and similar professional consulting costs. Such fees
shall be subject to the following limitations:
Such consultation shall be limited to reasonable and necessary
review or inspection that exceeds the expertise of the Town
Planning Department or its ability to review the application
materials or to inspect the project within reasonable time limits or
(1)
D.
§ 125-63 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-65
109:471
within such limits as are otherwise established by this chapter or
by law.
Such fees shall be assessed only to recover costs directly
associated with review of the application for a major site plan
submitted by the applicant to whom they are assessed or with the
inspection of the work prosecuted by such applicant pursuant to
said application. [Amended 5-5-2003]
(2)
Such fees shall be reasonable in amount, based upon the consulting
time involved and the complexity of the review or inspection.
(3)
The results of any consultation for which such fees are assessed
shall be available for public review, but such results shall be
deemed to have been made solely for the benefit of the Town of Bar
Harbor and shall remain its property.
(4)
Such fees shall be assessed for the privilege of pursuing an activity
requiring site plan approval and shall be payable without regard
to the decision rendered on the application or to the consultation
results.
(5)
Within 15 days of an application for site plan review being
determined complete, an applicant shall establish with the Town
a non-interest-bearing escrow account to guarantee payment of
actual fees pursuant to this section. The original deposit into said
account shall be in the amount set forth in the following subsection.
If the balance of the account shall be drawn down by 75%, the Town
shall notify the applicant and require that an additional amount,
reasonably estimated to cover the cost of the remaining review or
inspection, be deposited therein. The Town shall continue to notify
the applicant and require an additional amount to be deposited
each time the account is drawn down to less than 25% of the
original deposit.
(6)
The sum that an applicant shall originally deposit into said escrow
account shall be determined according to a schedule that shall,
from time to time, be established by the Bar Harbor Town Council.
(7)
Upon the denial of site plan approval, or upon an applicant's
completion of a project, the Town shall provide the applicant with
an accounting of expenditures from said escrow account and shall
return to the applicant any unused portion of the funds originally
deposited. In the event that the amount originally deposited in
said escrow account is insufficient to cover all costs incurred by
the Town and directly and reasonably related to said review and
inspection, the applicant shall pay to the Town the difference
between the amounts the applicant has already paid and the
amount ultimately expended.
(8)
In lieu of the establishment of an escrow account as aforesaid, an
applicant may provide the Town with a letter of credit, in form and
(9)
§ 125-65 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-65
109:472
§ 125-66. Submission requirements. [Amended 5-6-1996;
11-6-2001; 5-5-2003]
An application for a major site plan or subdivision review shall include, as
applicable:
content satisfactory to the Town Attorney, to ensure payment of
100% of the estimated costs to be incurred by the Town pursuant
to this Subsection D.
If, at any time, an applicant refuses to pay any amount reasonably
required under this section, the Town shall take one or more of the
following actions:
(a) Refuse to grant site plan approval.
(b) Refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy.
(c) Refuse to sign or release any plat or mylar.
(d) Issue a stop-work order for the project.
(e) Lien the subject property for all amounts due.
Institute legal action to recover all amounts due together with
all reasonable costs of collection, including attorneys' fees.
(f)
(10)
Form. A completed application on a form prescribed by the Planning
Department containing:
The names and addresses of all owners of the property being
developed;
(1)
(2) The names and addresses of all applicants;
(3) The names and addresses of all representatives of the applicants;
An indication of whether there is registered farmland within 150
feet of the proposed development;
(4)
The names and addresses of all other property owners within 300
feet of the property being developed;
(5)
A description of the proposed use(s) of the property being
developed;
(6)
Written permission from the owners of the property allowing the
Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, to enter and have
access to the property at all reasonable and proper times during
and immediately upon completion of construction to ensure
compliance with all applicable standards of this chapter;
(7)
A completed checklist of submissions with reference to
appropriately numbered exhibits;
(8)
A.
§ 125-65 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-66
109:473
A set of proposed findings with reference to exhibit(s) supporting
proposed findings.
(9)
Fees; taxes; compliance with previously approved plans. Written
evidence from appropriate municipal officials that: [Amended
11-4-2003]
The applicants have paid all applicable fees set forth in § 125-65
except technical assistance fees, which fees shall be paid no later
than 15 days after the application has been deemed complete;
(1)
The applicants are not in violation of any previously approved site
or subdivision plan, any building permit, any other locally issued
permit or any provision of this chapter.
(2)
B.
Title and interest. Evidence of the applicants' legal interest in the
property sufficient to allow the applicants to undertake the activity or
use for which site plan approval has been requested, including:
(1) A copy of the current deed to the property;
A copy of any purchase and sale agreement to which the applicants
are parties;
(2)
Copies of all easements, deed restrictions, rights-of-way or other
encumbrances currently affecting the property.
(3)
C.
Legal documents. Copies of any legal documents associated with the
proposed development together with written evidence that the Town
Council and the Town Attorney are satisfied that such documents
adequately protect the Town's interests. Such documents shall include,
but shall not be limited to:
Any restrictive covenants, easements or maintenance agreements
intended to run with the land, or any portion thereof, or any
dwelling unit, including but not limited to any conditions,
covenants, easements or agreements intended to maintain common
or shared roads, drainage areas or utilities or to protect open
space, reserved areas, recreation areas, natural features, views,
vistas or rights of access to any location by the public, or historic or
archaeological features, and the manner in which said conditions,
covenants, easements or agreements will be enforced;
(1)
Any proposed deed by which the applicants propose to convey any
roads or other interest in the property to the Town or to any other
municipal or quasi-municipal entity;
(2)
(3) Any proposed performance and live plant maintenance guarantees;
For any condominium, as defined by the Maine Revised Statutes as
amended, a copy of the proposed declaration, development rights,
special declarant rights, bylaws of the unit owners' association and
all other legal documents relating thereto;
(4)
D.
§ 125-66 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-66
109:474
(5) Site restoration guarantees.
Permits. All applicable permits or approvals from the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection and the Army Corps of
Engineers, together with any of the other permits or approvals referred
to in § 125-61H that the Planning Board may require. [Amended
5-3-2004]
E.
Approval of capacity and design. Statements from appropriate officials
that the proposed development will not cause an unreasonable burden
on and, where applicable, approving design plans for construction of
or connection to those of the following public services to be utilized or
impacted by or constructed for the proposed development:
(1) Police;
(2) Solid waste;
(3) Water supply;
(4) Stormwater disposal;
(5) Sewer and wastewater treatment;
(6) Schools and busing;
(7) Recreation facilities;
(8) Streets, street maintenance and snow removal.
F.
Design plans. Detailed design plans, including plans showing all
connections with existing public or private facilities, approved by an
engineer and demonstrating compliance with all applicable standards
set forth in this chapter for those of the following to be constructed or
utilized for or by the proposed development:
(1) Public water supply;
(2) Central private water supply;
(3) Individual wells;
(4) Fire hydrants, dry hydrants and fire ponds;
(5) Public sewer;
(6) Central subsurface wastewater system;
(7) Shared subsurface wastewater system;
(8) Stormwater disposal system;
(9) All other utilities, including gas, electricity and cable television.
G.
Design approval by DHS or DEP. The written approval of the Maine
Department of Human Services (DHS) or the Maine Department of
H.
§ 125-66 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-66
109:475
Environmental Protection (DEP), as applicable, for those of the
following to be constructed or utilized for or by the proposed
development:
(1) Central private water supply (DHS);
(2) Individual wells (DHS);
(3) Central or shared subsurface wastewater system (DHS);
(4) Wastewater discharge license (DEP).
Approval by DOT. The written approval of the Maine Department of
Transportation (DOT) if the developer proposes improvements within or
to streets within the Department's jurisdiction.
I.
Maps, plats or plans. Subject to the note below,66 one or more maps,
plats or plans indicating such of the following as are applicable:
For each map, plat or plan an indication of magnetic North, the
date of its preparation, a graphic map scale, the names and
addresses of the record owner and any subdivider, developer,
designer, surveyor or engineer, and the name of each municipality
in which the development is located;
(1)
Location of the site, with reference to surrounding areas as
indicated on a USGS 7.5 minute map;
(2)
+*The names of all adjoining property owners, including owners of
property directly across a street from the proposed development,
with book and page references to their properties, together with an
indication of the locations of such properties;
(3)
(4) Assessor's tax map and lot number;
(5) +*Zoning district(s) in which the site being developed is located;
+*The lot lines, including metes and bounds dimensions, of the site
being developed and all lots being created within the site;
(6)
(7) +*The area of each lot in square feet;
(8) +*The locations of permanent reference monuments;
(9) +*The exact acreage of the proposed development;
+*Any remaining portion of the owner's property if the proposed
development covers only a portion of the owner's contiguous
holdings;
(10)
(11)+*Lot numbers;
J.
66.Editor's Note: See the notes at the end of this Subsection J.
§ 125-66 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-66
109:476
+All lots that were, within the previous five years, contiguous to
and in common ownership with the tract being developed;
(12)
Locations and names of existing subdivisions within 200 feet of the
proposed subdivision and the names of the owners thereof;
(13)
+Topography showing existing and proposed contours at five-foot
intervals for slopes averaging 5% or greater and at ten-foot
intervals for land of lesser slope, with a benchmark clearly
designated, except that for proposed gravel extraction or mining
activities topography shall be shown for all land extending 100 feet
beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the operation is to take
place;
(14)
A medium-density soils survey, unless a high-density survey is
required by the Planning Board, identifying the soils' boundaries
and names in the proposed development, with soils information
superimposed on a plot plan in accord with the United States
Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation
Service National Cooperative Soil Classification; [Amended
6-10-2008]
(15)
Locations of existing buildings, structures, streets, sidewalks,
easements, driveways, entrances and exits within 200 feet of the
site being developed;
(16)
+Locations of existing and proposed buildings, structures and uses
on the site being developed;
(17)
+Distance between all existing and proposed buildings and
structures;
(18)
+Locations of existing and proposed utilities such as gas,
electricity, cable television and telephone;
(19)
(20)Locations of existing and proposed signs;
Locations of existing and proposed exterior lighting fixtures and
radius and intensity of light (in footcandles);
(21)
Landscaping, buffering and screening plan showing what will
remain and what will be planted, indicating the botanical and
common names of plantings, dimensions, times of planting and
maintenance plans;
(22)
Limits and locations of the clearing of vegetation that will occur
on the site, including but not limited to clearing associated with
proposed development;
(23)
? Locations of open drainage courses, significant vernal pools,
wetlands and sand and gravel aquifers and a description of these
features; [Amended 6-13-200667]
(24)
§ 125-66 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-66
109:477
(25)Locations of stone walls, graveyards and fences;
Locations of deer wintering areas, significant wildlife habitats,
fisheries and fish spawning grounds, as identified by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, and other important
or unique natural areas and site features, including but not limited
to scenic areas, habitat for rare and endangered plants and
animals, unique natural communities and natural areas together
with a description of such features;
(26)
Locations of rare and irreplaceable natural areas as identified by
the Maine Critical Areas Program;
(27)
Locations of identified local, state or federal historic or
archaeological sites and a description of such features;
(28)
Locations of trees at least eight inches as measured 4 1/2 inches
above grade;
(29)
+*Locations of all water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands on
the site and within 250 feet of the shoreline thereof; [Amended
6-13-2006; 6-8-2010]
(30)
(31)+*Shoreline; [Amended 6-8-2010]
(32)+*Hundred-year flood elevation;
+Identification of any portion of the site subject to storm flooding
as indicated by standing water occurring on saturated soils after a
heavy rain, or land inundated when a surface water body overflows
its banks;
(33)
+Lines indicating the required front, side and rear setbacks and all
setbacks from bodies of water;
(34)
+*Locations of existing and proposed fire hydrants, dry hydrants,
fire ponds and other sources of water to be used to combat fire
within the development;
(35)
+Location and dimension of proposed access to the site for firefighting
equipment and other emergency vehicles;
(36)
+*Location of any existing and proposed access over or through the
site to any water body;
(37)
+*Locations of proposed access to adjacent undeveloped land
whether owned by the developer or any other party;
(38)
+*Locations of all areas, existing and proposed, to be dedicated to
or reserved for public use, open space or recreation areas;
(39)
67.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-66 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-66
109:478
+*Locations of existing and proposed easements related to the
property;
(40)
Location of the solid or industrial, chemical, explosive or hazardous
waste or material to be hauled, stored, used, generated or disposed
of to, at or from the site;
(41)
(42)+Calculation of existing and proposed lot coverage;
+Legally existing and proposed parking, loading and unloading
areas indicated with dimensions, traffic patterns, parking angles,
curb radii and such other information as may be necessary to
ensure compliance with applicable standards;
(43)
Detailed design plans for all streets, sidewalks and other means of
access, including:
Construction drawings showing a plan view, profile and typical
cross section of proposed and existing streets and sidewalks
within 300 feet at fifty-foot intervals and at a distance sufficient
to show the full drainage scheme of any proposed intersection;
(a)
(b) Intersections of proposed streets with existing streets;
+*Roadway and right-of-way limits, including edge of
pavement, edge of shoulder, sidewalks and curbs;
(c)
Kind, size, location, material, profile, cross section and inverts
of each existing and proposed drainage structure, including
its location with respect to existing natural waterways and
proposed drainageways;
(d)
(e) Complete curve data for all horizontal and vertical curves;
(f) Turning radii at all intersections;
(g) Center-line gradients;
The length of all straight lines, deflection angles, radii, length
of curves and central angles of all curves, tangent distances
and tangent bearings for each street;
(h)
Locations, dimensions, grades, radii and contours of required
acceleration and deceleration lanes;
(i)
Design details for all improvements accessory to roads,
sidewalks or other means of access, including driveways,
bridges, curbs and bumpers;
(j)
(k) Direction(s) of travel;
(l) Locations of crosswalks;
(m) *Proposed street names of proposed streets;
(44)
§ 125-66 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-66
109:479
*The proposed name of any subdivision.
NOTES: [Amended 5-3-1999; 5-5-2003]
A. Minor site plan submissions. Minor site plan
applications shall show all information listed in this
section as pertinent to the proposed site plan. The
Planning Department, in the pre-application meeting,
shall determine these items.
B. The scope of the Planning Department's review in
considering a proposed revision to a previously
approved subdivision or site plan shall be limited to
those portions of the plan that have been changed.
C. All information on each map, plat or plan shall be easily
legible. Each map, plat or plan shall be no larger than
24 inches by 36 inches with a two-inch margin outside
the border line on the left side for binding and a oneinch
margin outside the border lines on the remaining
sides.
D. Except as otherwise provided herein, all maps, plats
and plans shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 40
feet to the inch.
E. For subdivisions, those items above indicated with (*)
shall be included on each of two reproducible stablebased
transparent originals (one to be recorded at the
Hancock County Registry of Deeds and one to be file in
the Planning Department) and three paper copies of a
plat, which plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more
than 100 feet to the inch. Final versions of the two
reproducible stable-based transparent originals must
be submitted for endorsement by the Planning Board
within 45 days of final approval by the Planning Board.
[Amended 5-2-2005]
F. Plats for recording with the Hancock County Registry
of Deeds must include all items indicated with (+),
along with any other items required by the Register of
Deeds, and be sealed by a Maine-licensed professional
recognized by the Register of Deeds. Additionally, the
Planning Board may require that existing site
information for all items indicated with (+) be shown
on a plan prepared by an appropriate Maine-licensed
professional. [Amended 5-2-2005]
G. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board, the
applicant shall submit one copy of the plat or site plan
in an electronic file format approved by the Planning
Department in lieu of one paper copy. [Added
5-2-2005]
(n)
§ 125-66 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-66
109:480
H. For those items marked with (?), all wetland
boundaries must be delineated using the methods
described in the “Corps of Engineers Wetlands
Delineation Manual” as most recently amended and
published. [Added 6-13-200668]
Assessor's certification of street names. Written certification of the
Municipal Tax Assessor that the proposed street names for proposed
streets in the development comply with all requirements for the
enhanced 911 system.
K.
Photographs. Photographs, including a copy of the Town's aerial
photograph, photographs from adjacent public ways, photographs from
within a site and photographs from adjacent bodies of water, including
wetlands, showing:
(1) Existing improvements on the site and with 200 feet thereof;
Existing vegetation and landscaping on the site and with 200 feet
thereof;
(2)
Other physical and natural features on the site and with 200 feet
thereof.
(3)
L.
Subsurface wastewater disposal. When sanitary waste disposal is to be
accomplished by subsurface wastewater disposal systems:
An on-site investigation by a site evaluator licensed by the Maine
Department of Health and Human Services and containing the
types of soils, locations of test sites, and proposed locations;
[Amended 6-10-2008]
(1)
Designs of the most appropriate and suitable subsurface
wastewater disposal systems on form HHE 200;
(2)
Evidence of the cumulative impact of the proposed systems when
considered in conjunction with other subsurface wastewater
disposal systems in the vicinity.
(3)
M.
Groundwater. With respect to groundwater to be extracted by the
development: [Amended 5-2-2005; 6-10-2008]
A statement as to the quantity of groundwater to be extracted. For
residential development, the groundwater extraction quantity shall
be at least equal to the wastewater disposal quantity based on the
Plumbing Code and site evaluation. For other groundwater uses
such as irrigation or heat pumps, the statement must be made by a
registered Maine professional engineer. The information submitted
must include the expected quantity of water withdrawal expressed
(1)
N.
68.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-66 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-66
109:481
as an annual total, maximum monthly rate and a maximum daily
rate.
A hydrogeologic assessment is required when any one or more of
the following are proposed:
Groundwater withdrawal rates to exceed 300 gallons per day
per well and/or 1,000 gallons per day for the development;
(a)
(b) Lot sizes smaller than recommended by the nitrate analysis;
(c) Public water supply on the site proposed for development;
Wastewater flows that exceed 2,000 gallons per day in one or
more engineered septic systems;
(d)
Wells proposed to be located within 200 feet of the shoreline
or farther than 200 feet from the shore but located adjacent to
existing lots where wells are within 600 feet of the shoreline
and lots are less than one acre in size;
(e)
Development on or within 300 feet of a mapped sand and
gravel aquifer;
(f)
Development within 300 feet of an existing public water
supply;
(g)
(h) Wastewater disposal within 100 feet of a surface water body;
(i) Quarrying/mining operations; and/or
(j) Commercial/Industrial development.
(2)
An analytic, finite-element, or finite-difference groundwater model
is required when any one or more of the following are proposed:
Multiple wells in a sensitive setting (such as two or more wells
proposed within 200 feet of the shore);
(a)
(b) More than 15 lots served by on-site water and wastewater;
(c) Lots smaller than 1/2 acre in size on average;
(d) Engineered septic systems; and/or
Public water supply developed on site to serve the
development.
(e)
(3)
On-site drilling and additional requirements.
Onsite drilling with locations recorded on Maine State Grid
Coordinates, geologic logging, monitoring well installation,
groundwater level measurement to NGVD29 datum, and
background water quality measurements are required when
any one or more of the following are proposed:
(a)
(4)
§ 125-66 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-66
109:482
[1] Large-quantity hazardous waste generator;
More than 1,320 gallons of petroleum products stored on
site;
[2]
Subdivision of 15 or more lots with an average lot size of
less than three acres; and/or
[3]
Development on or within 300 feet of a sand and gravel
aquifer.
[4]
This drilling shall include a minimum of three wells. The
minimum well requirement shall include one upgradient well,
one downgradient well, and a well at another location on the
site. If soil is greater than 10 feet thick, explorations shall be
nested with both surficial and bedrock wells. Bedrock wells
shall extend at least 50 feet into rock. On-site water quality
testing shall include total coliform, E coli, sodium, calcium,
magnesium, potassium, iron, manganese, arsenic, sulfate,
nitrate as nitrogen, chloride, carbonate, bicarbonate. If salt
water intrusion is a potential issue, testing shall include iodide
and boron. If a waste material or recycled waste material
other than residential sewage will be generated or stored on
the site, water quality testing shall include tests for chemical
constituents of the material that are soluble and for which
a maximum contaminant level (MCL) or maximum exposure
guideline (MEG) has been established by the Maine
Department of Health and Human Services. Minimum
detection limits for all parameters for which an MCL or MEG
is established shall be no higher than the applicable standard.
(b)
Erosion and sedimentation. A soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan endorsed by the Hancock County Soil and Water Conservation
District or the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission.
O.
Fire protection. The following items with respect to fire protection:
A statement from the Municipal Fire Chief that:
The proposed development will not cause an unreasonable
burden on the Fire Department's ability to deliver fireprotection
services;
(a)
The Fire Chief or his/her designee has reviewed the applicant's
proposed locations for fire hydrants, dry hydrants and fire
ponds, and other sources of water to combat fire within the
development and approves of same;
(b)
The Fire Chief or his/her designee has reviewed the location,
dimension and construction of proposed access to the site
for fire-fighting equipment and other emergency vehicles and
approves of same;
(c)
(1)
P.
§ 125-66 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-66
109:483
The Fire Chief or his/her designee, unless the Fire Chief has
deferred to the State Fire Marshal's Office or unless the
approval of the State Fire Marshal's Office is required by law,
has reviewed preliminary construction plans for the proposed
development and certifies that such plans comply in all
respects with applicable Life Safety Codes (NFPA 101).
(d)
If required by the Municipal Fire Chief or by law, a statement by
the State Fire Marshal's Office that it has reviewed preliminary
construction plans for the proposed development and has given
preliminary approval thereto.
(2)
Solid waste and hazardous waste or material. For any solid waste or
industrial, chemical, explosive or hazardous waste or material to be
hauled, stored, used, generated or disposed of to, at or from the site:
(1) A description of its amount and nature;
Copies of all state or federal statutes or regulations governing such
waste or material;
(2)
Copies of all state or federal permits required for the handling,
disposal, transportation or storage of such waste material;
(3)
Proposed methods of handling, disposal, transportation or storage
of such waste or material.
(4)
Q.
Building plans, elevations and interior use. For all proposed buildings
and structures and for all existing buildings and structures for which a
change of use is proposed:
Building plans for all levels of all buildings and structures,
including but not limited to fences;
(1)
All elevations, indicating the height of the structure and proposed
materials and exterior colors;
(2)
(3) Proposed use of all floor area, including basements and attics; and
When the proposed use is a restaurant, the maximum seating
capacity thereof.
(4)
R.
The lighting plan shall indicate the location of each current and
proposed outdoor lighting fixture. [Amended 11-4-2008]
The lighting plan should include a key to the proposed lighting that
provides the following information:
Type and number of luminaire equipment (fixtures), including
the cutoff characteristics, indicating manufacturer and model
number(s).
(a)
Lamp source type (bulb type, i.e., high-pressure sodium),
lumen output, and wattage.
(b)
(1)
S.
§ 125-66 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-66
109:484
Mounting height indicated, with distance noted to nearest
property line for each luminaire.
(c)
Types of timing devices used to control on/off and the hours
set for illumination, as well as the proposed hours when each
fixture will be operated.
(d)
Lighting manufacturer-supplied specifications ("cut sheets") that
include photographs of the fixtures, indicating the certified cutoff
characteristics of the fixture.
(2)
If requested by the Planning Department, an isometric footcandle
distribution diagram should be provided, plotting the light levels
at the designated mounting heights for the proposed fixtures.
Maximum luminance levels should be expressed in footcandle
measurements on a grid of the site showing isofootcandle readings
in every ten-foot square. The grid shall include light contributions
from all sources (i.e., pole-mounted, wall-mounted, sign, and
streetlights.) This plan will need to be stamped and certified by a
licensed professional, as an architect or engineer.
(3)
Signs. Design details for all existing and proposed signs sufficient for
the Planning Board to determine compliance with § 125-67BB.
T.
Traffic impact. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic
to be generated on a daily basis and at peak hours and, for all
developments of 10 or more lots, dwelling units or rental units, for all
developments expected to generate more than 100 vehicle trips per
day, and for all development deemed by the Planning Board because
of special circumstances to require it, a traffic impact analysis report
by a licensed professional engineer that the street and intersections
providing access to the development and neighboring streets and
intersections that can be expected to carry traffic to and from the
development have adequate carrying capacity to accommodate the
amount and types of traffic to be generated by the proposed use and
further demonstrating whether the development shall reduce the level
of service to below “D” by using the capacity analysis procedures set
forth in the current edition of the Highway Capacity Manual, published
by the Transportation Research Board. Traffic studies shall include the
data and analysis of peak summer traffic as well as traffic patterns
in winter months to determine the full range of impacts on the
development and from the development. [Amended 11-3-2009]
U.
Technical and financial capacity. Evidence of the applicant's technical
and financial capacity to complete the site plan as presented, including
but not limited to:
An estimate of all anticipated costs associated with the
development;
(1)
The applicant's proposed method of meeting such costs, including
financing arrangements, grants and the like;
(2)
V.
§ 125-66 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-66
109:485
A curriculum vita of each professional associated with the design
or construction of the proposed development;
(3)
A description of all similar projects completed by the developer or
the professionals assisting with the development.
(4)
Business, commercial, industrial and mining. In addition to any of
the foregoing requirements that are applicable, for proposed business,
commercial or industrial uses, or for a proposed gravel extraction or
mining operation:
A written description of the proposed operation in sufficient detail
to indicate the degree to which the operation will create traffic
congestion, noise, toxic or noxious matter, vibrations, odor, heat,
glare, air pollution, gases and fumes, waste, dirt, fly ash, dust,
smoke or other objectionable or offensive effects, together with
engineering, architectural and landscaping plans for mitigating or
eliminating such effects;
(1)
The hours of operation, the proposed shifts to be worked and the
maximum number of employees on each shift;
(2)
The name and current address of the individual, firm, or
corporation conducting the business, use or operation, if different
from the property owner.
(3)
W.
Mining. In addition to any of the foregoing requirements that are
applicable, for a proposed gravel extraction or mining operation:
A copy of the Maine Department of Environmental Protection site
location application;
(1)
An extraction plan that includes the estimated longevity of an
operation and the amounts and types of materials to be removed
and that demonstrates that the proposed operation shall comply
with all applicable review and performance standards, including
those set forth in § 125-69L;
(2)
A site restoration plan specifically describing the manner in which
the gravel pit or mining area shall be returned to as near a natural
state as is practicable by grading, filling, draining, and planting
(such plan shall be prepared in consultation with the Bar Harbor
Conservation Commission and shall include the estimated cost of
site restoration);
(3)
The proposed form of a performance guarantee for the estimated
cost of site restoration in accordance with the plan submitted
pursuant to the preceding subsection;
(4)
Plans for any anticipated washing operation, including any
proposal for groundwater extraction from the site for use in such
operation;
(5)
X.
§ 125-66 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-66
109:486
§ 125-67. General review standards.
The Planning Board, before granting site plan approval, must find that
the proposed plan will comply with each of the following standards. In all
instances the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant.
Evidence of adequate insurance against liability arising from
proposed extraction operations, which insurance shall be
maintained throughout the period of operation.
(6)
Additional information.
Any other information, documents or tests that the Planning Board
may, at any time during the review process, reasonably require
to assist it in a proper review or to clarify materials previously
submitted.
(1)
Any other information that the applicant wishes to submit in order
to demonstrate that the proposed development meets each of the
applicable standards of this chapter.
(2)
Y.
Permitted uses. Any proposed use must be a permitted use with site
plan approval, as determined by reference to Article III for each district
in which it is proposed.
A.
Lot standards. Except as modified by the provisions for planned unit
developments set forth in § 125-69M and S, as applicable, any proposed
structure or lot must comply with the lot size, area per family, road
frontage, lot width, and front, side and rear setback requirements,
and the shoreland zone lot standards in § 125-68B as determined by
reference to Article III for each district in which it is proposed subject
to the following: [Amended 5-7-1991; 11-5-1991; 5-1-1995;
5-6-1996; 11-2-1999; 11-4-2003; 5-3-2004; 11-2-2004; 5-2-2005;
6-13-2006; 11-7-2006; 11-4-2008; 6-8-2010]
(1) Any yard adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard.
Front setback distances shall be measured from the center line of
the traveled way in all districts except the Village Historic, Mount
Desert Street Corridor District, Downtown Village, Downtown
Residential, Hulls Cove Business, Village Residential and
Shoreland General Development I Districts where setback
distances shall be measured from the edge of the lot line.
[Amended 11-2-2010]
(2)
In any subdivision in which lots are not created, the distance from
the side of one principal building to the side of another principal
building shall be no less than twice the distance of the side yard
setback in the district; the distance from the side of one principal
building to the front of another principal building shall be no less
than twice the distance of the front yard setback in the district;
the distance from the side of one principal building to the back of
(3)
B.
§ 125-66 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:487
another principal building shall be no less than twice the distance
of the rear yard setback in the district; the distance from the front
of one principal building to the front or back of another principal
building shall be no less than twice the distance of the front yard
setback in the district; and the distance from the back of one
principal building to the back of another principal building shall
be no less than twice the distance of the rear yard setback in the
district.
Off-street parking.
No off-street parking or loading or maneuvering space for offstreet
parking shall be located within the front or side setbacks
of any district. This requirement shall not be construed to
prohibit parking in any area of any driveway associated with
single-family dwellings; provided, however, that in no event
may a vehicle, in any district, be parked within five feet of
a residential structure located on an abutting property in
different ownership.
(a)
(4)
If there is more than one principal structure on a lot, the lot area,
yard setback, and height requirements of the applicable district
shall apply separately to each building, but the combined area
occupied by the total number of buildings on the lot shall not
exceed the maximum lot coverage requirement of the district.
However, in the event a lot is occupied by a principal structure
or structures comprised exclusively of dwelling units and any
structures accessory thereto, then regardless of the number of
separate or detached structures, lot shall comply with both of the
following requirements:
The area of the lot must equal or exceed the minimum lot
area requirements for the district in which it is located or be
buildable as a nonconforming lot of record; and
(a)
The area of the lot must equal or exceed the lot area per
family requirement of the district regulations multiplied by the
number of dwelling units on the lot.
(b)
(5)
Exceptions to setback. The following structures, subject to the
limitations set forth below, are not subject to the setback
requirements of the district in which they are located, provided
that no such structure shall be constructed in such a way as to
obstruct visibility from the end of any driveway or otherwise to
constitute a safety hazard, and provided that the following
structures comply with the provisions in § 125-68B, if applicable.
Fences shall be set back 18 inches from the property line to
allow both sides to be maintained from the land belonging to
the owner of the fence and sufficient to allow compliance with
driveway and sight distance standards found in Subsection
E(27) and (20). Fences may be installed along a property line,
(a)
(6)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:488
provided that the abutting property owners consent to the
location and agree to provide access for maintenance on the
fence side separately and there is compliance with driveway
and sight distance standards found in Subsection E(27) and
(20).
(b) Driveways and walks, only with respect to front setbacks.
Septic tanks and leach fields, except as necessary to comply
with state law.
(c)
Signs, provided that no sign shall be located closer than five
feet to a lot line unless the setback requirement in that district
is less than five feet.
(d)
(e) Lights and mailboxes.
Equipment and structures necessary for access to or egress
from any existing structure by a person with a disability as
such term is defined in 5 M.R.S.A. § 4553, as amended,
provided that such equipment or structures shall comply with
the applicable setback requirements to the greatest extent
possible and shall not be used for any other purpose, such
as, but not limited to, display, dining or waiting area or living
space. However, such access to or egress from any
nonresidential structure constructed after May 7, 1996, shall
comply fully with all applicable setback requirements.
(f)
Trellises, arbors or other structures intended solely for the
support of live plants; structures less than three feet in height
used solely for containing live plants, such as raised bed
planters, hollow piers or walls containing raised plant beds;
and freestanding dry laid stone walls less than four feet in
height. In no case may any of the above be connected to a
principal structure or used as an enclosure that would extend
the footprint of an accessory structure inside the required
setback.
(g)
(h) Essential services.
Structures for active recreation in a public or private park may
be required to meet only the front setback.
(i)
(j) Roadside stands. [Added 11-2-2010]
Streetscape improvements, such as sidewalks, benches, public
bike and walking paths and the like. [Added 11-2-2010]
(k)
Road frontage exemption for certain lots. A lot may be exempt from
the road frontage requirements, provided that the lot is serviced by
a driveway that meets the requirements contained in Subsection E
and is located within a thirty-foot-wide easement running from the
street to the lot.
(7)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:489
Exceptions to lot coverage.
In the required front setback, the footprint of driveways and
sidewalks required for access to a site from a public or private
road shall not constitute lot coverage, except in the Shoreland
Districts. In the application of this standard, any footprint area
of the portion of driveways larger than the minimum width
required under § 125-67E(26) shall constitute lot coverage;
and any footprint area of a sidewalk that exceeds four feet
in width or is wider than that required under § 125-67G(3)(a)
shall constitute lot coverage.
(a)
In the required setbacks, essential services shall not constitute
lot coverage.
(b)
(8)
Height. Any proposed structure must comply with the height
requirements, as determined by reference to Article III for each district
in which it is proposed. In no event shall a mechanical space exempted
from height requirements have a footprint area greater than 30% of the
floor below. [Amended 5-2-1994; 11-4-2003; 6-13-200669]
C.
Parking requirements. Any activity that can be expected to generate
vehicular traffic shall provide for off-street parking in accordance with
the following requirements. Parking requirements may be reduced, as
determined by the Planning Board, when at least 5% of the required
parking spaces are designated for low-emitting and fuel-efficient
vehicles, carpools or vanpools or any combination thereof, and are
marked as such. Parking requirements may also be reduced, as
determined by the Planning Board, for properties that are located on
a regularly scheduled bus route. [Amended 11-5-1991; 5-2-1994;
11-4-1997; 3-24-1998; 5-5-2003; 11-4-2003; 5-3-2004; 5-2-2005;
6-13-2006; 6-8-2010; 11-2-2010; 6-13-2017]
Off-street parking lot shall always be considered a permitted
accessory use when required or provided to serve a permitted use
in any district.
(1)
Required off-street parking lot shall be located on the same lot as
the principal building or use that it serves, except that, with site
plan approval and subject to such conditions as the Planning Board
may impose, off-site, off-street parking spaces may be located on
land or premises of the same ownership as the lot containing the
principal building or use if said land or premises is dedicated for
parking.
Such off-site, off-street parking lots may not be farther than
500 feet from each entity requesting to utilize those spaces.
This distance shall be measured following a reasonable, safe
(a)
(2)
D.
69.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:490
walking route between the primary use and the parking lot
being utilized.
Such off-site, off-street parking lot shall be located in a district
that permits the use of the principal building or use.
(b)
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the following
minimum off-street parking shall be provided and maintained in
the case of new construction, alterations or changes of use which
would increase the parking demand according to the standards
set forth below, or any increase in the area used which increases
the number of persons using the premises. In the event of such
construction, alterations, change or increase, the entire premises
or use, and not just that portion constructed, altered, changed or
increased, shall become subject to the following requirements.
(a) Dwellings: one parking space for each dwelling unit.
Transient accommodations:
TA-1, bed-and-breakfast I and TA-3: one parking space plus
one parking space for each guest room.
[1]
Hotels, motels and conference centers: one parking space
for each guest room.
[2]
(b)
Schools: one parking space for each classroom plus one space
for each four employees.
(c)
Health institutions (bed facilities only): one parking space for
every three beds, plus one space for each employee, based on
the expected average employee occupancy.
(d)
Theaters, churches and other places of public assembly: one
parking space for every four seats or 10 spaces for every 1,000
square feet of assemblage space if no fixed seats.
(e)
Retail stores: two parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet
of gross leasable area.
(f)
Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments: four spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.
(g)
Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments - take out:
two parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable
area.
(h)
Professional offices and public buildings: two parking spaces
per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable area.
(i)
Marinas and nonresidential piers, docks and wharves:
minimum of 30 parking spaces plus one parking space for each
docking and mooring space.
(j)
(3)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:491
Other commercial recreation establishments (mini golf
courses, touring/sightseeing buses or boats, etc.): minimum of
15 parking spaces or the number deemed appropriate by the
Planning Board in site plan review.
(k)
Industrial: one parking space per each 1.5 employees, based
on the highest expected average employee occupancy, plus
visitor and customer parking to meet the needs of specific
operations.
(l)
Clubs (private). Any club organized after May 2, 1988, and any
club in existence and operating on May 2, 1988, which plans
an extension of its current operations shall provide off-street
parking for a minimum of 10 vehicles and such additional
number of off-street parking spaces as the Planning Board shall
deem necessary after considering the evidence presented at
site plan review.
(m)
Campgrounds: 200 square feet plus maneuvering space per
recreational vehicle, tent or shelter site.
(n)
Cabins and cottages: 200 square feet plus maneuvering space
for each cabin or cottage.
(o)
Museums and art galleries: one parking space per each two
employees.
(p)
Farmers' market: minimum of 1.5 parking spaces per number
of vendors for which the farmers' market is approved, rounded
to the next highest whole number.
(q)
Eleemosynary, educational or scientific institution, research
facility, or research production facility: one parking space per
each 1.5 employees, based on the highest expected average
employee occupancy, plus visitor and customer parking to
meet the needs of specific operations.
(r)
Automobile repair garage and automobile service station: one
space for each service bay and each mechanic.
(s)
Wholesale business establishment: one space per 1,000 square
feet of gross leasable area.
(t)
(u) (Reserved)
Medical clinics: four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet
of gross leasable area, plus a designated loading zone for
ambulance and bus dropoff and pickup.
(v)
Nursing/convalescent homes: one parking space per employee
on the largest work shift plus a designated loading zone for
ambulance and bus dropoff and pickup.
(w)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:492
The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall not be
required of nonconforming structures or uses in the case of
alterations or changes of use which would not increase the
generation of parking demand by the structure or use. The Code
Enforcement Officer, when reviewing permit and site plan review
applications involving alterations or change of nonconforming
structures or uses, shall make a determination whether such
alterations or changes increase parking demand above existing
use, with reference to the minimum parking requirements as set
forth above. Such a determination shall be made notwithstanding
any previous waivers of parking or loading requirements granted
by the Bar Harbor Appeals or Planning Board prior to May 1, 1989.
(4)
Calculations of the number of parking spaces to meet the
requirements of Subsection D(3) above shall be performed in the
following manner: Area of proposed development in square feet
times the number of units required per 1,000 square feet divided by
1,000. The result should be rounded up to the next whole number.
Example: Proposed retail store of 1,896 square feet: 1,896 x 3 /
1,000 = 5.688 which is rounded up to 6.
(5)
Shared parking. Applicants may request Planning Board approval
for shared parking to meet their off-street parking requirements,
provided that the times of usage do not conflict.
Applicants must demonstrate that demands for parking are at
different times of day (e.g., daytime vs. evening), different days
(weekdays vs. weekends), or different seasons of the year; and
that proposed uses will not occupy spaces at the same time.
The Planning Board shall review requests to share parking on
a case-by-case basis, using the following criteria:
[1] The type of business activity and size of business;
The anticipated demand for parking spaces and peak
requirements as recommended by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers;
[2]
[3] The composition of tenants or customers; and
[4] The turnover rate of shared spaces.
(a)
If shared parking spaces are on an off-site parking lot, such
parking lot may not be farther than 300 feet from each
business requesting to share those spaces. This distance shall
be measured following a reasonable, safe walking route
between the main entrance of each business and the parking
lot being shared.
(b)
A shared parking agreement shall be filed with the Planning
Department of the Town of Bar Harbor. This agreement must
specify the party or parties responsible for operating and
(c)
(6)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:493
maintaining the parking area, and for maintaining liability
coverage for personal injury and/or property damage. The
agreement must be approved by the Town Attorney prior to
Planning Board approval.
Parking areas and driveways. All site plans shall comply with the
following standards for parking areas and driveways:
There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress from
all parking spaces with the width of access drives or driveways
determined as part of site plan review, based on the proposed use
of the property, topography, and similar considerations.
(1)
To the greatest extent possible, access to parking stalls should not
be from major interior travel lanes or from public ways.
(2)
Parking areas shall be designed to permit each vehicle to proceed
to and from any parking stall without requiring the moving of any
other vehicle.
(3)
Parking stalls and aisle layout shall comply with the following
standards. Universally accessible or handicapped stalls and
pedestrian aisles are exempted from the dimensional requirements
of this subsection but shall comply with the current standards of
Americans with Disabilities Act requirements for parking stalls and
access aisles. [Amended 11-6-2001]
Parking
Angle Stall Width
Skew
Width Stall Depth
Aisle
Width
90º 9' 0" 9' 0" 18' 5" 25' 0"
60º 8' 6" 10' 5" 18' 0" 18' 0"
45º 8' 6" 12' 9" 17' 5" 13' 0"
30º 8' 6" 17' 0" 17' 0" 12' 0"
0º 12' 0"
(4)
Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving single-row
parking stalls placed at an angle of other than 90º.
(5)
Parking stalls, driveways, aisles and direction of traffic flow shall
be clearly marked and delineated by arrows and lines painted
on the pavement or otherwise. The Planning Board may require
that certain areas be designated, marked and maintained for firefighting
equipment or other emergency vehicles or purposes.
(6)
Major interior travel lanes shall be designed to allow for continuous
and uninterrupted traffic movement.
(7)
Devices such as guardrails, curbs, fences, walls and landscaping
shall be used to identify circulation patterns of parking areas and
to restrict driving movements diagonally across parking aisles but
shall not reduce the visibility of oncoming pedestrians or vehicles.
(8)
E.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:494
Sidewalks shall be provided between parking areas and principal
structures along aisles and driveways and wherever pedestrian
traffic shall occur. Such sidewalks shall have a minimum of four
feet of passable area and shall be raised six inches or more above
the parking area except where the sidewalks cross streets or
driveways. Guardrails or wheel stops permanently anchored to the
ground shall be provided in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles
shall not overhang or extend over sidewalks unless an additional
2 1/2 feet of sidewalk is provided to accommodate such overhang.
[Amended 5-4-1992]
(9)
To the greatest extent possible, parking areas should be arranged
so that it is not necessary for vehicles to back into any street.
(10)
Bumpers or wheel stops shall be provided where the overhangs of
parked cars might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through roads,
restrict pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways or damage
landscaping, buildings or other structures.
(11)
In addition to the requirements of Subsection H(1)(f), any parking
lot with an area over one acre shall be provided with shade trees
planted at representative points throughout the lot. There shall be
at least one tree planted for every 35 parking spaces. All such trees
shall, when placed, be at least four inches in diameter at a height
of four feet from the ground.
(12)
Parking space allocations shall be oriented to specific buildings or
structures or uses.
(13)
Parking areas should be designed to focus on major walkways,
which should be fenced or marked.
(14)
Where pedestrians must cross service or access roads to reach
parking areas, crosswalks shall be clearly designated by pavement
markings or signs and shall be lighted. Crosswalk surfaces should
be raised slightly to designate them to drivers, unless drainage
problems would result.
(15)
Driveways should approach pedestrian exit areas from the right to
permit passengers to alight to the sidewalk.
(16)
To the greatest extent possible, one-way traffic should be
established at building entrances.
(17)
Where bus traffic is expected, bus shelters and bus indentation
slots, off the roadway, shall be provided.
(18)
All entrance and exit driveways shall be located to afford maximum
safety to traffic, to provide for safe and convenient ingress and
egress to and from the site and to minimize conflict with the flow of
traffic.
(19)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:495
Any exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designed in profile
and grading and so located as to provide the following minimum
sight distances measured in each direction. The measurements
shall be from the driver's seat of a vehicle standing on that portion
of the exit driveway with the front of the vehicle a minimum of 10
feet behind the curbline or edge of shoulder.
Allowable Speed on Road To
Be Entered
(miles per hour)
Required Sight Distance
(feet)
25 160
40 275
45 325
50 350
55 425
(20)
Where a lot occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point of tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius of that
site. Access to the lot shall be provided across the frontage and to
the street where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and
for hazards to traffic and pedestrians.
(21)
No part of any driveway shall be located within 10 feet of a side
property line, except in the following districts: Downtown Village,
Shoreland General Development I and II, Hulls Cove Business,
Town Hill Business and Downtown Residential. However, in any
district the Planning Board shall permit a driveway serving two or
more adjacent sites to be located on or within 10 feet of a side
property line between the adjacent sites. [Amended 5-6-1996;
6-8-2010]
(22)
Where topographic and other conditions allow, provision shall be
made for circulation driveway connections to adjoining lots of
similar existing or potential use when such driveway connection
will facilitate fire protection services as approved by the Fire Chief
or when such driveway will enable the public to travel between
two existing or potential uses, generally open to the public, without
need to travel upon a street.
(23)
Where two or more two-way driveways connect a single site to any
one road, a minimum clear distance of 100 feet measured along
the right-of-way line shall separate the closest edges of any two
such driveways. If one driveway is two-way and one is a one-way
driveway, the minimum distance shall be 75 feet.
(24)
Driveways used for two-way operation shall intersect the road at an
angle of as near to 90º as site conditions will permit and in no case
less than 60º. Driveways used by vehicles in one direction of travel
(25)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:496
(right turn only) shall not form an angle smaller than 45º with a
road unless acceleration and deceleration lanes are provided.
Driveways shall be designed and constructed to accommodate
adequately the volume and character of vehicles anticipated to
be attracted daily to the development for which a site plan is
prepared, subject to the following minimums, provided that the
maximum width of any driveway shall not exceed double the
minimum required width: [Amended 5-7-1991; 5-6-1996;
5-1-2000; 6-8-2010]
One-Way
Up to
500 Feet
(feet)
One-Way
More
Than 500
Feet
(feet)
Two-Way
Up to
500 Feet
(feet)
Two-Way
More Than
500 Feet
(feet)
1 or 2 dwelling
units or bed-andbreakfast
I
through IV
12 16 12 16
3 to 8 dwelling
units or hotels;
motels;
conference
centers
12* 16* 16* 18*
More than 8
dwelling units
15* 18* 18* 20*
All other
commercial or
industrial
18* 18* 18* 18*
NOTES:
*All driveways, except for those serving one or two dwelling units
within 75 feet of their frontage road, shall be five feet wider at
the curbline, and this additional width may taper down until the
minimum width is reached at a distance of at least 10 feet into the
site. Overhanging branches shall be pruned to maintain a twelvefoot
vertical clearance above the entire driveway surface.
(26)
At each driveway curb cut, no visual obstructions higher than three
feet above street level shall be allowed closer than 10 feet to
the traveled way for a distance of 25 feet from the intersection,
measured along both the street and the driveway.
(27)
Entrances and exits shall be clearly identified by the use of signs,
curb cuts, and landscaping and shall comply with the Bar Harbor
policy on curb cuts and street entrances.
(28)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:497
Access points from a public road to commercial and industrial
operations shall be so located as to minimize traffic congestion and
to avoid generating traffic on local access streets of a primarily
residential character.
(29)
Notwithstanding the lesser requirements of this Subsection E, any
driveway that serves more than two dwelling units or that is more
than 500 in length shall, with respect to minimum grade, maximum
grade, crushed aggregate subbase course and crushed aggregate
base course, be constructed in accordance with the standards for
a private right-of-way as set forth in Subsection G(3)(a) and also
the requirements of Subsection G(3)(f), (g) and (h). [Amended
5-6-1996]
(30)
Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to prevent
the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage. Should the sidewalk be
so close to the curb at a depressed curb driveway as to cause the
ramp to be too steep and be likely to cause undercarriage drag, the
sidewalk shall be appropriately lowered to provide a suitable ramp
gradient.
(31)
Driveways shall not have a grade in excess of 15% over the entire
length. On arterials, the grade shall not be more than 5% for
the first 25 feet from the road unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board. Driveways shall not be located where visibility is
limited because of curves or topography.
(32)
Where a driveway serves right-turning traffic from a parking area
providing 200 or more parking spaces and the road has an average
daily traffic (ADT) volume exceeding 7,500 vehicles, an
acceleration lane shall be provided which is at least 200 feet long
and at least 10 feet wide measured from the road curbline. A
minimum thirty-five-foot curb return radius shall be used from the
driveway to the acceleration lane.
(33)
Where the same conditions exist as in the previous subsection and
a driveway serves as an entrance to a development, a deceleration
lane shall be provided for traffic turning right into the driveway
from the road. The deceleration lane shall be at least 200 feet
long and at least 10 feet wide measured from the road curbline. A
minimum thirty-five-foot curb return radius shall be used from the
deceleration lane into the driveway.
(34)
Loading requirements. In connection with every building or group of
buildings which is to be occupied by industrial, office, laboratory or
commercial uses, or by uses involving distribution of material or
merchandise by vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained offstreet
loading berths in accordance with the requirements set forth
below.
F.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:498
Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the
building or use to be served so that trucks, trailers and containers
for loading or storage shall not be located upon any Town way.
(1)
Each loading berth shall be at least 12 feet wide, 50 feet long, and
14 feet high, and no loading berth may occupy any part of any
required front, side or rear setback.
(2)
The following minimum off-street loading berths shall be provided
and maintained in the case of new construction, alterations or
changes of use which would increase the loading demand
according to the standards set forth below, or any increase in
the area used which increases such loading demand. In the event
of such construction, alterations, change or increase, the entire
premises or use, and not just that portion constructed, altered,
changed or increased, shall become subject to the following
requirements:
Health institutions: in addition to ambulance spaces, one berth
for the first 10,000 to 30,000 square feet of gross floor space
plus one additional berth for each additional 30,000 square
feet of gross floor space or portion thereof.
(a)
Hotels and offices: one berth if over 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area.
(b)
Retail, commercial, planned commercial and industrial groups,
wholesaling, manufacturing and industrial uses: one berth if
between 5,000 and 29,999 square feet of gross floor area; two
berths if between 30,000 and 50,000; four berths if between
50,000 and 75,000; plus one additional berth for each
additional 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. [Amended
6-8-2010]
(c)
Schools: one berth if over 15,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
(d)
Undertakers and funeral homes: one berth plus one additional
berth for each 5,000 square feet of gross floor space or portion
thereof in excess of 5,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(e)
(3)
Streets, sidewalks and access.
Capacity.
New streets and intersections, and streets and intersections
giving access to the development and neighboring streets and
intersections which can be expected to carry traffic to and from
the development shall have traffic carrying capacity and be
suitably improved to accommodate the amount and types of
traffic generated by the proposed use. No development shall
reduce the street’s level of service below “D” as determined
(a)
(1)
G.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:499
by using the capacity analysis procedures set forth in the 2000
Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209, as published by
the Transportation Research Board. [Amended 11-3-2009]
Accessways shall be of a design and have sufficient capacity to
avoid queuing of entering vehicles on any street.
(b)
The proposed development shall not cause unreasonable
highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to the use of highways or public roads, existing or
proposed.
(c)
Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic or
pedestrians, or to avoid traffic congestion, provision shall be
made for turning lanes, traffic directional islands, frontage
roads, driveways and traffic controls within public streets or
for the connection of internal pedestrian walkways to the
nearest public sidewalk when such sidewalk is reasonably
close to the proposed development and it is reasonably
anticipated that the users of the proposed development will
regularly use such sidewalk in connection with their use of the
proposed development. [Amended 5-4-1992]
(d)
Layout.
Proposed streets shall conform, as far as practical, to the Bar
Harbor Comprehensive Plan.
(a)
All streets within subdivisions shall be so designed that they
will provide safe vehicular travel while discouraging movement
of through traffic.
(b)
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location
of all streets shall be considered in their relation to existing
or planned streets, to topographical conditions and to public
convenience and safety and their appropriate relation to the
proposed use of the land to be served by such streets. Grades
of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original
topography.
(c)
In the case of dead-end streets, where needed or desirable, the
Planning Board may require the reservation of a twenty-footwide
easement in the line of the street to provide continuation
of pedestrian traffic or utilities to the next street. The Planning
Board may also require the reservation of a fifty-foot easement
in line with the street to provide for continuation of the street
where future adjoining subdivision is possible.
(d)
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited
except where their control is definitely placed in the Town
under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
(e)
(2)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:500
Where a development borders an existing narrow road (below
standards set herein) or when the Comprehensive Plan
indicates plans for realignment or widening of a road that
would require use of some of the land in the development,
the developer shall be required to show areas for widening or
realigning such roads on the plan, marked "Reserved for Road
Realignment (or Widening) Purposes." It shall be mandatory
to indicate such reservation on the plan when a proposed
widening or realignment is shown on the Official Map. Land
reserved for such purposes may not be counted in satisfying
setback or yard or area requirements of this chapter.
(f)
Where a development abuts or contains an existing or
proposed arterial street, the Planning Board may require
marginal access streets (street parallel to arterial street
providing access to adjacent lots), reverse frontage (that is,
frontage on a street other than the existing or proposed
arterial street) with screen planting contained in a non-access
reservation along the rear property line, or such other
treatments as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation of through and
local traffic.
(g)
Two street connections with existing public streets, streets
shown on the Official Map, or streets on an approved
subdivision plan for which a performance guarantee has been
filed and accepted: [Amended 11-7-2006]
[1] Are required for subdivisions of 15 or more lots; and
May be required by the Planning Board for subdivisions of
15 or more dwelling units.
[2]
(h)
Entrances of any streets onto existing or proposed collector
streets shall not exceed a frequency of one per 400 feet of
street frontage. Entrances of any streets onto existing or
proposed arterial streets shall not exceed a frequency of one
per 1,000 feet of street frontage.
(i)
Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
(j)
Where the streets in a subdivision are to remain private, the
following words shall appear on the recorded plan: "All streets
in this subdivision shall remain private streets to be
maintained by the developer or the lot owners and shall not be
accepted or maintained by the Town."
(k)
Design and construction.
All streets shall be designed and constructed to meet the
following standards for streets according to their classification
(a)
(3)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:501
as determined by the Planning Board: [Amended 5-7-1991;
5-6-1996]
Street Construction Standards
ArterialCollectorMinor
Private
ROW
Industrial/
Commercial
Minimum
right-of-way
width (feet)
80 60 60 50 60
Minimum
pavement
width/
traveled way
width (feet)
44 24 20 184 30
Sidewalk
width (feet)
8 5 5 N/A N/A
Minimum
grade
.5% .5% .5% .5% .5%
Maximum
grade within
50 feet of
intersection
3% 3% 3% 3% 3%
Maximum
grade
5% 6% 10% 10% 5%
Minimum
center-line
radius (feet)
500 200 150 100 400
Minimum
tangent
between
curves of
reverse
alignment
(feet)
200 100 50 50 200
Roadway
crown (inch
per foot)
1/4 1/4 1/4 1/4 1/4
Minimum
angle of
street
intersections2
90º 60º 60º 60º 90º
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:502
Street Construction Standards
ArterialCollectorMinor
Private
ROW
Industrial/
Commercial
Minimum
curb radii at
intersections3
(feet)
30 20 15 15 303
Minimum
right-of-way
radii at
intersections
(feet)
20 10 10 10 20
Minimum
width of
shoulders
(each side)
(feet)
8 3 3 2 9
Crushed
aggregate
subbase
course (stone
maximum 4
inches)1
(inches)
18 18 14 14 18
Crushed
aggregate
base course
(inches)
4 4 4 4 4
Hot
bituminous
pavement
(total
thickness)1
(inches)
3 1/2 3 3 N/A 3 1/2
Surface
course1
(inches)
1 1/2 1 1 N/A 1 1/2
Base course1
(inches)
2 2 2 N/A 2
NOTES:
1Minimum thickness of material after compaction.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:503
Street Construction Standards
ArterialCollectorMinor
Private
ROW
Industrial/
Commercial
2Street intersection angles shall be as close to 90º as feasible,
but no less than the list angle.
3Should be based on turning radii of expected commercial
vehicles, but no less than 30 feet.
4May be reduced to 16 feet for subdivisions that consist of
four lots or fewer and that are limited by zoning, covenant or
deed restriction to eight dwelling units or fewer, provided
that the street is not intended to provide future access to
adjacent undeveloped land.
In addition to the design standards above, dead-end streets
shall be constructed to provide a cul-de-sac turnaround with
the following requirements for radii: property line: 65 feet;
outer edge of pavement: 50 feet; inner edge of pavement:
30 feet. Where the cul-de-sac is in a wooded area prior to
development, a stand of trees shall be maintained within the
center of the cul-de-sac. No dead-end street shall exceed a
length of 2,000 feet.
(b)
Adjacent to areas zoned and designed for commercial use, or
where a change of zoning to a zone which permits commercial
uses is contemplated by the municipality, the street right-ofway
and/or pavement width shall be increased on each side
by half of the amount necessary to bring the road into
conformance with the standards for commercial streets in
these regulations.
(c)
The center line of the roadway shall be the center line of the
right-of-way.
(d)
Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the center
line and side lines of the new road shall be staked or flagged at
fifty-foot intervals.
(e)
Before grading is started, the entire width of the traveled way
and shoulders shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and
other objectionable material. All ledge, large boulders, and
tree stumps shall be removed from the entire width of the
traveled way and shoulders. Streets shall be rough graded to
the full width of the traveled way and shoulders.
(f)
All organic materials shall be removed to a depth of two feet
below the subgrade of the roadway. Rocks and boulders shall
also be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade of
the roadway. On soils which have been identified by the Town
(g)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:504
as not suitable for roadways, the subsoil shall be removed from
the street site to a depth of two feet below the subgrade and
replaced with material meeting the specifications for gravel
aggregate subbase below.
Except in a ledge cut, side slopes shall be no steeper than a
slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical and shall be
graded, loamed, limed, fertilized, and seeded according to the
specifications of the erosion and sedimentation control plan.
Where a cut results in exposed ledge, a side slope no steeper
than four feet vertical to one foot horizontal is permitted.
(h)
All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving to
avoid cuts in the pavement. Building sewers and water service
connections shall be installed to the edge of the right-of way
prior to paving.
(i)
Grades of all streets shall, within the limits stated above,
conform in general to the terrain, so that cut and fill are
minimized while maintaining the grade standards above.
(j)
All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves
in order to provide the following minimum stopping sight
distances based on the street design speed. Stopping sight
distance shall be calculated with a height of eye at 3.5 feet and
the height of object at 0.5 feet.
Design Speed
(miles per
hour)
Stopping Sight
Distance
(feet)
20 125
25 150
30 200
35 250
(k)
Cross (four-cornered) street intersections shall be avoided
insofar as possible, except as shown on the Comprehensive
Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A minimum
distance of 200 feet shall be maintained between center lines
of side streets.
(l)
Where new street intersections are proposed, sight distances,
as measured along the road onto which traffic will be turning,
shall be based upon the posted speed limit and conform to
the table below. Sight distances shall be measured from the
driver's seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of the exit
with the front of the vehicle a minimum of 10 feet behind
the curbline or edge of shoulder, with the height of the eye
3.5 feet, to the top of an object 4.5 feet above the pavement.
(m)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:505
Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and
sight obstructions, including ground excavation, to achieve the
required visibility.
Allowable Speed
on Road To Be
Entered
(miles per hour)
Required Sight
Distance
(feet)
25 250
30 300
35 350
40 400
45 450
50 500
55 550
Street curbs and gutters shall be required on all streets within
Maine State Highway Commission defined urban areas and
shall be required at the discretion of the Planning Board in
other areas. Granite curbing shall be installed on a thoroughly
compacted gravel base of six inches minimum thickness.
Bituminous curbing shall be installed on the base course of
the pavement. The specified pavement width above shall be
measured between the curbs. Where curb and gutter are not
required, stabilized shoulders and proper drainage shall be
the responsibility of the developer in compliance with the
requirements herein.
(n)
The aggregate subbase course shall be sand and gravel of hard
durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of
clay and other deleterious substances.
The gradation of the part that passes a three-inch square
mesh sieve shall meet the following grading requirements:
Sieve Designation
Percentage by Weight
Passing Square Mesh Sieve
1/4" 25% to 70%
No. 40 0% to 30%
No. 200 0% to 7%
[1]
Aggregate for the subbase shall contain no particles of
rock exceeding four inches in any dimension.
[2]
(o)
The aggregate base course shall be sand or gravel of hard
durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of
clay and other deleterious substances.
(p)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:506
The gradation of the part that passes a three-inch square
mesh sieve shall meet the following grading requirements:
Sieve
Designation
Percentage by Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieve
1/2" 45% to 70%
1/4" 30% to 55%
No. 40 20%
No. 200 0% to 5%
[1]
Aggregate for the base shall contain no particles of rock
exceeding two inches in any dimension.
[2]
Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the
MDOT specifications for plant mix grade B with an aggregate
size no more than one inch maximum. Minimum standards
for the surface layer of pavement shall meet the MDOT
specifications for plant mix grade C with an aggregate size no
more than 3/4 inch maximum.
(q)
Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing
pavement shall be cut along a smooth line and form a neat,
even, vertical joint.
(r)
Sidewalks shall be installed at the expense of the developer
where a subdivision abuts or fronts onto a street with existing
sidewalks and such other locations as the Planning Board
deems necessary. When installed, sidewalks shall be built to
the following standards or to alternate specifications of equal
or higher quality.
Bituminous sidewalks.
The crushed aggregate base course shall be no less
than eight inches thick.
[a]
The hot bituminous pavement surface course shall be
no less than two inches after compaction.
[b]
[1]
Portland cement concrete sidewalks.
[a] The sand base shall be no less than six inches thick.
The Portland cement concrete shall be reinforced with
six-inch square number 10 wire mesh and shall be no
less than four inches thick.
[b]
[2]
(s)
All esplanade or planting strip areas at sides of streets shall
receive at least six inches of compacted topsoil (loam) free of
stones over one inch in diameter, sods, and clay.
(t)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:507
Base material shall be removed prior to placement of
topsoil. Planting strips shall be limed at the rate of one
pound per 10 square feet, fertilized at the rate of one
pound of a 10-10-10 fertilizer per 50 square feet or
equivalent and seeded with a conservation mix endorsed
by the Hancock County Soil and Water Conservation
District. When required by the Planning Board, street
trees shall be planted in the esplanade areas of all new
streets.
[1]
Trees of the first magnitude (Birch, Beech, Linden, Oak,
Pine, Sugar Maple and Basswood) shall be planted at fortyto
sixty-foot intervals.
[2]
Trees of the second magnitude (Hawthorn, Flowering
Crabapple, etc.) may be planted at intervals of less than 40
feet.
[3]
All roadways within the development shall be constructed
according to road specifications herein as overseen by the
Public Works Director or his designee.
(u)
Names.
Streets which join or are in alignment with streets of abutting
or neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Names of
new streets shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance
to, the names of existing streets within the municipality and
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board. Street
name signs shall be furnished and installed by the developer.
The type, size and location of signs shall be to the approval of
the Planning Board.
(a)
No plan shall be approved unless the Planning Board finds that
the Municipal Tax Assessor has issued written certification that
proposed street names for proposed streets in the development
comply with all requirements for the enhanced 911 system.
[Added 5-6-1996]
(b)
(4)
Buffering and screening. All site plans shall provide for buffering or
screening in accordance with the following standards:
Buffers. Buffers shall be provided and maintained:
At least 75 feet in width along any line of any lot in a
nonresidential district containing a nonresidential structure or
use if said line abuts a residential district, provided that this
requirement shall not apply to the Downtown Village District;
[Amended 6-8-2010]
(a)
(b) Along property lines to shield varying uses from one another;
(1)
H.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:508
Along property lines when necessary to block prevailing winds
to stop wind-borne debris from leaving the site;
(c)
Along interior roads running parallel to roads exterior to the
site in order to prevent driver confusion, particularly at night;
(d)
Along property lines when necessary to prevent any proposed
lighting from interfering with residential property or with safe
driving;
(e)
For all sites located within a two-hundred-foot corridor of
Routes 3, 102 and 233 in accordance with Table 1.70
(f)
Along all parking areas to minimize their visual impact on
adjoining traveled ways and properties.
(g)
Screening. Screening shall be provided and maintained:
To block from view from adjoining traveled ways and
properties all loading areas, waste collection and disposal
areas, parking areas for commercial vehicles and outdoor
storage areas;
(a)
Consisting of barriers sufficient to deter entry to the site where
a potential safety hazard to children exists on the site.
(b)
(2)
All buffers and screening shall be durable and properly maintained
at all times by the owner in a neat and sanitary manner and
shall be so located within the property lines to allow access for
maintenance on both sides without intruding upon abutting
properties.
(3)
Natural features shall be maintained wherever possible to provide
a buffer between the proposed development and noncompatible
abutting properties and public roadways. When natural features
such as topography, gullies, stands of trees, shrubbery or rock
outcrops do not exist or are insufficient to provide a buffer, other
kinds of buffers shall be provided to satisfy the purposes stated
above. Evergreens can be used as buffers, provided they are
planted properly. An evergreen buffer requires two or three rows
of staggered plantings. The rows should be five feet apart and
the evergreens planted four feet on center. All plantings required
under this chapter shall be of a type and species appropriate for
the soil types and climatic conditions in Bar Harbor.
(4)
Unless otherwise specifically indicated by the Planning Board, all
plant materials used in any buffer or screening required under this
chapter shall meet the following minimum size standards:
(5)
70.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:509
Plant Type
If Site Abuts
Vacant Land All Other Sites
Canopy tree
Single stem 1.5 inch caliper 2.5 inch caliper
Multiple stem 6 feet high 10 feet high
Understory tree 4 feet high 1.5 inch caliper
Evergreen tree 3 feet high 5 to 7 feet high
Shrub
Deciduous 15 inches high 24 inches high
Evergreen 12 inches high 18 inches high
Water supply. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed
development shall have sufficient water available for the reasonably
foreseeable needs of the development, in accordance with the
following:
The developer shall demonstrate by actual test or by a signed
affidavit from an authorized representative of the servicing water
company that water meeting Public Health Service Drinking Water
Standards, 1962, can be supplied to the development at the rate of
at least 350 gallons per day per dwelling unit and at an adequate
pressure for fire-fighting purposes.
(1)
The minimum size of a water main connected to a public water
supply shall be six inches.
(2)
Because they are difficult to maintain in a sanitary condition, dug
wells shall be permitted only if it is not economically or technically
feasible to develop other groundwater sources.
(3)
The water supply system shall be designed and installed in
accordance with requirements of the Maine Department of Human
Services.
(4)
If a central water supply system is provided by the developer,
location and protection of the source, and design, construction, and
operation of the distribution system, appurtenances and treatment
facilities, shall conform to the recommendations included in the
Manual for Evaluating Public Drinking Water Supplies, Public
Health Service No. 1180 (1969).
(5)
I.
Municipal water supply. All site plans shall demonstrate in the form of
signed affidavits from the servicing water company that the proposed
development shall not cause an unreasonable burden on the municipal
water supply, if such supply is to be utilized, and that said water
company has approved the design specifications of any water supply
system that shall be connected to the municipal water supply.
J.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:510
Groundwater. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed
development shall not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities,
adversely affect the quality or quantity of groundwater or of a body
or course of water and that the development shall comply with the
following standards:
No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge
of any treated, untreated, or inadequately treated liquid, gaseous,
or solid materials of such nature, quantity, obnoxious, toxicity, or
temperature that run off, seep, percolate, or wash into surface or
ground waters so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm such waters
or objectionable shore deposits, floating or submerged debris, oil
or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness to be harmful to human,
animal, plant or aquatic life.
(1)
All aboveground storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical
or industrial wastes, and biodegradable raw materials shall be
located on impervious pavement and shall be completely enclosed
by an impervious dike which shall be high enough to contain the
total volume of liquid kept within the storage area, plus the rain
falling into this storage area during a twenty-five-year storm, so
that such liquid shall not be able to spill onto or seep into the
ground surrounding the paved storage area. Storage tanks for
home heating oil and diesel fuel, not exceeding 275 gallons in size,
are exempted from this requirement.
(2)
All below-ground tanks must meet the standards of the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
(3)
No development shall directly or indirectly cause an increase in
any contaminant concentration in the groundwater at the property
boundary with adjacent existing lots to more than one-half of the
difference between the existing water quality and the EPA National
Primary Drinking Water Regulations (primary standards)or the
Maine Maximum Exposure Guidelines for Drinking Water (MEGs),
whichever is more restrictive. No development shall increase any
contaminant concentration in the groundwater to more than the
EPA National Secondary Drinking Water Regulations standards.
[Amended 6-10-2008]
(4)
If existing groundwater quality already exceeds the primary
standards and MEGs and the development is to be served by on-site
groundwater supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water
quality will be improved or treated. [Amended 6-10-2008]
(5)
If existing groundwater quality already exceeds the primary
standards, MEGs, and/or secondary standards, the quality of any
discharge from the development shall not exceed or cause any
other standard to exceed the applicable water quality standard(s).
[Amended 6-10-2008]
(6)
K.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:511
Subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking water wells
shall be constructed as shown on the map submitted with the
hydrogeologic assessment of groundwater impacts, if one has been
required. If construction standards for drinking water wells are
recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be included
as a note on the final plan and as restrictions in the deeds to the
affected lots.
(7)
Nitrate analysis. Unless a more site-specific groundwater modeling
analysis demonstrates that the minimum lot size is adequate to
protect groundwater, the Board shall require lot sizes larger than
the minimum lot size required by this chapter where soil conditions
warrant the additional dilution potential to meet groundwater
quality standards identified above. The following formula shall be
used to calculate minimum allowable lot sizes: [Amended
6-10-2008]
Nitrate Analysis Formula
A = (qs x Cs) / [Rrecharge x (Cnitrate – Cb)]
A = Lot size (acres per dwelling).
qs = Average septic discharge rate = 270 gpd/dwelling =
0.19 gpm/dwelling (if more than three bedrooms per dwelling,
use the design flows for single-family dwellings provided by
the Maine Department of Health and Human Services in the
Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules, 10-144 CMR
241).
Cs = Assumed concentration of nitrate-nitrogen reaching the
water table from septic discharge = 40 mg/l.
Cnitrate = Limiting concentration of nitrate-nitrogen in
groundwater = 5 mg/l (equal to half the EPA primary drinking
water standard).
Cb = Background concentration of nitrate-nitrogen in the
ambient groundwater (if not known, assume = 0.25 mg/l)
Rrecharge = Rate of natural groundwater recharge, averaged
over the year in gpm/acre; some representative numbers,
based on soil types and Bar Harbor average annual
precipitation, are:
Soil Type
Recharge
(as % of
precipitation1)
Recharge Rate
(gpm/acre)
Glaciomarine claysilt2
5% 0.14
Thick silty clay 10% 0.28
(8)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:512
Soil Type
Recharge
(as % of
precipitation1)
Recharge Rate
(gpm/acre)
Thin silty till over
rock
15% 0.43
Sandy glacial till 25% 0.71
Glaciomarine fine
sands
40% 1.14
Raised beach
deposits
50% 1.42
Sand and gravel 50% 1.42
*NOTES:
1 Average annual precipitation in Bar Harbor equals 55 inches/year
(USGS, 2002).
2 Glaciomarine clay-silt soils are not only limiting in their ability
to treat residential wastewater, but they also have limitations
relating to other site engineering issues such as slope stability,
drainage, and siltation potential.
The quantity of water to be taken from groundwater sources will
not lower the groundwater table at the property lines by more than
two feet to the surficial aquifer, 10 feet to the bedrock aquifer
or to the detriment of any existing groundwater, cause saltwater
intrusion to any existing well, cause undesirable changes in
groundwater flow patterns, or cause unacceptable ground
subsidence. [Amended 6-10-2008]
(9)
Salt water intrusion analysis shall be based on a drought year
occurring between average years with a total precipitation in the
drought year of 70% of average annual precipitation of 55 inches.
The proposed development shall not cause chloride concentrations
to exceed 250 mg/l at the proposed well and/or existing wells.
[Amended 6-10-2008]
(10)
The proposed development shall not be within the defined source
water protection area of a public water supply, unless notice is
given to the operator thereof and the Board has considered any
information supplied by the operator and finds that no adverse
effect on a public water supply will result. [Amended 6-10-2008]
(11)
Nothing in this procedure nor any decision by the Planning Board
shall be deemed to create groundwater rights other than those
rights which the applicant may have under Maine law.
(12)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:513
The proposed development shall not otherwise cause undue water
pollution, taking into consideration at least the following factors:
[Amended 6-10-2008]
The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the
floodplains.
(a)
The nature of the soils and subsoils and their ability to
adequately support waste disposal.
(b)
The slope of the land and its effect on effluents, infiltration
capacity, and potential for wastewater breakouts to the land
surface.
(c)
The ecological impact on surface water bodies when waste
water originating at the site eventually discharges.
(d)
Any applicable state and local health and water resource rules
and regulations.
(e)
(13)
Increase in lake phosphorous concentration prohibited. The longterm
cumulative effects of the proposed development will not
unreasonably increase a great pond's phosphorus concentration
during the construction phase or during the life of the
development. The development shall meet the phosphorus
requirements of Maine Department of Environmental Protection
Rules, Chapter 500, Stormwater Management, and Chapter 502,
Direct Watersheds of Waterbodies Most at Risk From New
Development, and Sensitive or Threatened Regions or Watersheds.
The development shall use the Maine Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual published by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection in the control of
phosphorus. [Added 5-6-1996; amended 6-10-2008]
(14)
Stormwater management. All site plans shall demonstrate that the
proposed development shall provide for adequate stormwater
management in compliance with the following standards and must
be maintained as necessary to ensure proper functioning: [Amended
11-5-1991; 6-10-2008; 11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
All new construction and development, whether or not served by a
stormwater collection and transportation system, shall be designed
to reflect or resemble, as nearly as possible, natural runoff
conditions in terms of volume, velocity and location of runoff. If
runoff into receiving waters other than direct discharge to the
ocean after development would exceed by 10% predevelopment
runoff conditions, the off-site impact must be evaluated in terms
of potential soil erosion and sedimentation, drainage capacity, land
use and land cover characteristics. Appropriate methods of
reducing off-site impact shall be employed. Stormwater
management evaluations and designs shall be based on a twentyfour-
hour, twenty-five-year recurrence interval storm except
(1)
L.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:514
detention pond spillways, which shall be designed for the onehundred-
year, twenty-four-hour storm event.
Stormwater runoff systems should be designed to facilitate aquifer
recharge when it is advantageous to compensate for groundwater
withdrawals or reductions in infiltration. Conversely, designs
should avoid recharge where groundwater effects might be
harmful. The development shall use the Maine Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual in the control of stormwater,
published by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
Design of permanent storage facilities should consider safety,
appearance, recreational use, and cost and effectiveness of
maintenance operations, in addition to the primary storage
function. Natural overland flows and open drainage channel and
swale locations should be the preferred alignments for major
components of a residential drainage system. The use of enclosed
components, such as underground piping, should be minimized
where the existing natural systems are able to accommodate storm
runoff. Energy dissipaters, to reduce high flow velocities, and other
forms of outfall protection shall be employed where enclosed
drains discharge onto erodible soils. Stormwater and surface water
runoff, whether channelized or not, shall not be diverted onto
adjacent properties without an easement, unless in a natural or
previously existing channel.
(2)
The stormwater management system shall be designed to
accommodate upstream drainage, taking into account existing
conditions and approved or planned developments not yet built,
and shall include a surplus design capacity factor of 25% for
potential increases in the peak twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour
upstream runoff rate.
(3)
Downstream drainage requirements shall be studied to determine
the effect of the proposed development, including the twenty-fivepercent
surplus design capacity factor as required above. The
storm drainage shall not overload existing or future planned storm
drainage systems downstream from the development. The
applicant shall be responsible for financing any improvements to
existing drainage systems required to handle the increased storm
flows.
(4)
The minimum pipe size for any storm drainage pipe shall be 12
inches. Maximum trench width at the pipe crown shall be the
outside diameter of the pipe plus two feet. Pipe shall be bedded in
crushed stone or widely graded gravel with a uniformity coefficient
of greater than six and less than 10% passing the #200 sieve and
containing no stones larger than three inches, lumps of clay, or
organic matter, reaching a minimum of six inches below the bottom
of the pipe and extending to six inches above the top of the pipe.
(5)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:515
Catch basins shall be installed where necessary and located at the
curbline, but at no greater horizontal intervals than 300 feet.
(6)
Drain inlet alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and
vertical alignment unless specific approval of a curvilinear drain is
obtained in writing from the Public Works Director.
(7)
Manholes shall be provided at all changes in vertical or horizontal
alignment and at all junctions. On straight runs, manholes shall be
placed at a maximum of two-hundred-fifty-foot intervals.
(8)
Outlets shall be stabilized against soil erosion by riprap or other
suitable materials to reduce stormwater velocity.
(9)
Materials used in storm drainage construction shall comply with
the following standards:
Reinforced concrete pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall meet
the requirements of ASTM Designation C-76 (AASHTO M 170).
Pipe classes shall be required to meet the soil and traffic loads
with a safety factor of 1.2 on the 0.01 inch crack strength
with a Class B bedding. Joints shall be of the rubber gasket
type meeting ASTM Designation C 443-70, or of an approved
preformed plastic jointing material such as "Ramnek."
Perforated concrete pipe shall conform to the requirements of
AASHTO M 175 for the appropriate diameters.
(a)
(b) (Reserved)
ABS pipe. ABS (Acrylonitrile-butadiene styrene) composite
pipe and fittings shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO
M 264 and AASHTO M 265. Perforated pipe shall conform to
the requirements of AASHTO M 36, Type III.
(c)
Corrugated plastic pipe. Corrugated plastic pipe shall conform
to the requirements of AASHTO M 252.
(d)
Manholes. Manholes shall be of precast eccentric concrete
truncated cone section or eccentric flat top construction
meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C 478. Bases
may be cast-in-place 3,000 psi twenty-eight-day strength
concrete or may be of precast concrete, placed on a compacted
foundation of uniform density. Metal frames and covers shall
be set in a full mortar bed and with tops shall conform to
the requirements of AASHTO M 103 for carbon steel castings,
AASHTO M 105, Class 30, for gray iron castings or AASHTO
M 183 (ASTM A 283, Grade B or better) for structural steel.
Manholes shall be provided with polypropylene-coated steps.
Frames and covers shall be brought to grade with a minimum
of two courses and a maximum of five courses of brick.
(e)
(10)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:516
Catch basins. Catch basins shall be of precast concrete
eccentric truncated cone section or eccentric flat top
construction meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation
C 478. Castings shall be square cast iron sized for the
particular inlet condition with the gratings perpendicular to
the curbline. Bases may be cast-in-place 3,000 psi twentyeight-
day strength concrete or may be of precast concrete,
placed on a compacted foundation of uniform density. Metal
frames and grates shall be set in a full mortar bed and with
tops shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M 103 for
carbon steel castings, AASHTO M 105, Class 30, for gray iron
castings or AASHTO M 183 (ASTM A 283, Grade B or better)
for structural steel. Frames and grates shall be brought to
grade with a minimum of two courses and a maximum of five
courses of brick. Catch basins shall be provided with a two
sump.
(f)
Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed so as to prevent
the infiltration of stormwater into the public sewer system and shall
be maintained as necessary to ensure proper functioning.
(11)
Wherever a stormwater drainage system, including a natural
watercourse or drainageway, is not within a public right-of-way,
perpetual easements shall be provided to the Town allowing
maintenance and improvement of the system. Such easement shall
be at least 30 feet in width. In no event shall the granting of such
an easement be deemed to require maintenance or improvement of
the stormwater drainage system by the Town.
(12)
All site plans shall demonstrate in the form of signed affidavits from
the Public Works Department that the proposed development shall
not place an unreasonable burden on the municipal stormwater
drainage system, if such system is to be used, and that the Public
Works Department has approved the design specifications of any
stormwater drainage system that shall be connected to the
municipal system.
(13)
Municipal sewer facilities. All site plans shall demonstrate that the
proposed development will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal
and that it shall not cause an unreasonable burden on the municipal
sewage waste disposal facilities, if such facilities are to be utilized,
and that the Public Works Department has approved the design
specifications for any new sewer facilities to be connected to the
municipal facilities. [Amended 5-4-1992]
M.
Sewage disposal. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed
development will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal, subject
to the following standards:
N.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:517
All developments shall be connected to municipal sewage waste
disposal facilities when required by the Bar Harbor Sewer
Ordinance set forth in Chapter 165.
(1)
Industrial or commercial wastewaters may be discharged to
municipal sewers only in such quantities or of such quality as to
be compatible with municipal sewage treatment operations. Such
wastes may require pretreatment at the industrial or commercial
site in order to render them amenable to municipal treatment
processes. Pretreatment includes, but is not limited to, screening,
grinding, sedimentation, pH adjustment, surface skimming,
chemical oxidation, and reduction and dilution. The disposal of
industrial or commercial wastewaters by means other than the
municipal sewerage system shall comply with the laws of the State
of Maine concerning water pollution. Wash water or other process
water carrying stone dust, stone particles, silt or other mineral
matter will not be accepted into the municipal system.
(2)
When a development will produce sewage and when the
development will not be serviced by municipal sewage waste
disposal facilities, the applicant shall present a Maine Department
of Human Services Bureau of Health Engineering site evaluation
form, completed by a licensed site evaluator, evidencing adequate
soil conditions for sufficient subsurface wastewater disposal and
shall also present sufficient evidence that the proposed subsurface
wastewater facilities, when considered with other such facilities in
the vicinity, will not have an undue adverse environmental effect.
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed or
replaced in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules. If soils are in Design Class A according
to the licensed site evaluator’s report, at least five subsurface
probes or test pits are required in each proposed leachfield area.
[Amended 11-5-1991; 5-2-2005; 6-10-2008]
(3)
When two or more lots or buildings in different ownership share
a common subsurface disposal system, the system shall be owned
and maintained in common by an owners' association. Covenants in
the deeds for each lot shall require mandatory membership in the
association and provide for adequate funding of the association to
assure proper maintenance of the system.
(4)
Soils. No activity shall be permitted in any area where the soil is
rated severe or very severe for the proposed activity according to the
County Soil Survey of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, unless satisfactory evidence is presented that
construction methods will overcome soil inadequacies.
O.
Landscaping. All site plans shall provide for the landscape to be
preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
and soil removal and grade changes. Landscaping shall be designed to
soften, buffer, screen or enhance the physical design of structures and
P.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:518
parking areas to minimize the encroachment of the proposed use on
abutting uses. In addition, activities located within the Design Review
Overlay District that require a certificate of appropriateness pursuant
to Article XIII, Design Review, are subject to additional requirements
set forth in the standards of Article XIII. [Amended 11-2-1999]
Erosion. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed development
will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the land's
capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition
results and further that the following standards will be met during
construction and after completion:
Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development shall be
done in such a way as to minimize erosion;
(1)
Development shall preserve salient natural features, keep cut and
fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff;
(2)
The top of a cut or the bottom of a fill section shall not be closer
than 10 feet to an adjoining property, unless otherwise specified in
this chapter, and in no instance shall a cut or a fill exceed a threeto-
one slope;
(3)
The development shall not unreasonably increase the rate or
volume of surface water runoff from the proposed site;
(4)
Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected
and supplemented;
(5)
The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum;
(6)
(7) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable;
(8) Dust control methods shall be employed during dry conditions;
Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be used to protect exposed
critical areas during development;
(9)
The permanent vegetation and mechanical erosion control
measures shall be installed as soon as practicable on the site, but
in no event later than six months after completion of construction;
(10)
Until the disturbed area is stabilized, sediment in the runoff water
shall be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps or other acceptable methods;
(11)
Whenever sedimentation is caused by stripping vegetation,
regrading or other development, it shall be the responsibility of
the developer causing such sedimentation to remove it from all
(12)
Q.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:519
adjoining surfaces, drainage systems and watercourses and to
repair any damage at his expense as quickly as possible;
It is the responsibility of any person doing any act on or across
a communal stream, watercourse or swale or upon the floodway
or right-of-way thereof to maintain as nearly as possible in its
present state the stream, watercourse, swale, floodway or rightof-
way during the duration of such activity and to return it to its
original or equal condition after such activity is completed; and
(13)
Maintenance of drainage facilities or watercourses originating and
completely on private property is the responsibility of the owner to
the point of open discharge at the property line or at a communal
watercourse within the property.
(14)
The proposed development shall use the Maine Erosion and
Sediment Control BMPs (Best Management Practices) published by
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection in the control
of sediment and erosion. [Added 6-10-2008]
(15)
Flood permit. If it is determined, based on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood
Insurance Rate Maps and information presented by the applicant, that
the proposed development, or any part of it, is in a flood-prone area,
the site plan shall not be approved until the applicant has obtained a
Flood Hazard Development Permit pursuant to Chapter 90, Floodplain
Management, of the Bar Harbor Code and any plat or map to be
recorded contains a written condition that all structures, except waterrelated
structures, constructed in such an area shall be constructed
with their lowest floors, including basements, at least two feet above
the one-hundred-year flood level. [Amended 11-5-1991]
R.
Air quality. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed
development will not result in undue air pollution and that it will comply
with the following standards:
No emission of dust, ash, smoke or other particulate matter or
gases and chemicals shall be allowed which can cause damage
to human or animal health or safety, vegetation, or property by
reason of concentration or toxicity, which can cause soiling beyond
the property boundaries, or which fails to meet or cannot meet
the standards set by the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection.
(1)
No person, wherever located, shall cause or allow the emission
of odorous air contaminants from any source such as to result in
detectable odors at the lot line of the source which are measured
in excess of the following limits:
For areas used for residential or commercial purposes within
500 feet of the lot line of the source, it is a violation if odors
(a)
(2)
S.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:520
are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with seven
or more volumes of odor-free air.
For the purposes of this regulation, two odor measurements
shall be made within a period of one hour, these measurements
being separated by at least 15 minutes. These measurements
shall be made outside the property line of the property from
which the emission originates. The Barnebey-Cheney
Scentometer, suitably calibrated, or any other instrument,
device, or technique equivalent may be used in the
determination of the intensity of an odor and may be used as a
guide in the enforcement of this performance standard.
(b)
Refuse disposal. All site plans shall demonstrate, in compliance with the
following standards, that the proposed development will have adequate
and environmentally sound means of disposing of the solid and liquid
wastes that the proposed development can reasonably be expected to
generate.
The applicant shall demonstrate by means of an affidavit from an
appropriate official that the proposed development will not cause
an unreasonable burden on the Town's ability to dispose of solid or
liquid wastes if Town services are to be utilized.
(1)
Each plan shall demonstrate that all solid and liquid wastes
reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed development
will be disposed of in a timely manner and in accordance with
applicable federal and state laws and local ordinances. Such wastes
shall not be kept on site for unreasonable lengths of time.
(2)
If Town waste disposal services are not to be utilized or if, because
of the amount or types of waste to be generated, Town waste
disposal services cannot be utilized, a plan will demonstrate that
the developer has adequately provided for the efficient and
environmentally sound disposal of all solid and liquid wastes
reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed development.
(3)
Each plan shall demonstrate that all solid and liquid wastes
reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed development
will, during such times as they are kept on site, be stored in a safe,
sanitary and environmentally sound manner and in such a way as
not to pollute the site or adjoining land, air or water.
(4)
T.
Dangerous or hazardous materials and wastes. With respect to
materials or wastes that are potentially dangerous due to possible
explosion, extreme fire hazard, chemical hazard or radioactivity and
which are reasonably anticipated to be used in connection with the
proposed development, site plans shall demonstrate the following:
No such materials shall be stored in bulk above ground unless they
are located at least 75 feet from any lot line.
(1)
U.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:521
No such materials shall be stored in bulk below ground unless they
are located at least 40 feet from any lot line.
(2)
All such materials shall be used, stored, manufactured, processed
or assembled in accordance with all applicable federal, state or
local laws, codes, rules and regulations, which laws, codes, rules
and regulations the applicant shall bring to the attention of the
Planning Board.
(3)
There shall exist a written emergency plan that sets forth in detail
what steps shall be taken in the event of the accidental spill,
release, explosion or combustion of such materials.
(4)
Vibration. With the exception of vibration necessarily involved in the
construction or demolition of structures, or mining, excavation or
extraction being carried out in compliance with this chapter, no
vibration shall be transmitted outside the lot where it originates.
V.
Wildlife habitat. All site plans will demonstrate that the proposed
development will not have an undue adverse effect on significant
spawning grounds or wildlife habitat identified by the Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the Town of Bar Harbor.
W.
Aesthetic areas and physical and visual access. All site plans will
demonstrate that the proposed development will not have an undue
adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics,
historic sites, rare and irreplaceable natural areas, or any public rights
for physical or visual access to the shoreline. Such rights of access
shall be maintained by means of easements or rights-of-way, or should
be included in any reserved open space, with provisions made for
continued public access. If the proposed development contains any
areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan or by the Maine Critical
Areas Program as rare and irreplaceable natural areas, these areas
shall be included as open space and suitably protected by appropriate
covenants and management plans. With respect to subdivisions:
[Amended 5-3-1999]
The plan shall, by notes on the final plan and deed restrictions, limit
the clearing of trees or to those areas designated on the plan.
(1)
The Planning Board may require the reservation of between 5%
and 10% of the area of the subdivision as common open space in
order to provide for the recreational needs of the occupants of the
development or to maintain the scenic or natural beauty of the
area. In determining the need for open space, the Planning Board
shall consider the proximity of the subdivision to neighboring
dedicated open space or recreation facilities; the needs identified
in the Bar Harbor Comprehensive Plan or recreation plan for open
space or recreation facilities in the neighborhood surrounding the
subdivision; the type of development and the demographic
(2)
X.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:522
characteristics of potential residents in the subdivision; and the
density or lot sizes of the development.
Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character,
configuration and location suitable for the particular use intended.
A site intended to be used for active recreation purposes, such as a
playground or a play field, should be relatively level and dry, have a
total frontage on one or more streets of at least 200 feet, and have
no major dimensions of less than 200 feet. Sites selected primarily
for scenic or passive recreation purposes shall have such access
as the Planning Board may deem suitable and no less than 25 feet
of road frontage. The configuration of such sites shall be deemed
adequate by the Planning Board with regard to scenic attributes to
be preserved, together with sufficient areas for trails, lookouts, and
the like where necessary and appropriate.
(3)
Where the proposed subdivision is located on a lake, pond, river,
stream or the sea coast, a portion of the waterfront area, when
feasible, shall be included as reserved open space. The land so
reserved shall be at least 200 feet wide measured perpendicularly
from the normal high water mark.
(4)
Reserved land acceptable to the Planning Board and developer may
be dedicated to the Town as a condition of approval.
(5)
Where land within the subdivision is not suitable or is insufficient
in amount, or where the applicant prefers, a payment in lieu of
dedication shall be calculated at the market value of the developed
land at the time of the subdivision, as determined by the Municipal
Tax Assessor, and deposited by the applicant into a municipal land
acquisition or improvement fund, which fund shall be used
exclusively for the purchase and development of neighborhood
sites for parks, playgrounds and other recreational purposes.
(6)
Heat. No radiant heat shall be perceptible beyond the lines of the lot on
which it originates.
Y.
Light and glare. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed
development shall comply with the following requirements with respect
to exterior lighting. In addition, activities located within the Design
Review Overlay District that require a certificate of appropriateness
pursuant to Article XIII, Design Review, are subject to additional
requirements set forth in the standards of Article XIII. [Amended
11-2-1999; 11-4-2008
Purpose: to establish minimum requirements for outdoor lighting
that increase visibility and public safety by controlling glare and
preventing intrusion into adjacent properties and the natural
environment. Voluntary best practices are recommended to
promote energy conservation and preserve the Town's night sky,
(1)
Z.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:523
which is a natural resource and valuable component of the Town's
character.
Exemptions (with exception to lights that cause disability glare as
noted herein):
(a) All lighting less than 1,800 lumens.
Lighting of places of worship and flags, emergency, as well as
approved sports lighting.
(b)
The temporary use of low-wattage or low-voltage lighting for
public festivals, celebrations, and the observance of holidays is
exempt from regulation, except where these lights may create
a hazard or nuisance from glare. Light trespass requirements
remain in effect; and, where possible, lighting should be full
cutoff.
(c)
(d) Lighting of signs in Appendix A listed as historic.
(2)
Requirements.
Use of full-cutoff fixtures. All lights greater than 1,800 lumens
shall be shielded to direct all light towards the ground so that
the lighting elements are not exposed to normal view and do
not create or constitute a hazard or nuisance to motorists,
pedestrians or neighboring residents.
Fixtures shall conform with the Illumination Engineering
Society (IES) Specification for Full Cutoff to ensure
lighting elements are not exposed to normal view (see
the Guidelines for Lighting document provided by the
Planning Department, which contains illustrations of
currently available fixtures conforming with the IES
specifications).
[1]
Disability glare. Full-cutoff fixtures shall be used so as not
to create or constitute a hazard or nuisance to motorists,
pedestrians or neighboring residents in the opinion of the
Police Department. High-intensity discharge (HID) light
sources causing disability glare shall not be directly visible
to drivers.
[2]
(a)
Avoidance of light trespass. All light shall be directed away
from adjacent properties. The light sources in flood- and
spotlights shall not be directly visible from adjacent properties.
For purposes of this subsection, abutting properties shall
include properties that are separated from the lot being
developed by a street, road or right-of-way.
The maximum illumination of an adjacent parcel from light
emitted from an artificial light source is 0.1 horizontal
footcandles and 0.1 vertical footcandles when measured:
[1]
(b)
(3)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:524
[a] At five feet inside an adjacent residential parcel.
At 10 feet inside an adjacent commercial or industrial
parcel.
[b]
No line of sight to a light source is permitted five feet
or more beyond the edge of the public right-of-way or
property line in a residential district by an observer
viewing from a position that is level with or higher than
the ground below the fixture.
[2]
Compliance is achieved with fixture shielding, directional
control designed into the fixture, fixture location, fixture
height, fixture aim, or a combination of these factors.
[3]
Additional requirements for commercial and multifamily
applications:
Signs and advertising. [Amended 6-8-2010; 6-14-2016]
All externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by topmounted
lights pointed downward. No sign may be
illuminated with fixtures not shielded from upward
transmission of light.
[1]
Signs may be illuminated internally only by nonflashing
lights. Any lights that flash, pulse, rotate, move, or
simulate motion are not permitted.
[2]
All lighting for externally illuminated signs shall be
shielded to ensure that light sources are not directed
toward or directly visible to drivers or from neighboring
properties.
[3]
Lighting of signs is further regulated in § 125-67BB, Signs
and advertising, and categories of internally illuminated
signs are defined in § 125-109, Definitions.
[4]
(a)
White string mini-lights meeting the requirements of holiday
lighting are allowed as part of interior window displays, in
trees, bushes, and shrubs as part of the landscaping, or under
canopies as part of the regular lighting if they are compatible
with the building.
(b)
Lighting reviewed by the Planning Board or the Design Review
Board shall ensure that the style of the light and light standard
is consistent with the architectural style of the principal
building.
(c)
The maximum height of freestanding lights shall be the same
as the principal building or be no higher than 25 feet,
whichever is less.
(d)
(4)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:525
Recommended best practices. Recommended practices can be
found in a guidebook provided at the Planning Department.
(5)
Nonconformance.
All site plans and subdivisions filed after December 4, 2008,
shall be in compliance with this section.
(a)
Any luminaires that direct light toward streets, parking lots
or the water, that cause disability glare to motorists, cyclists,
pedestrians or boaters, shall either be shielded or redirected
as per enforcement action under Article X and shall not be
subject to any nonconforming protections.
(b)
Any luminaire that replaces a nonconforming luminaire or any
nonconforming luminaire that is moved must meet the
standards of this chapter.
(c)
(6)
Noise. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed development
will comply in all applicable respects with the Bar Harbor Noise
Ordinance, Chapter 139, Noise, of the Bar Harbor Code.
AA.
Signs and advertising. All site plans shall demonstrate that all signs
related to the proposed development will comply with the following
standards, to which all signs located within the Town of Bar Harbor
are subject, regardless of the need for site plan approval. In addition,
activities located within the Design Review Overlay District that require
a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to Article XIII, Design Review,
are subject to additional requirements set forth in the standards of
Article XIII. [Amended 11-5-1991; 11-2-1999; 11-4-2003;
6-13-2006; 11-7-2006; 11-6-2007; 6-9-2009]
Purpose and intent. To establish clear direction on regulating and
reviewing signage by applying specific criteria standards that will
prescribe fair and consistent standards in order to:
(a) Allow description of goods and services.
(b) Enhance character of the area.
(c) Enhance architectural elements of a building.
Use minimum wording and sign size to avoid cluttered
appearance.
(d)
Encourage compatible materials, color, scale and design to
provide consistency with the existing building and its environs.
(e)
Improve traffic, pedestrian and public safety; reduce
distractions and obstructions.
(f)
(g) Protect and enhance property values.
(1)
BB.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:526
Respect the historical elements of a building, property and
district.
(h)
(i) Respect the scenic qualities of the Acadia Byway.
Exemptions. The following signs are exempt from this chapter, shall
not be counted towards sign area, and may be installed in any
district without a permit, provided they comply as follows:
Signs installed by the Town of Bar Harbor, the federal
government, or the State of Maine for the purposes of traffic
control, traffic or pedestrian safety or convenience, as well as
public notices and warnings.
(a)
Political signs on private properties or vehicles only, provided
that such sign shall not exceed six square feet in sign area,
shall not be placed in such location as to constitute a traffic or
pedestrian safety hazard, and shall not be displayed for more
than 42 days prior to the appropriate election or more than two
days following such election.
(b)
Holiday decorations which contain no commercial messages
and which are displayed during the appropriate season.
(c)
Fuel pump signs as required by state law are allowed and shall
not affect the computation of allowable number of signs or
aggregate sign area on a property. [Amended 6-14-2016]
(d)
Any sign within a structure, so long as the sign is not visible
from other properties or from any street right-of-way.
(e)
Residential identification signs, showing resident's name and
street address.
(f)
Flags of countries, states, counties, cities, religious and civic
organizations.
(g)
National Register of Buildings or Places markers or other
historic plaques.
(h)
(i) Memorial signs and tablets.
Signs as listed and noted accordingly in Appendix A71 as
historic are exempt from calculations of maximum sign area
and lighting requirements.
(j)
(2)
Prohibitions.
No sign shall hereafter be erected, altered, or changed except
in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(a)
(3)
71.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:527
No sign, whether new or existing, shall be permitted that
causes a traffic, health, or welfare hazard, or results in a
nuisance due to illumination, placement, display or manner of
construction.
(b)
No sign in a business district shall be located in the rear or side
yard of any premises which abuts a lot in a residential district.
(c)
Unless otherwise allowed, signs located on private property
shall be related only to goods or services sold or rendered on
that property.
(d)
No sign shall have visible moving parts, or blinking,
intermittent, or glaring illumination, or consist, in whole or
in part, of pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners or other
similar devices. No light-emitting-diode (LED) motion signs are
allowed. No sign or other advertisement shall include the use
of smoke, vapors, noxious odors or noise. Analog clocks, analog
thermometers, flags and banners otherwise permitted shall be
allowed as the only exceptions to this subsection.
(e)
Outdoor neon signs are prohibited, except that neon signs
containing only the words "Vacancy" or "No Vacancy" and
limited to a maximum sign area of two square feet are
permitted for transient accommodations located in business
and corridor districts. [Amended 6-8-2010]
(f)
No sign shall be erected, painted, drawn or attached to, or on
any utility pole, tree, rock or other natural feature, except that
this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit the attachment
to rocks of metal commemorative plaques.
(g)
Internally illuminated signs of Type 1, cabinet with translucent
face, and Type 2, channel letter, are prohibited in all districts.
[Amended 6-8-2010; 6-14-2016]
(h)
Internally illuminated signs of Type 2B, cabinet with light
limiting face, 30% (or less) translucent face/70% (or greater)
opaque background field, are prohibited in all districts except
for lots with frontage on Route 102 or Route 3. [Added
6-14-2016]
(i)
Conditional signs. Signs noted below are allowed without a
certificate of appropriateness or a building permit and shall not
be counted toward allowable square footage for sign area, subject
to noted conditions, provided they comply as follows: [Amended
6-14-2016]
Signs in the State Department of Transportation Official
Business Directional Sign Program as set forth in the Maine
Traveler Information Services Act, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1901 et seq.
(a)
(4)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:528
Signs created by public, civic, philanthropic charitable or
religious organizations announcing an auction, public supper,
lawn sale, arts and educational events, a campaign or drive or
other like event or soliciting contributions. Such signs shall be
removed within 72 hours of the close of the event.
(b)
Banners and signs for an event wholly within a Town park. The
approval of any banners or signs within the park to advertise
the event may be given by the Town Council or the Parks and
Recreation Committee.
(c)
Signs located on the rolling stock of common carriers and on
registered and inspected motor vehicles are permitted, except
such signs which are determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be circumventing the intent of these regulations.
(d)
Any restaurant may display its menu in a manner so that it
is visible to persons passing by the outside of said restaurant
provided that the displayed menu is no larger than the menus
actually distributed to the restaurant's customers and provided
that it is displayed in a frame or a box.
(e)
One on-premises real estate sign, and one off-premises
directional sign not exceeding six square feet in total sign
area, may be erected advertising the sale, lease or rental of
the premises upon which the on-premises real estate sign is
located and shall be removed by the owner or agent when the
property is sold or leased.
(f)
Garage/yard sale and open house/studio signs, limited to one
sign located on the property on which the garage/yard sale is
taking place and one at each of no more than two intersections
of public streets. Said sign shall be placed no more than two
days prior to the sale event and removed within one day after
the event.
(g)
One development or construction sign, not exceeding 20
square feet in sign area, may be erected 30 days prior to
construction at the site of a construction project solely to
identify the project and contractors and shall be removed
within 30 days after completion of the project.
(h)
Directional signs solely indicating ingress and egress placed
at driveway locations, containing no advertising material or
display area, not exceeding two square feet in sign area, and
not extending higher than three feet above ground level are
permitted.
(i)
A sign indicating a business is open or closed, and/or a sign
indicating hours of operation, not to exceed one each per entry
and not to exceed more than one square foot in sign area
(j)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:529
each. In the case of a combination sign, it shall not exceed two
square feet in total sign area.
Flags containing the word "OPEN" for businesses having
frontage on Routes 102 or on Route 3 from the municipal
boundary with Trenton to the intersection of West Street and
from the intersection with Park Street to the municipal
boundary with Mount Desert.
(k)
Internally lit vending and dispensing machines facing a
residential district if screened to prevent the visibility of light
from neighboring properties.
(l)
Home occupations. One sign identifying the name, address
and profession or occupation of a home occupation is allowed
provided that such sign is nonilluminated and does not exceed
the maximum sign area requirements for the street on which
the home occupation has frontage:
Posted Speed
Limit
(miles per hour
at location of sign)
Maximum Sign Area
(square feet)
Less than 30 4
30 to 49 8
50 or more 12
(m)
Sales flyers or other commercial notices not otherwise
regulated, up to two square feet per tenant.
(n)
General requirements for all signs.
Safety and neatness. All signs must be kept clean, neatly
painted, and free of all hazards, such as, but not limited to,
faulty wiring or loose fastenings, and must be maintained at
all times in safe condition. The owner of any sign shall at all
times maintain such liability insurance as may be required by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
(a)
Removal of signs for a discontinued use. Unless otherwise
required, any sign for a discontinued use or a past activity/
event, shall be taken down and removed within 30 days. This
provision shall not be construed to require the owners of
seasonal businesses to remove signs at the end of each season.
(b)
Erected on private property only. All signs must be located
on private property, with the exception of official business
directional signs, as defined in 23 M.R.S.A. § 1903, and any
other traffic or directional signs erected by the state or federal
government or by the Town of Bar Harbor.
(c)
(5)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:530
Maximum sign area. The aggregate area for signs for any
premises shall not exceed two square feet per one foot of
road frontage up to 100 square feet. Aggregate sign area
may be increased upon review by the Design Review Board of
multitenant sign plans, signage for property with multiple front
property lines, and campus sign plans that meet the purpose
and intent of the Sign Ordinance.
(d)
Maximum individual sign area. Unless otherwise approved by
the Design Review Board, individual signs shall not exceed
24 square feet in the Downtown Village I and II and historic
districts. [Amended 6-8-2010]
(e)
Wall signs. The maximum area of a wall sign shall not exceed
10% of the wall area to which it is attached. Projecting wall
signs shall have a minimum of 10 feet of clearance from the
ground.
(f)
Roof signs. Roof signs are permitted only if the height of the
sign is two feet or less and the top of the sign does not exceed
the elevation of the top of the roofline upon which the sign is
erected. No roof sign shall obscure the view of natural vistas
as seen from any public park or right-of-way.
(g)
Window and door signs. Permanent window sign area and door
sign area shall not exceed 30% of the window or door area.
[Amended 6-14-2016]
(h)
Freestanding signs shall not extend more than 20 feet above
ground level at their base, as defined by the natural contour of
the ground. A freestanding sign shall adhere to the following
maximum sign area requirements: [Amended 6-14-2016]
Posted Speed Limit
(miles per hour
at location of sign)
Maximum Sign Area
(square feet)
Less than 30 24
30 to 49 32
50 or more 50
(i)
Setback. All freestanding signs shall be set back a minimum of
five feet from any property line except in the downtown village
districts. [Amended 6-8-2010]
(j)
Illumination. The illumination of all signs shall comply in all
respects with the provisions of Subsection Z of this section.
(k)
Sign materials. Signs shall be in a material that is compatible
with the architectural style and components of the building
facade and its environs.
(l)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:531
Signs subject to the review by the Design Review Board for a
certificate of appropriateness. All signs listed below are required
to receive a certificate of appropriateness from the Design Review
Board prior to receiving a building permit if they are located within
the identified districts or are associated with a conditionally
permitted use. Signs located in all other districts shall receive
a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer prior to
installing the sign. [Amended 6-8-2010; 11-2-2010; 6-14-2016]
Building permits required. All signs except those otherwise
exempted are required to obtain a building permit as well as
the certificate of appropriateness.
All signs listed below are required to receive a certificate
of appropriateness from the Design Review Board prior to
receiving a building permit if they are located within the
following districts or are associated with a conditionally
permitted use.
[a] Village Historic.
[b] Bar Harbor Gateway.
[c] (Reserved)
[d] Downtown Village I and II Districts.
[e] Educational Institutional.
[f] Lots with road frontage on Routes 102 and 3.
[g] Marine Research.
[h] Scientific Research.
[i] Shoreland General Development I and II.
[j] Town Hill Business.
[k] Town Hill Residential Corridor.
[1]
Signs in other districts shall receive a building permit from
the Code Enforcement Office prior to erecting the sign.
[2]
All signs shall be reviewed to determine compliance with
the purpose and intent of this subsection.
[3]
(a)
Wall signs, window signs, door signs, freestanding signs and
roof signs.
(b)
Indoor neon signs visible from the street. Allowed neon signs
shall be for the purpose of displaying whether the business
is open or the general type of merchandise available for
purchase. Neon signs are part of the calculation for allowed
signage and shall not exceed two square feet in total.
(c)
(6)
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:532
Banners and signs for Chamber of Commerce events, drives
and large gatherings, Merchant's Flag Program, sales flyers
totaling more than two square feet per tenant and other
advertisements not otherwise regulated. The Design Review
Board shall review the location, color, and size, compatibility of
design, quantity, and length of time for display. Such displays
shall not visually impede upon existing commercial signs, nor
block public views in public parks.
(d)
Off-premises signs. Off-premises signs, excluding official
business directional signs as defined in 23 M.R.S.A. § 1903,
may be constructed, erected or maintained only in accordance
with the following:
Location of establishment.
Any commercial establishment having frontage on the
Old Bar Harbor Road, Sand Point Road, Norway Drive,
or the Hadley Point Road shall be permitted to have
up to four off-premises signs.
[a]
Any commercial establishment not having frontage
which is contiguous to the main entrance on Maine
State Route 102 or 233 or on Eden, Mount Desert,
Main, Cottage, or West Street shall be permitted to
have up to two off-premises signs.
[b]
Any commercial establishment having contiguous
frontage on Maine State Route 102 or 233 or on Eden,
Mount Desert, Main, Cottage or West Street shall not
have off-premises signs.
[c]
[1]
[2] Off-premises signs shall be directional only in nature.
The maximum area of any off-premises sign shall be
limited dependent upon its location according to the
following:
Location of Off-Premises Sign
Permitted
Area
(square feet)
In the area bounded by and including
the Atlantic Ocean, Eden Street and
Mount Desert Street and the imaginary
extension thereof shoreward
2
On roads with speed limits less than 30
miles per hour
4
On roads with speed limits of 30 to 49
miles per hour
8
[3]
(e)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:533
Location of Off-Premises Sign
Permitted
Area
(square feet)
On roads with speed limits greater than
49 miles per hour
12
Property owners of multitenant buildings shall submit an
overall signage plan for their property. No individual sign shall
be approved on a multitenant building unless a signage plan
has been submitted and approved. The signage plan need not
show the specific message content for any individual sign
contained therein; but as changes occur, individual signs will
be reviewed. In addition to Table 2,72 the signage plan shall
show:
[1] Allowable square footage for each unit;
Any restrictions on signage as may be imposed by the
landowner.
[2]
(f)
(g) Sandwich signs or boards.
(h) Taxi or tour stand signs.
Activity/program signboard: chalkboard, tack board, grease
board or wood panel.
(i)
Other portable signs not otherwise listed unless specifically
prohibited.
(j)
Campus signage. In the Education Institute, Marine Research
and Scientific Research Districts, a campus sign plan shall
be submitted to the Design Review Board. This plan shall
show the entire campus site plan, outlining the location and
design specification for entry point signs, internal building
signs, directional signs and any other pertinent signage. The
Board's review will be to determine adequate locations, ease
and safety for finding parking and buildings, and cohesiveness
of overall design theme.
(k)
Awning or canopy:
Lettering or graphics no more than 12 inches in height
permitted on the valance;
[1]
Lettering and graphics on an awning or canopy or
attached valance are considered signage and must comply
with the requirements of this chapter.
[2]
(l)
72.Editor's Note: Table 2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:534
There shall be eight feet of clearance from the bottom of
the valance to the ground.
[3]
Kiosks for the purpose of visitor way-finding and general
information sponsored and maintained by either the Town of
Bar Harbor or a private nonprofit agency.
(m)
Internally illuminated signs: opaque background only and
allowable only on Routes 102 and Route 3 outside of the
Downtown Village Districts and historic districts.
(n)
Exemptions. The following activities are not subject to design
review:
Replacement of one conforming wall-mounted, hanging,
or window sign, provided that the replacement sign is
equal to or less than the square footage of the existing
conforming sign it will replace. The sign may be altered
in any code-compliant manner, except that it may not be
relocated or enlarged.
[1]
A tenant occupying a space with a Design Review Board
approved tenant signage plan may replace signage at any
time, provided that the new signage will comply with the
approved tenant signage plan for the building.
[2]
Installation of one twenty-four inch-by thirty-six inch
sandwich board sign, provided that it is not located in a
public way and is taken inside at the close of business each
night.
[3]
Installation of lighting for signage, provided that such
lighting complies with § 125-67Z.
[4]
(o)
Nonconforming signs.
Defined. A legally existing (grandfathered) nonconforming sign
is a sign that lawfully existed immediately prior to July 2009
which, as a result of the enactment of the 2009 Bar Harbor
Land Use Ordinance, or any subsequent amendment, presently
fails to comply with any of the requirements of the Land Use
Ordinance. Any other sign that fails to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter or its amendments is an illegal
nonconformity.
(a)
General policies.
All nonconformities shall be encouraged to convert to
conformity whenever possible and, when required by this
chapter, shall convert to conformity.
[1]
(b)
(7)
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:535
Any nonconformity not expressly allowed by this section
to continue is hereby deemed illegal and shall cease or be
corrected immediately.
[2]
The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is a
legal nonconformity shall, in all cases, fall upon the owner
of such nonconformity and not upon the Town of Bar
Harbor.
[3]
Any legally existing nonconformity may be transferred and
the new owner may continue such nonconformity; however
nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit any
person or entity to display any sign in violation of any
other federal, state or Town of Bar Harbor statute,
ordinance or regulation.
[4]
Once converted to conformity, no sign shall revert to
nonconformity.
[5]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,
legally existing nonconforming signs shall be required to
comply with all other pertinent sections.
[6]
Continued use of nonconforming signs. The use or display of
any legally existing nonconforming sign may be continued, but
only in strict compliance with the following:
No nonconforming sign shall be enlarged, increased or
extended to occupy a greater area than it occupied when it
became nonconforming or changed in any other way that
increases its nonconformity.
[1]
A legally existing nonconforming sign may be replaced
only with a sign that complies with this chapter in all
respects, except that a legally existing nonconforming
sign, the replacement of which is necessitated by the
vandalism of persons other than the owner or his or her
agents, or by a force of nature, or by normal wear from
the elements, may be replaced or maintained with a sign
identical in all respects to the one being replaced.
[2]
Any sign removed pursuant to the provisions herein may
be replaced only with a sign that complies with this
chapter in all respects.
[3]
(c)
Outdoor storage or displays. All site plans shall demonstrate that any
materials or merchandise to be stored outdoors shall be stored in
such a manner as to prevent the breeding and harboring of insects,
rats or other vermin. Except for merchandise sold at farmers' markets
and as otherwise provided by the Town Code, no merchandise shall
be displayed or stored outside of any business establishment located
within the Design Review Overlay District until a certificate of
CC.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-67
109:536
appropriateness has been approved by the Design Review Board
pursuant to Article XIII, Design Review. [Amended 3-24-1998]
Utilities. Except for within mobile home parks, utilities shall be
installed underground except as otherwise approved by the Planning
Board. Underground utilities shall be installed prior to the installation
of the final gravel base of the road. Any utility installations remaining
above ground shall be located so as to have a harmonious relation to
neighboring properties and the site. All utilities, poles and streetlights
shall be installed in conformity with the approved plan.
DD.
Fire protection.
Detailed building plans for commercial developments in the
Downtown Village and Shoreland General Development I Districts,
transient accommodations, nursing homes, convalescent centers,
retirement communities, private compulsory schools, multifamily
dwellings and hospitals shall be approved, in writing, for
compliance with Life Safety Codes by the State Fire Marshal's
Office or by the Bar Harbor Fire Chief. [Amended 11-5-1991;
5-3-1999; 6-8-2010]
(1)
No subdivision which has access to a public water supply shall be
developed such that any building lot is more than 500 feet from a
fire hydrant which has a capacity of 750 gallons per minute.
(2)
No subdivision which lacks access to a public water supply shall be
developed so that any building lot is more than 2,000 feet from a
fire pond having a capacity of 45,000 gallons or a dry hydrant with
a capacity of 750 gallons per minute for 60 minutes or some other
water source acceptable to the Fire Chief.
(3)
All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed development will
not cause an unreasonable burden on the Town's ability to deliver
fire protection services.
(4)
EE.
Comprehensive Plan. All site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed
development conforms to a duly adopted Comprehensive Plan and to
any other applicable municipal ordinances. In making this
determination, the Planning Board may interpret the plan or
ordinances.
FF.
Financial and technical capacity. All site plans shall demonstrate that
the applicant has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the
standards set forth in this chapter.
GG.
Farmland. No building permit or site plan approval shall be granted
by the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board for any
inconsistent development upon or use of land within 150 feet of
farmland properly registered pursuant to the provisions of 7 M.R.S.A.
§ 41 et seq.;73 provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to
any lot or parcel of land which, together with any adjoining lot or parcel
HH.
§ 125-67 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-67
109:537
in the same ownership, was one acre or less in area as of January 1,
1988. This subsection shall be construed and the requirements hereof
varied in accordance with the definitions and procedures set forth in 7
M.R.S.A. § 41 et seq.
Other municipal services. All site plans shall demonstrate that the
proposed development will not cause an unreasonable burden on the
Town's ability to deliver other necessary services not otherwise
described above, including but not limited to police protection, road
maintenance and snow removal, and schools.
II.
Violations. No plan shall be approved as long as the applicant is in
violation of this chapter or of any previously approved subdivision or
site plan in the Town of Bar Harbor. [Amended 11-4-2003]
JJ.
Legal documents. No plan shall be approved unless the Planning Board
finds that the Town Council and the Town Attorney are satisfied that the
legal documents submitted pursuant to § 125-66D adequately protect
the Town's interests. [Added 5-6-1996]
KK.
Historic and archaeological resources. If any portion of the site has
been identified by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission or the
Bar Harbor Comprehensive Plan as containing historic or
archaeological resources, the development shall include appropriate
measures for protecting these resources, including but not limited to
modifications of the proposed design of the site, timing of construction
and limiting the extent of excavation. [Added 5-3-1999]
LL.
Utilization of the site. The plan for development will reflect the natural
capabilities of the site to support development. Buildings, lots and
support facilities will be clustered in those portions of the site that
have the most suitable conditions for development. Environmentally
sensitive areas, including but not limited to wetlands, steep slopes,
floodplains, significant wildlife habitats, fisheries, scenic areas, habitat
for rare and endangered plants and animals, unique natural
communities and natural areas, and sand and gravel aquifers, will be
maintained and preserved to the maximum extent. [Added 5-3-1999]
MM.
Natural features. If any portion of the site has been identified by
the Maine Natural Areas Program, the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife, and/or the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as
containing natural features of interest, the development shall include
appropriate measures for protecting those resources, including but
not limited to modifications of the proposed design of the site, timing
of construction, and limiting the extent of excavation. [Added
6-10-2008]
NN.
73.Editor's Note: Sections 41 to 49 of Title 7 were repealed by Chapter 478 of the Laws of
1989. See now 7 M.R.S.A. § 51 et seq.
§ 125-67 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:538
§ 125-68. Shoreland standards. [Amended 11-5-1991; 5-4-1992;
5-6-1996; 6-13-200674]
Notwithstanding and in addition to any other provisions of this chapter,
before granting site plan approval or a building permit for: [Amended
11-3-2009]
Any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf, pier or other
structure extending below the normal shoreline of a water body or
within a wetland;
(1)
Any land use activity situated entirely or partially within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal shoreline of any great pond
or river, within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge
of a coastal or freshwater wetland, or within 75 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, tributary
stream, significant vernal pool as such terms are defined in 38
M.R.S.A. § 435 et seq. and § 125-109 of this chapter. [Amended
6-8-2010]
(2)
A.
The Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Department, as applicable, must find that the proposed plan will comply
with such of the following standards, and all land use activities within
the shoreland zone shall conform to the following standards as are
applicable: [Amended 11-7-2006; 11-4-2008; 11-3-2009;
6-8-2010]
Agriculture. All site plans shall demonstrate that any agricultural
activities in shoreland areas shall comply with the following:
All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance
with the Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine
Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the
Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. §§ 4201 to 4209), or
subsequent revisions thereof.
(a)
Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet,
horizontal distance, of a great pond classified GPA or a river
flowing to a great pond classified GPA, or within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of other water bodies, streams, tributary
streams, significant vernal pools, or wetlands. All manure
storage areas within the shoreland zone must be constructed
or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of
effluent or contaminated stormwater.
(b)
Agriculture practices shall be conducted in such manner to
prevent soil erosion, sedimentation, and contamination or
nutrient enrichment of surface waters.
(c)
(1)
B.
74.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:539
There shall be no tilling of soil in a resource protection district,
tilling of soil in excess of 20,000 square feet lying either wholly
or partially in any other shoreland district, or spreading,
disposal or storage of manure in any shoreland district unless:
The tillage is carried out in conformance with provisions
of a conservation plan which meets the standards of the
State Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and
nonconformance with which shall constitute a violation of
this chapter;
[1]
The plan is approved by the appropriate soil and water
conservation district; and
[2]
[3] Approval of the plan is filed with the Planning Board.
(d)
There shall be no tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high water line of a great pond
classified GPA; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from other
water bodies and coastal wetlands; nor within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of tributary streams, significant vernal
pools, and freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the
effective date of this chapter and not in conformance with this
provision may be maintained.
(e)
Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be
permitted within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high water line of a great pond classified GPA; within 75 feet,
horizontal distance, of other water bodies and coastal
wetlands; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams, significant vernal pools, and freshwater wetlands.
Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities and
which are not in conformance with the above setback
provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is
conducted in accordance with a soil and water conservation
plan.
(f)
(2) (Reserved)75
Beach construction. Beach construction on any great pond or
coastal wetland shall require a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection. Beach construction on any river, stream,
or brook capable of floating watercraft shall require approval from
the Commissioner of the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife, as required by law.
(3)
Erosion and sedimentation control. All site plans shall demonstrate
through a submitted written soil erosion and sedimentation control
plan that filling, grading, lagooning, dredging, earthmoving
activities and other land use activities in a shoreland area shall
(4)
75.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(2), Timber harvesting, was repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:540
be conducted in such manner to prevent, to the maximum extent
possible, erosion and sedimentation of surface waters and shall
further demonstrate that, in addition to the requirements of
§ 125-67Q, such activities shall comply with the following:
On slopes greater than 25%, there shall be no grading or filling
within 100 feet of the shoreline or upland edge of a wetland
except to protect the shoreline and prevent erosion.
(a)
In order to create the least potential for erosion, development
shall be designed to fit with the topography and soils of the
site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural
contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
(b)
Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to
all aspects of the proposed project involving land disturbance
and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be
minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
(c)
Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently
stabilized within one week from the time it was last actively
worked by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall
occur within nine months of the initial date of exposure.
In addition:
Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of
at least one bale per 500 square feet and shall be
maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
[a]
Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or
other suitable method may be required to maintain the
mulch cover.
[b]
[1]
Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in
order to avoid siltation into the water. Such measures may
include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
[2]
(d)
Natural and man-made drainageways and drainage outlets
shall be protected from erosion from water flowing through
them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in
order to carry water from a twenty-five-year storm or greater
and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
(e)
Mineral exploration. Mineral exploration to determine the nature
or extent of mineral resources in a shoreland area shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
which create minimal disturbance. A permit from the Planning
(5)
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:541
Board shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the
above limitations.
Uses extending over or below the shoreline. Site plans for piers,
docks, wharves, breakwaters, causeways, marinas or other
structures or uses extending over or below the shoreline shall
demonstrate that the proposed development will comply with the
following requirements; provided, however, that such compliance
shall not relieve the applicant from obtaining, before construction
begins, all other required federal, state and local licenses and
permits: [Amended 11-4-2008; 11-3-2009]
Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for
such use and constructed so as to control erosion.
(a)
(b) The location shall not interfere with developed beach areas.
The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects
on fisheries.
(c)
The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to
carry on the activity and be consistent with the surrounding
character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or
wharf in nontidal waters shall not be wider than six feet for
noncommercial uses.
(d)
The facility shall provide or have access to such sewage
disposal facilities as may be required by state law or as may
reasonably be required to accommodate the reasonably
anticipated needs of its users and to minimize the possibility
of intentional or accidental discharges of raw sewage into the
water.
(e)
No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier,
wharf, dock or other structure extending below the normal
high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the
structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland
as an operational necessity. Buildings which are constructed
and used for the purpose of providing public safety services
that are related in any way to activities on or near a water
body shall be deemed to require direct access to the water
body as an operational necessity and shall be exempt from the
provisions of § 125-68.
(f)
New permanent piers and docks on nontidal waters shall not
be permitted unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning
Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible and a
permit has been obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act.
(g)
(6)
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:542
No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock,
wharf or other structure extending below the normal highwater
line of a water body or within a wetland shall be
converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
(h)
Except in the shoreland general development districts,
structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or
other structure extending below the normal high water line of
a water body or within a wetland shall not exceed 20 feet in
height above the pier, wharf, dock or other structure. NOTE:
Permanent structures extending over or below the shoreline
shall require a permit from the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act,
38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C.
(i)
Lot standards. All site plans for property located entirely or
partially in a shoreland zone shall demonstrate that all lots shall
comply with the following:
Land below the normal high water line of a water body or
upland edge of a wetland and land beneath roads serving
more than two lots shall not be included toward calculating
minimum lot area.
(a)
Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall
be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless
such road was established by the owner of land on both sides
thereof after September 22, 1971.
(b)
The minimum width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a water
body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater
than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the
proposed use.
(c)
If any lot in a proposed subdivision has shore frontage on a
river, stream, brook, great pond or coastal wetland, none of
the lots created within the subdivision shall have a lot depth to
shore frontage ratio greater than five to one.
(d)
(7)
Roads and driveways. All site plans for development, including
roads, shall demonstrate that such roads shall be located,
constructed and maintained so that minimal soil erosion and
sedimentation of surface water results. Further, all roads,
driveways, drainage systems, culverts and related features
constructed in a shoreland area shall comply with the following:
Water crossings shall be kept to the minimum number
necessary;
(a)
(b) Bottoms of culverts shall be installed at stream bed elevation;
(8)
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:543
All cut or fill banks and areas of exposed mineral soil shall be
revegetated or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible; and
(c)
Bridges or culverts of adequate size and design shall be
provided for all road crossings of watercourses which are to be
used when surface waters are unfrozen. The requirement for
a bridge or culvert may be waived by obtaining a permit from
the Planning Board.
(d)
Roads and driveways shall be set back at least 100 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of a great
pond classified GPA or a river that flows to a great pond
classified GPA; 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high water line of other water bodies, tributary steams, or the
upland edge of a freshwater wetland; 25 feet from a significant
vernal pool; and 25 feet from the upland edge of a forested
wetland, unless no reasonable alternative exists, as
determined by the Planning Board, Planning Department or
Code Enforcement Officer, as applicable. If no other
reasonable alternative exists, the Planning Board, Planning
Department or Code Enforcement Officer, as applicable, may
reduce the road and/or driveway setback requirement, which
shall be to no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, upon clear
showing by the applicant that appropriate techniques will be
used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include but are not
limited to the installation of settling basins and/or the effective
use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so
as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream,
or wetland. On slopes of greater than 20%, the road and/
or driveway setback shall be increased by 10 feet, horizontal
distance, for each five-percent increase in slope above 20%.
This subsection shall apply neither to approaches to water
crossings nor to roads or driveways that provide access to
permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the
shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity,
excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and
driveways providing access to permitted structures within the
setback area shall comply fully with the requirements of this
section, except for that portion of the road or driveway
necessary for direct access to the structure.
(e)
Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road
right-of-way regardless of their setback from a water body,
tributary stream or wetland.
(f)
New roads and driveways are prohibited in a resource
protection district, except that the Planning Board may grant
a permit to construct a road or driveway to provide access to
permitted uses within the district. A road or driveway may also
be as approved by the Planning Board in a resource protection
(g)
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:544
district, upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route
or location is available outside the district. When a road or
driveway is permitted in a resource protection district, the
road and/or driveway shall be set back as far as practicable
from the normal high water line of a water body, tributary
stream, significant vernal pool, or upland edge of a wetland.
Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope
of two horizontal to one vertical and shall be graded and
stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Subsection B(4) of this
section.
(h)
Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than 10%,
except for segments of less than 200 feet.
(i)
In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from
directly entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands,
roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least
50 feet plus two times the average slope in width between the
outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high water
line of a water body, tributary stream, significant vernal pool or
upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage which is directed
to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to
promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized
flow of the drainage through the buffer strip.
(j)
Ditch relief (cross-drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water
turnouts shall be installed in a manner effective in directing
drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow in the
road or ditches gains sufficient volume or head to erode the
road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall
apply:
Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water
turnouts shall be spaced along the road or driveway at
intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade
Spacing
(feet)
0% to 2% 250
3% to 5% 200 to 135
6% to 10% 100 to 80
11% to 15% 80 to 60
16% to 20% 60 to 45
21% + 40
[1]
(k)
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:545
Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts
only where the grade is 10% or less.
[2]
On sections having slopes greater than 10%, ditch relief
culverts shall be placed at approximately a thirty-degree
angle downslope from a line perpendicular to the center
line of the road or driveway.
[3]
Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly
installed in order to allow for effective functioning, and
their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with
appropriate materials.
[4]
Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other
stormwater runoff control installations associated with roads
and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to assure
effective functioning.
(l)
Subsurface wastewater. All subsurface sewage disposal systems
shall be installed in conformance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the following: a) the
clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new
system and any associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer
than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line
of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and b) a holding
tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the Shoreland
District. All site plans for Shoreland areas shall demonstrate that
all subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located in areas
of suitable soil of at least 1,000 square feet in size. The minimum
setback for subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be no less
than 100 horizontal feet from the shoreline of a perennial water
body. These requirements shall not be reduced by variance.
(9)
Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which
the proposed uses or structures can be established or maintained
without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage and water
pollution, whether during or after construction. Proposed uses
requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require
a soils report, prepared by a state-certified professional based
on an on-site investigation. A certified professional may include
Maine certified soil scientist, Maine professional engineer, Maine
state-certified geologist or any other person who has training and
experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The
report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the
soil and surrounding land and water areas, maximum groundwater
elevation, presence of ledge, drainage conditions and other
pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. Suitability
considerations shall be based primarily on criteria employed in the
National Cooperative Soil Survey as modified by on-site factors
(10)
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:546
such as depth to water table and depth to refusal. The soils report
shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract
soil limitations where they exist.
Seasonal conversion. Before a seasonal dwelling located in a
shoreland area may be converted to a year-round principal
dwelling, a seasonal conversion permit shall be obtained from the
local Plumbing Inspector in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4215(2). The granting of such a permit shall not be construed so
as to exempt the conversion from any other applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(11)
Principal and accessory structures. All site plans shall demonstrate
that all principal and accessory structures in a shoreland district
shall comply with the following:
All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back
at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline of
great ponds classified GPA and rivers that flow to great ponds
classified GPA and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, significant vernal pools or the upland edge of a
wetland, and for properties located in the Shoreland General
Development III and IV District; except that in the Shoreland
General Development I and II Districts, the setback from the
shoreline shall be at least 25 feet, horizontal distance. In the
Resource Protection District, the setback requirement shall
be 250 feet, horizontal distance, except for structures, roads,
parking spaces or other regulated objects specifically allowed
in that district, in which case the setback requirements
specified above shall apply. In the Stream Protection District
any structure associated with a "municipal facility or grounds"
or with "uses or small structures accessory to permitted uses
or structures" be set back 75 feet, horizontal distance, from
the shoreline, unless a variance is obtained from the Board of
Appeals. In Resource Protection the setback requirement from
the shoreline for wind turbines shall be 250 feet horizontal
distance unless a variance is obtained from the Board of
Appeals. In the Stream Protection District the setback
requirement from shoreline for wind turbines or municipal
facilities and grounds shall be 75 feet horizontal distance
unless a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals. In
addition: [Amended 11-8-2011; 6-12-2018]
The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback
provision shall not apply to structures which require direct
access to the water body or wetland as an operational
necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to
other functionally water-dependent uses.
[1]
(a)
(12)
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:547
Principal and accessory structures are exempt from
setbacks from a forested wetland of any size on lots in
existence prior to or on September 6, 2005, or from a
freshwater wetland less thatn 10 acres in size on lots in
existence prior to or on September 6, 2005.
[2]
For principal structures, water and wetland setback
measurements shall be taken from the top of a coastal
bluff that has been identified on coastal bluff maps as
being "highly unstable" or "unstable" by the Maine
Geological Survey pursuant to its "Classification of Coastal
Bluffs" and published on the most recent Coastal Bluff
Map. If the applicant and the permitting official(s) are
in disagreement as to the specific location of a highly
unstable or unstable bluff, or where the top of the bluff is
located, the applicant may, at his or her expense, employ a
Maine registered professional engineer, a Maine certified
soil scientist, a Maine state geologist, or other qualified
individual to make a determination. If agreement is still
not reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the
Board of Appeals.
[3]
On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a
residential structure exists, and it is not possible to place
an accessory structure meeting the required water body,
tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the Code
Enforcement Officer may issue a permit to place a single
accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of
yard tools and similar equipment. Such accessory
structure shall not exceed 80 square feet in area nor eight
feet in height and shall be located as far from the shoreline
or tributary stream as practical and shall meet all other
applicable standards, including lot coverage and
vegetation-clearing limitations. In no case shall the
structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary
stream than the principal structure.
[4]
Notwithstanding the dimensional, setback and coverage
requirements of the applicable district and the requirements of
§ 125-67H, stairways or similar structures may be allowed with
a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer for structures
400 square feet or less in area and from the Planning Board
for structures greater than 400 square feet in area to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils
provided that the structure is limited to a maximum of four
feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or
over the normal high water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland (unless permitted by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. § 480-C); and that the applicant
(b)
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:548
demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on
the property.
Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber
harvesting. All site plans shall demonstrate that clearing of
vegetation for purposes of development shall be accomplished in
accordance with the following:
In a shoreland area zoned as a resource protection district
abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation
within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance,
inland from the normal high water line, except to remove
safety hazards. Elsewhere, in any resource protection district,
the cutting and removal clearing of vegetation shall be limited
to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that
district.
(a)
Except in areas as described in Subsection B(13)(a) above, and
except to allow for the development of permitted uses, within
a strip of land extending 100 feet, horizontal distance, inland
from the normal high water line of a great pond classified
GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, 75
feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary
stream, stream, significant vernal pool or the upland edge
of a freshwater wetland, and 25 feet from the upland edge
of a forested wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be
preserved as follows:
There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square
feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody
vegetation if a forested canopy is not present), as
measured from the outer limits of the tree or shrub crown.
However, a footpath not to exceed six feet in width, as
measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems, is
allowed, provided that a cleared line of sight to the water
through the buffer strip is not created.
[1]
Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed,
provided that a well-distributed stand of trees and other
natural vegetation is maintained.
For the purposes of this section, a "well-distributed
stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond classified GPA,
or a river or stream flowing to a great pond classified
GPA, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score
of 24 or more in each twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot
square (1,250 square feet) area, as determined by the
following rating system:
[a]
[2]
(b)
(13)
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:549
Diameter of Tree at 4 1/2
Feet Above Ground Level
(inches) Points
2 to less than or equal to 4 1
4 to less than or equal to 8 2
8 to less than or equal to 12 4
12 or greater 8
NOTES:
As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a twentyfive-
foot by twenty-five-foot plot contains five trees
between two and four inches in diameter, four trees
between four and 12 inches in diameter, and two
trees over 12 inches in diameter, the rating score is:
(5 x 1) + (4 x 2) + (2 x 4) = 21 points. The twentyfive-
foot by twenty-five-foot plot contains trees worth
21 points.
Trees totaling nine points (21 - 12 = 9) may be
removed from the plot provided that no cleared
openings are created.
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams,
significant vernal pools, and wetlands, a "welldistributed
stand of trees" is defined as maintaining
a minimum rating score of 16 per twenty-five-foot by
fifty-foot rectangular area.
The following shall govern in applying this point
system:
The twenty-five-foot by fifty-foot rectangular
plots must be established where the
landowner or lessee proposes clearing within
the required buffer;
[A]
Each successive plot must be adjacent to but
not overlap a previous plot;
[B]
Any plot not containing the required points
must have no vegetation removed except as
otherwise allowed by this chapter;
[C]
Any plot containing the required points may
have vegetation removed down to the
minimum points required or as otherwise
allowed by this chapter; and
[D]
[i]
[b]
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:550
Where conditions permit, no more than 50%
of the points on any twenty-five-foot by fiftyfoot
rectangular area may consist of trees
greater than 12 inches in diameter.
[E]
For the purposes of this Subsection B(13)(b)[2],
"other natural vegetation" is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three feet in height and
other ground cover and retaining at least five
saplings less than two inches in diameter at 4 1/
2 feet above ground level for each twenty-fivefoot
by fifty-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do
not exist, no woody stems less than two inches in
diameter can be removed until five saplings have
been recruited into the plot.
[ii]
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than
40% of the total volume of trees four inches or more in
diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level,
may be removed in any ten-year period.
[c]
In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitats,
existing vegetation under three feet in height and other
ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer,
shall not be cut, covered, or removed except to provide
for a footpath or other permitted uses as described in
Subsection B(13)(b)[1] and [2]. [Amended 6-12-2018]
[3]
Pruning of tree branches on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is
allowed.
[4]
In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the
removal of storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees
results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings
shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing
new tree growth is present.
[5]
Subsection B(13)(b)[2] does not apply to those portions of
public recreational facilities adjacent to public swimming
areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum
area necessary.
[6]
At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from
a great pond classified GPA or a river flowing to a great pond
classified GPA and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high water line of any other water body, tributary
stream, significant vernal pools, or the upland edge of a
wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in any ten-year
period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of the volume
of trees four inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet
above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the
(c)
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:551
development of permitted uses shall be included in the fortypercent
calculation. For the purposes of these standards,
volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area. In no
event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not
limited to principal and accessory structures, driveways, lawns
and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate 25% of
the lot area within the shoreland district or 10,000 square feet,
whichever is greater, including land previously cleared. This
provision shall not apply to the shoreland general development
districts.
Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be
maintained but shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this
chapter.
(d)
Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to
primarily shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be
regulated under the provisions of Subsection B(13).
(e)
Water quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or
discharge to the waters of the state any pollutant that, by itself
or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body,
tributary stream or wetland. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(14)
Archaeological sites. Any proposed land use activity involving
structural development or soil disturbance on or adjacent to sites
listed on or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic
Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission for review and comment at least 20 days prior to
action being taken by the Planning Board, the Code Enforcement
Officer or the Planning Department. The Planning Board, the Code
Enforcement Officer and the Planning Department shall consider
comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a
decision on the application.
(15)
Commercial and industrial uses. The following new commercial and
industrial uses are prohibited within a shoreland district adjacent
to great ponds classified GPA and rivers and streams which flow to
great ponds classified GPA:
(a) Auto washing facilities.
Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations,
including body shops.
(b)
(c) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories.
Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or
fertilizers, other than amounts normally associated with
individual households or farms. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(d)
(16)
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:552
Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture
stripping.
(e)
(f) Dry-cleaning establishments.
(g) Electronic circuit assembly.
(h) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer.
(i) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing.
Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except
storage on the same property as use occurs and except for
storage and sales associated with marinas.
(j)
(k) Photographic processing.
(l) Printing.
Parking areas. All site plans shall demonstrate that any parking
areas associated with proposed development in a shoreland district
shall comply with the following requirements:
Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream
setback requirements for structures for the district in which
such areas are located. The setback requirement for parking
areas serving public boat launching facilities in districts other
than Shoreland General Development I and II Districts shall
be no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline
or tributary stream if the Planning Board finds that no other
reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or
tributary stream. [Amended 11-4-2008; 6-12-2018]
(a)
Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use,
shall comply with the requirements of § 125-67E and shall be
designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly
into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and, where
feasible, to retain all runoff on site. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(b)
In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking
facilities, the following shall apply if stricter than the
requirements of § 125-67E:
Typical parking space: approximately 10 feet wide and 20
feet long, except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat
trailer shall be 40 feet long.
[1]
[2] Internal travel aisles: approximately 20 feet wide.
(c)
(17)
Essential services. All site plans shall demonstrate that essential
services shall be installed in compliance with the following:
Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be
limited to existing public ways and existing service corridors.
(a)
(18)
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-68
109:553
The installation of essential services, other than roadside
distribution lines, is not allowed in a resource protection or
stream protection district, except to provide services to a
permitted use within said district, or except where the
applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists.
Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located
so as to minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and
resources, including visual impacts. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(b)
Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and
distribution lines, towers and related equipment may be
replaced or reconstructed without a permit. [Added
11-4-2008]
(c)
Private campsites. Individual, private campsites not associated
with campgrounds are allowed, provided that the following
conditions are met: [Amended 11-4-2008]
One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this
chapter, or 30,000 square feet of lot area within a shoreland
district, whichever is less, may be permitted.
(a)
Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended
for a recreational vehicle or tent platform, shall be set back
100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line
of a great pond classified GPA or river flowing to a great
pond classified GPA and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high water line of other water bodies, tributary
streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
(b)
Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite.
The recreational vehicle shall not be located on any type of
permanent foundation, except for a gravel pad, and no
structure except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational
vehicle.
(c)
The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational
vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a resource protection district
shall be limited to 1,000 square feet.
(d)
A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed
method and location of sewage disposal shall be required for
each campsite and shall be approved by the local Plumbing
Inspector. Where disposal is off site, written authorization from
the receiving facility or landowner is required.
(e)
When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed
on site for more than 120 days per year, all requirements for
residential structures shall be met, including the installation of
a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless
served by public sewage facilities.
(f)
(19)
§ 125-68 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-68
109:554
§ 125-69. Standards for particular uses, structures or activities.
Notwithstanding and in addition to any other provision of this chapter,
before granting site plan approval for any land use activity described in this
section, the Planning Board must find that the proposed plan will comply
with such of the following standards as are applicable:
Signs. Notwithstanding any less restrictive provision of this
chapter, the following provisions shall govern the use of signs in
the resource protection, stream protection, and shoreland limited
residential districts:
Sign area shall not exceed six square feet in area and shall
not exceed two signs per premises. Off-premises signs shall be
prohibited.
(a)
Residential users may display one sign not over three square
feet in area relating to the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
(b)
Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed
without restriction as to number, provided that no such sign
shall exceed two square feet in area. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(c)
Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without
restriction. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(d)
(20)
Automobile salvage yards. Before granting site plan approval for an
automobile salvage yard the Planning Board shall receive evidence that
the applicant has obtained all necessary federal and state permits and
licenses and must further find that the proposed salvage yard shall
comply with the following:
Automobile salvage yards shall be located a minimum of 1,000 feet
from the edge of the rights-of-way of Routes 3, 102, and 233 and a
minimum of 600 feet from the edge of the rights-of-way of all other
roads and shall be set back 100 feet from all side and rear lot lines.
(1)
Automobile salvage yards shall be located a minimum of 300 feet
from any public park, facility, or grounds and shall comply with
all requirements of Chapter 109, Health and Sanitation, § 109-8,
Junked motor vehicles.
(2)
Automobile salvage yards shall be entirely screened from view by
natural objects, plantings or fences which shall be well constructed
and properly maintained at a minimum height of six feet and
sufficient to accomplish the complete screening from ordinary view.
(3)
Upon arrival at the salvage yard, batteries shall be removed and
oil, lubricants and fluids shall be drained from all vehicles, and
appropriate safety precautions, such as the removal of door and
trunk locks, shall be taken to avoid injury and accidents.
(4)
A.
§ 125-68 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:555
No vehicles may remain intact in the yard for more than 30 days,
and complete processing of vehicles into salvage materials shall be
accomplished within four months.
(5)
All junk and salvage materials shall be stored within the screened/
fenced areas and the operation shall be conducted in such a
manner as to prevent unsightliness of the adjacent area.
(6)
No open burning of salvage material or junk shall be permitted on
the premises. Waste fluids and unusable materials shall be disposed
of in an environmentally sound manner.
(7)
The Planning Board may impose additional and more stringent
restrictions, limitations and conditions such as are reasonably
calculated to adequately protect public health and safety. Such
additional restrictions, limitations and conditions, together with
all of the standards imposed by this chapter, shall govern the
future operation and use of the automobile salvage yard. Site plan
approval obtained for an automobile salvage yard shall be
nontransferable, and any subsequent owner of such a salvage yard
must obtain site plan approval before continuing operations.
(8)
Cabins and cottages. Cabins and cottages shall be treated as transient
accommodations; provided, however, that any lot containing cabins and
cottages shall contain at least 20,000 square feet.
B.
Campgrounds. All site plans for proposed campground development
shall demonstrate that:
(1) The applicant has obtained all required state permits and licenses.
Each recreational vehicle, tent, or shelter site shall contain a
minimum of 5,000 square feet of suitable land in shoreland areas
and 2,500 square feet of suitable land in inland areas, not including
driveways and roads, for each site. Land supporting wetland
vegetation and land below the normal high water line of a water
body shall not be included in calculating land area per site.
[Amended 11-5-1991]
(2)
The area intended for placement of the recreational vehicle, tent
or shelter site and utility and service buildings shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the exterior lot lines of the camping area,
100 feet from the normal high water line of a great pond classified
GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified GPA, and 75 feet
from the normal high water line of a tributary stream, upland edge
of a wetland or any other body of water. [Amended 11-5-1991]
(3)
(4) The campground shall be screened from all abutting areas.
Each recreational vehicle, tent or shelter site shall be provided with
a trash receptacle.
(5)
C.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:556
Conversion to multifamily use. Conversion of existing structures into
multifamily dwelling units I or II will be permitted only on the following
conditions:
Off-street parking will be provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 125-67D(3)(a).
(1)
Written approvals of conversion plans by the Fire, Electrical, and
Plumbing Inspectors are submitted at the time of application.
(2)
Each dwelling unit shall be at least 500 square feet in area for onebedroom
units, plus 150 square feet for each additional bedroom,
and all such space shall comply with FHA standards.
(3)
Each dwelling unit shall have its own toilet and kitchen facilities,
and no dwelling unit will share these facilities with any other
dwelling unit.
(4)
D.
Home occupations. Home occupations will be permitted only on the
following conditions: [Amended 11-3-2009]
Home occupations on properties with frontage on Routes 3 and 102
are to accommodate uses not otherwise allowed in the district and
permitted as a means for residents to live and work in place while
taking advantage of the existing high daily vehicle trips. Home
occupations are limited to those uses which may be conducted
within a residential dwelling without substantially changing the
appearance or condition of the residence or accessory structures
and which are compatible with the districts in which they are
located.
(1)
Home occupations on properties with frontage on Routes 3 and
102:
Shall seek minor site plan review as per § 125-58B(5) if nonfamily
members are employees; approvals shall be based upon
meeting the criteria herein;
(a)
The use of the dwelling for a home occupations shall be
incidental and subordinate to its residential use; however, any
accessory structure may be fully dedicated to the home
occupation;
(b)
Up to five non-family members may be employed; however, the
owner of the business must reside on the premises;
(c)
The area for any exterior displays or materials storage shall be
counted towards lot coverage requirements in the district;
(d)
Accessory structures dedicated to the home occupation shall
not be located in the front yard;
(e)
(2)
E.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:557
Up to 40% of the dwelling unit floor area may be dedicated
to the home occupation; unfinished basement and attic spaces
are not included in this calculation.
(f)
Home occupations in the Downtown Residential District and on
properties with frontage on the following streets: Bayview Drive,
Crooked Road, Eagle Lake Road, and Old Bar Harbor Road. Home
occupations in these locations shall be subject to the requirements
in Subsection E(4) below except:
(a) There may be up to two non-family-member employees;
Not more than 30% of the dwelling unit floor area shall be
dedicated to home occupation, provided that for purposes of
this calculation, unfinished basement and attic spaces are not
included.
(b)
(3)
Home occupations in other locations.
The use of a dwelling unit or its accessory structure for a home
occupation shall clearly be incidental and subordinate to its
use for residential purposes.
(a)
A home occupation must be carried on wholly within a dwelling
unit or a structure customarily accessory to a dwelling unit.
(b)
A home occupation must be conducted by a member or
members of the family residing in the dwelling units.
(c)
A home occupation must not materially injure the usefulness of
the dwelling unit or accessory structure for normal residential
purposes.
(d)
A home occupation shall be allowed no exterior display, no
exterior sign other than those permitted in § 125-67BB(4)(m),
no exterior storage of materials, no retail sale of goods except
those produced upon the premises and those which are clearly
incidental to the providing of service involved in a home
occupation, and no other exterior indication of the home
occupation or variation from the residential character of the
principal building.
(e)
Not more than 20% of the dwelling unit floor area shall be
dedicated to home occupation, provided that for purposes of
this calculation, unfinished basement and attic spaces are not
included;
(f)
One accessory structure. The floor area utilized in the
accessory structure shall not exceed 50% of the total floor area
of the dwelling unit as previously calculated.
(g)
(4)
(5) For all home occupations:
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:558
Objectionable conditions such as noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
electrical disturbance, odors, heat, glare, or activity at
unreasonable hours shall not be permitted of a home
occupation.
(a)
The traffic generated by a home occupation shall not increase
the volume of traffic so as to create a traffic hazard or disturb
the residential character of the immediate neighborhood.
(b)
In addition to the off-street parking provided to meet the
normal requirements of the dwelling, adequate off-street
parking shall be provided for any employees allowed above
and for the vehicles of the maximum number of users a home
occupation may attract during peak operating hours.
(c)
For purposes of this chapter, use of residential buildings for
transient accommodations shall not be considered a home
occupation but rather shall be governed by other provisions of
this chapter.
(d)
The Code Enforcement Officer shall refer any request for a land
use permit for a home occupation, or an owner within 300 feet of a
home occupation may submit a request, to the Board of Appeals if
there is any doubt as to whether the proposed use fails to meet any
of the requirements.
(6)
Manufactured housing.
It is the policy of the Town of Bar Harbor to allow manufactured
housing on individual, undeveloped lots in a variety of locations so
as to offer a viable housing option for the citizens of Bar Harbor.
Such housing shall be subject to the same requirements as singlefamily
dwellings except as provided in this Subsection F. Mobile
homes are prohibited in the Downtown Village, Downtown
Residential, Village Historic, and Shoreland General Development
Districts. [Amended 11-5-1991; 6-8-2010]
(1)
All manufactured housing located on a lot in the Town of Bar
Harbor shall comply with the following design standards:
A roof with a pitch of two or more vertical units for every 12
horizontal units of measurement and which is covered with
asphalt or fiberglass composition shingles or other materials,
specifically excluding corrugated metal roofing material;
(a)
A permanent foundation consisting of a full, poured concrete
or masonry foundation; a poured concrete or mortared
masonry frost wall, with or without a concrete floor; a
reinforced, floating concrete pad, the design for which shall
require an engineer's certification if it is to be placed on soil
with a high frost susceptibility; or any foundation which,
(b)
(2)
F.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:559
pursuant to the Building Code76 for the Town of Bar Harbor, is
permitted for other types of single-family dwellings;
(c) At least 14 feet in width;
Exterior walls that are residential or traditional site-built in
appearance;
(d)
Skirting which matches the factory base or trim color of the
unit, with plastic or tar paper specifically prohibited.
(e)
The foregoing design standards shall not be construed to prevent
the relocation of any manufactured housing, regardless of its date
of manufacture, that was legally sited within the Town of Bar
Harbor as of August 4, 1988.
(3)
Mobile home parks. All site plans for mobile home parks shall
demonstrate that the proposed development will comply with the
following requirements:
A mobile home park shall consist of a contiguous parcel of land
with a minimum overall area of at least the combined area of its
mobile home park lots plus:
(a) The area required for road rights-of-way;
(b) The area required for buffer or screening;
For mobile home parks served by a public sewer, an area
for open space, storage or recreation equal to 10% of the
combined area of the individual lots within the mobile home
park;
(c)
The area of any setbacks required by mandatory shoreland
zoning.
(d)
(1)
Except as otherwise required by mandatory shoreland zoning, the
minimum size of individual lots in a mobile home park shall be:
Twenty thousand square feet with on-site subsurface
wastewater disposal;
(a)
(b) Five thousand square feet with public sewer;
Six thousand five hundred square feet with engineered waste
disposal system;
(c)
Twelve thousand square feet if served by a central on-site
subsurface wastewater disposal system approved by the
Department of Human Services, provided that the overall
density of the mobile home park shall be no more than one
home for every 20,000 square feet.
(d)
(2)
G.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 36, Building Construction.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:560
Except as otherwise required by mandatory shoreland zoning, the
setback requirements of the district in which a mobile home park
is located may be reduced up to 50% or the minimum amount
necessary to accommodate the minimum lot standards set forth
in Subsection G(2), except that mobile homes on lots adjacent to
a public road shall be set back according to the requirements
applicable to other residential developments in the district.
(3)
The road frontage requirements of the district in which a mobile
home park is located may be reduced for the individual lots within
the park up to 35% or the minimum amount necessary to
accommodate the minimum lot standards set forth in Subsection
G(2).
(4)
Where possible, mobile home stands shall be oriented with respect
to scenic vistas, natural landscape features, topography, and
natural drainage areas.
(5)
Buffer strip.
A mobile home park shall have a fifty-foot natural buffer strip,
including individual lot setbacks, along any park boundary that
abuts land used for residential use if the per-acre density of
homes within the park is at least two times greater than:
The density of residential development on immediately
adjacent parcels of land; or
[1]
If the immediately adjacent parcels of land are
undeveloped, the maximum net residential density
permitted by applicable municipal ordinances or state law.
[2]
(a)
No structures, streets or utilities may be placed in the buffer
strip, except that utilities may cross a buffer strip to provide
services to a mobile home park.
(b)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a mobile home park shall
comply with the screening requirements applicable to other
single-family residences located in the same district as the
mobile home park.
(c)
(6)
Areas in the mobile home parks intended for the storage of garbage
and rubbish shall be entirely screened from view, except that
portions may be left open to permit pedestrian and vehicular
access.
(7)
Each mobile home site shall comply with the parking requirements
of § 125-67D(3)(a).
(8)
All mobile homes located within a mobile home park within the
Town of Bar Harbor shall comply with the requirements of
Subsection F(2), except that provision shall not be construed to
prevent the relocation of any mobile home, regardless of its date of
(9)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:561
manufacture, that was legally sited within the Town of Bar Harbor
as of August 4, 1988.
If the developer intends to offer the roads within a mobile home
park to the Town for acceptance as a Town way, such roads will be
built according to the Town's standards.
(10)
If the developer does not intend to offer the roads within a mobile
home park to the Town for acceptance as a Town way, such roads
shall:
Be built according to acceptable engineering standards and
with a professional engineer's seal as required by the
Manufactured Housing Board;
(a)
Have a right-of-way of 23 feet in width, 20 feet of which shall
be paved; and
(b)
Conform to the safety standards applicable to intersections
with public ways adjacent to the mobile home park.
(c)
(11)
Dead-end streets within a mobile home park shall be limited in
length to 1,000 feet and at the closed end shall be provided with a
turnaround having a minimum radius of 60 feet.
(12)
Sidewalks not less than three feet in width shall be provided on at
least one side of every street within a mobile home park.
(13)
Walkways not less than two feet in width shall connect each mobile
home stand to a sidewalk, to a paved street, or to a driveway
connecting to a paved street.
(14)
Temporary storage. Upon the approval of the Code Enforcement
Officer, portable or mobile trailers, vans or similar vehicles or
temporary buildings may be used for storage or display for a period not
to exceed six months.
Such approval may be extended by the Planning Board for
successive periods of six months if the Board finds that:
The use does not diminish area requirements as set forth in the
zoning ordinance for that district.
(a)
There is a valid temporary need which cannot be met within
the principal structure and that adequate economic hardship
can be shown.
(b)
The initial approval, or any renewal, of the use will not in any
way be detrimental to the neighboring properties, including
aesthetic appearance.
(c)
(d) The use is not intended as a permanent or long-term use.
(1)
H.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:562
The use is not intended to circumvent building area limitations
for that district or to prolong the use of facilities which have
been outgrown.
(e)
The facilities will be adequately screened from neighborhood
properties and the street.
(f)
The facilities will not be used as or intended for advertising for
on- or off-premises purposes.
(g)
(h) The facilities are not intended for retail sales.
The above provisions do not prohibit the use of such temporary
facilities as construction or job site office or equipment storage
facilities during construction, provided that no advertising other
than the contractor's name shall be on the vehicle or facility and
that such signs meet the requirements of § 125-67BB(3)(f).
Construction or job site office or equipment storage facilities shall
be allowed to be in place during the entire duration of the
construction which the office or storage facility serves, provided
that a building permit from the Code Enforcement Officer is
granted prior to installation of such. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(2)
I. (Reserved)77
Swimming pools. Around every swimming pool located within the Town
of Bar Harbor, except portable aboveground swimming pools with side
walls of at least 24 inches in height, shall be erected a good quality
fence or wall not less than four feet in height above ground surface
and of a character to exclude children. A building may be used as
part of the fence or wall which shall be constructed so as not to
have openings, holes or gaps larger than four square inches, except
for fences constructed of vertical posts or louvers, in which case the
openings shall not be greater than four inches in width with no
horizontal members between the top and bottom plates.
J.
Restaurants. The maximum seating capacity stated in a restaurant's
application shall not be exceeded without a new building permit or site
plan approval, whichever was required originally.
K.
Mining, quarrying and gravel extraction. All mining, quarrying or
gravel extraction activities shall conform to the following applicable
standards:
No excavation or removal of earth material shall be allowed within
100 feet of any property line and no below-grade excavation or
mining shall be allowed within 200 feet of any public way.
(1)
No below-grade excavation shall create an unstable slope so that
the land within 100 feet of any property line or 200 feet of any
(2)
L.
77.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection I, Timber harvesting, as amended, was repealed
6-12-2018.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:563
public way shall be subject to any increased erosion, slump or
mass movement or other detrimental effect. A slope with a steeper
incline than a ratio of three horizontal to one vertical shall be
deemed unstable unless demonstrated otherwise.
No gravel pit or mining or extraction operation shall result in
increased erosion or runoff that will adversely affect any adjoining
properties.
(3)
At least 30 days before the initiation of any blasting, the operator of
any mining, quarrying or extraction activity shall notify in writing
all residents within 1/2 mile of the blast area, informing them how
to request a pre-blast survey.
(4)
Within six months of completion, all gravel extraction, mining or
quarrying operations shall be restored with a ground cover or
cover crop which prevents erosion and is suitable for wildlife. The
cover should be approved by the Soil and Water Conservation
Service. No slopes on which vegetation cannot be reestablished
shall be left upon discontinuance of the gravel pit operation. Any
restoration shall not cause an increase or decrease of water flow to
adjacent properties. Before approving a gravel extraction, mining
or quarrying operation, the Planning Board shall receive an
executed performance guarantee, in a form acceptable to the Town
Attorney, in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of site
restoration.
(5)
All gravel extraction, mining or quarrying operations shall be
screened from view from adjacent properties and public ways by
vegetation or other appropriate means.
(6)
No gravel extraction, mining or quarrying operations shall be
worked at a level less than three feet above the average seasonal
high water table for freshwater and high tide for saltwater.
(7)
No leachate harmful to groundwater quality, including but not
limited to salt, creosoted timber, petroleum products or rubbish,
shall be dumped or stored in a gravel pit except under cover and
upon an impermeable spill-proof base.
(8)
Access to gravel extraction, mining or quarrying areas shall be
strictly controlled with locking gates at the entrance of access
roads. When the pit is not being operated, all vehicular entrances
shall be made impassable.
(9)
No site plan approval will be granted for a gravel extraction,
mining or quarrying operation until the applicant has received site
location approval from the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, if required.
(10)
No site plan approval will be granted for a gravel extraction,
mining or quarrying operation until the applicant has provided
(11)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:564
evidence of adequate insurance against liability arising from
proposed extraction operations and evidence that such insurance
shall be maintained throughout the period of operation.
Planned Unit Development - Outlying Area (PUD-O). [Amended
6-13-200678]
Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development - Outlying Area
is to provide an opportunity for residential subdivision
developments on large tracts of land to embody the principles
of:
Clustering of dwelling units to create buffers, open space
and recreation areas;
[1]
[2] Reduce infrastructure needs; and
Reducing negative impacts to the environment from the
development.
[3]
(a)
A PUD-O is also offered to seek development projects that:
[Amended 11-4-2008]
[1] Include affordable housing; or
Follow the applicable guidelines for the Great American
Neighborhood; and/or
[2]
[3] Follow the guidelines of low-impact development.
(b)
The intent of PUD-O is to encourage development which
benefits the Town as a whole by offering financial incentives.
The PUD seeks to provide for enhanced planned developments
by:
[1] Allowing greater freedom of design;
Improving the opportunity for flexibility and creativity in
the land development process; and
[2]
Undertaking techniques which foster community and
pedestrian access.
[3]
(c)
(1)
District and authority.
The Planned Unit Development-Outlying Area is an overlay
option to zoning in existing neighborhood districts. The
districts in which the PUD-O overlay is permitted are Bar
Harbor Residential and Village Residential in those areas not
(a)
(2)
M.
78.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:565
served by the Town sewer system; Hulls Cove Rural in those
areas not served by the Town sewer system; Emery; Indian
Point Residential; Indian Point Rural; McFarland Hill
Residential; McFarland Hill Rural; Town Hill Corridor; Town
Hill Residential; Town Hill Rural; Otter Creek; Salisbury Cove
Corridor; Salisbury Cove Residential; and Salisbury Cove
Rural. Properties in the above-noted neighborhood districts
with a portion of land in the Shoreland Residential, Resource
Protection and Stream Protection Neighborhood Districts may
apply for a PUD-O; however these properties must still meet
shoreland standards contained in § 125-68. [Amended
6-8-2010]
Applicants may choose to permit a project as a PUD-O;
otherwise the underlying zoning requirements apply.
(b)
The Planning Board is the permitting authority for a PUD-O;
however, any other permits and approvals required must be
sought and received by the applicant. A PUD-O does not relieve
the applicant from obtaining any local, state and/or federal
permits that may be required.
(c)
PUD-O process.
The PUD-O process shall include the requirements of a
subdivision approval process as outlined in Articles V and VI.
Any modification upon approval shall be subject to the
requirements of § 125-58B.
(a)
In addition to Subsection M(3)(a) above, and as part of the
sketch plan filing, applicants shall prepare a site analysis
diagram graphically identifying major physical features of the
site, including but not limited to existing structures and
improvements, land cover type, wetlands, watercourses and
significant vernal pools, slopes greater than 20%, and district
boundaries. The site analysis shall identify the context of the
neighborhood surrounding the project area by showing
graphically the relationship of proposed new structures or
alterations to nearby preexisting structures in terms of
character and intensity the of use (e.g., scale, materials,
setbacks, roof and cornice lines, and other major design
elements). The analysis shall also include a graphic illustration
of the visual impacts and viewshed alterations that the
proposed development will have on neighboring properties
because of the location and configuration of proposed
structures, parking areas, open space, and gradient changes.
[Amended 11-4-2008]
(b)
At the sketch plan submission, the Planning Board may require
the applicant to prepare a plan to show a possible layout for
a conventional subdivision application. This plan may be used
(c)
(3)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:566
by the Planning Board to determine base development density.
[Added 11-4-2008]
Prior to submitting an application for a PUD-O, and after the
submission of the sketch plan, the Planning Department will
hold a neighborhood meeting. Abutters within 600 feet of the
application parcel shall receive notice of this meeting.
[Amended 11-4-2008]
(d)
Parcel size and eligibility. [Amended 11-4-2008]
The application parcel cannot contain in the aggregate more
than 50% of the following land type(s):
[1] Wetlands and significant vernal pools;
[2] Sustained slopes greater than 20%;
Areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the shoreline
of a stream, great pond, river, coastal wetland or
significant vernal pool; [Amended 6-8-2010]
[3]
[4] Floodplains.
(a)
An application for a PUD-O may consist of land in more than
one ownership, provided that all land comprising the parcel
lies entirely within the PUD-O Overlay District.
(b)
Proposed developments may include preexisting buildings,
provided that all PUD-O requirements are satisfied by each
new or existing building and these are included in calculations
for the PUD-O as a whole.
(c)
(4)
Permitted uses. The Planning Board may consider the allowance
of multifamily dwellings not otherwise allowed in the underlying
district when the construction of multifamily dwelling structures
will result in the creation and/or retention of larger buffers, open
space and recreation areas that might not be possible otherwise in
the development, reduce negative impacts on the environment and
will be consistent with the purpose and intent of this provision.
(5)
Intensity of development.
Number of allowable dwelling units.
Applications shall show the density allowed for a
conventional subdivision application. This density shall be
used in calculations for requisite open space, affordable
unit dedication and also as the base requirement that
the Planning Board may increase as noted below. This
plan establishes the base development density. Land
encumbered at the time of the application by conservation
[1]
(a)
(6)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:567
easement cannot be included in the calculation for base
development density. [Amended 11-4-2008]
An increase in the number of dwelling units above the base
development density shall be considered for the following
provisions:
For every additional affordable dwelling unit, an
additional market-rate dwelling unit may be allowed.
[a]
For 10% of additional open space dedicated on the
application parcel, an additional market-rate dwelling
unit may be allowed. [Amended 11-4-2008]
[b]
For the provision by deed and construction of active
recreation space, an additional market-rate dwelling
unit may be allowed.
[c]
For projects that meet, either by application or by
affidavit for adherence during construction, the
standards of Leadership in Energy & Environmental
Design of the U.S. Greenbuilding Council (“LEEDS”)
or an approved equivalent, for all dwelling units, an
additional market-rate dwelling unit may be allowed.
[d]
For projects that propose to construct new pedestrian
amenities to connect the proposed development to
other areas, amenities or goods and services, an
additional market-rate dwelling unit may be allowed.
[e]
For projects that provide formal access to public
transportation, an additional market-rate dwelling
unit may be allowed.
[f]
For projects that restore or preserve an historic
resource existing on the property as part of the
application, an additional market-rate dwelling unit
may be allowed.
[g]
For projects that place all public utilities, other than
stormwater management systems, underground on
the application parcel, an additional market-rate
dwelling unit may be allowed.
[h]
For projects that utilize shared septic systems for all
of the dwelling units, an additional market-rate
dwelling unit may be allowed.
[i]
[2]
A PUD-O may never exceed the allowable number of
dwelling units by more than 1 1/2 times the base
development density, except as listed below:
[3]
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:568
The maximum allowable number of dwelling units may
be twice the base development density when the
increase in dwelling units above the base development
density is allowed as a result of the addition of
affordable housing units under § 125-69 M(6)(a)[2][a]
and no other provision.
[a]
Affordable units and lots. For applications that propose to
exceed the base development density, the final plan must
include a minimum number of affordable units or lots that is
20% of the base development density. These units and lots
must be in compliance with § 125-69R. Each of these units
shall be allowed a companion market-rate unit. [Amended
11-4-2008]
(b)
Open space.
All PUD-Os shall set aside by deed or easement an area
in square footage at least 40% of the application parcel as
open space. [Amended 11-4-2008]
[1]
Open space calculations may not include land that is under
conservation easement at the time of application.
[2]
Open space is not required to be contiguous; however, no
open space area in square footage set aside shall be less
than 5% of the application parcel;
[3]
No more than 75% in the aggregate of the following land
types can be used in the calculation of open space:
[a] Wetlands and significant vernal pools;
[b] Sustained slopes greater than 20%;
[c] Stormwater management systems; and
Area(s) within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high water line of a stream, great pond, river,
saltwater body, or significant vernal pool.
[d]
[4]
Restrictive language. The applicant shall present the
Planning Board with proposed language for incorporation
into deeds, recorded plans and declarations designed to
ensure the integrity, protection and maintenance of the
common open space. Such language shall be subject to the
approval of the Town Attorney to be sure it will accomplish
its intended purposes. The applicant will comply with all
reasonable requests of the Town to incorporate such
language in appropriate documentation to ensure the
purposes of this section will be met.
[5]
(c)
(d) Dimensional controls.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:569
The standards in Article III may be modified through
review by the Planning Board to ensure the purpose and
intent of this ordinance are met.
[1]
The aggregate lot coverage of a PUD-O cannot exceed that
of the neighborhood district.
[2]
In no event shall height requirements be allowed to exceed
the requirements of the underlying neighborhood district.
[3]
Other standards. The standards found in § 125-67 may be
considered for modification in instances where the applicant
adequately shows that the proposed application meets the
purpose and intent of a PUD-O.
(e)
Criteria for approval.
In reviewing PUD-O applications, the Planning Board shall use
the requirements found in §§ 125-67 and 125-69 as applicable
and as may be modified to meet the Purpose and intent of a
PUD-O.
(a)
The Planning Board also shall use the requirements of
§ 125-68, which shall not be modified, for review of property in
a shoreland zone(s) as may be applicable.
(b)
All Planning Board approvals of PUD-Os are contingent upon
the development meeting the express purpose and intent of a
PUD-O.
(c)
(7)
Subdivisions. Subdivisions shall comply with the following:
Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be set at all corners
and angle points of the subdivision boundaries, at all street
intersections and points of curvature, and at the corners of all lots.
Monuments shall be of a material usually and customarily used
for such purposes, located in the ground at final grade level, and
indicated on the final plan.
(1)
Blocks.
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to:
Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special
needs of the type of use contemplated;
[1]
[2] Requirements as to lots sizes and dimensions;
Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and
safety of streets traffic;
[3]
[4] Limitations and opportunities of topography.
(a)
(2)
N.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:570
In blocks exceeding 800 feet in length, the Planning Board
may require the reservation of a twenty-foot-wide easement
through the block to provide for the crossing of underground
utilities and pedestrian traffic where needed or desirable and
may further specify, at its discretion, that a four-foot-wide
paved footpath be included. The Planning Board shall require
the subdivider to provide for the proper maintenance of any
such easement.
(b)
Lot standards. Except as modified by the provisions on planned unit
developments as set forth in Subsections M and S as applicable,
the lot size, width, frontage, depth, shape and orientation and
the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated. [Amended 6-13-200679]
(3)
Frontage. Except as modified by the provisions on planned unit
developments set forth in Subsections M and S, as applicable, the
subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide that each lot
shall have frontage on a public street, or on a private road giving
access to a public street, in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Article III for the district in which the development is
proposed. [Amended 6-13-200680]
(4)
Double frontage and reverse frontage. Double frontage lots and
reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to
provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and
orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 10 feet, across
which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the
line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous
use.
(5)
Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines.
(6)
Future development. Where a tract is subdivided into lots
substantially larger than the minimum size required in the district
in which a subdivision is located, the Planning Board shall require
that streets and lots be laid out so as to permit future resubdivision
in accordance with the requirements contained in these standards.
[Amended 6-13-200681]
(7)
79.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
80.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
81.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:571
Land not suitable for development. The Planning Board shall not
approve such portions of any proposed subdivision that:
(a) Are situated below sea level;
Are located within the one-hundred-year frequency floodplain
as identified by an authorized federal or state agency or, when
such identification is not available, are located on floodplain
soils identified and described in the National Cooperative
Standard Soils Survey;
(b)
Are located on land which must be filled or drained or on
land created by diverting a watercourse, except the Planning
Board may grant approval if a central sewage collection and
treatment system is provided. In no instance shall the Planning
Board approve any part of a subdivision located on filled tidal
wetlands or filled or drained great ponds (natural water body
of 10 acres or more in size);
(c)
Employs septic sewage disposal and is located on soils rated
poor or very poor by the Soil Suitability Guide for Land Use
Planning in Maine. Where soils are rated fair for septic sewage
disposal, the minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet.
(d)
(8)
Fences. Fences shall be erected with the finished side facing abutting
properties or rights-of-way and so as to comply with the provisions
of § 125-67B(6)(a), E(27) and (20). [Added 5-7-1991; amended
6-13-2006]
Fences shall be no more than eight feet in height in business and
industrial districts and of not more than seven feet in all other
districts. Structures which may require taller fences surrounding
them, such as, but not limited to, swimming pools, tennis courts,
baseball fields, and other similar structures shall have fences of
not more than 14 feet in height in all districts. Fences may be
more than eight feet in height but less than 12 feet in business and
industrial districts and more than seven feet in height but less than
14 feet in all other districts, provided the abutting property owners
give written consent to the increased height.
(1)
Fences must comply with the setback distances set forth in
§ 125-67B(6)(a.).
(2)
O.
Farmers' market. In addition to any applicable requirements of
§§ 125-67 and 125-68, all farmers' markets shall comply with the
following additional requirements: [Added 3-24-1998]
Products sold. Any product that does not constitute a farm and food
product as defined by this chapter may not be sold at a farmers'
market. Prohibited products include, but are not limited to, articles
of clothing, souvenirs, antiques, crafts and tickets.
(1)
P.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:572
Licenses to be displayed. Any person who sells at a farmers' market
a product for the processing or sale of which is required a license
from the State of Maine or the United States shall prominently
display of copy of such license at the farmers' market.
(2)
Sales not in permanent buildings. Any vehicles or structures from
which products at a farmers' market are sold which are not
permanently connected to a subsurface wastewater disposal
system or the public sewer system shall be removed from the site
in all hours during which the farmers' market is not in operation.
(3)
Toilet facilities. There shall be provided at each site at which
a farmers' market is conducted at least one toilet or rest room
facility which shall, at a minimum, be available during all hours of
operation to all sellers at the farmers' market.
(4)
Number of sellers limited. The number of sellers permitted at any
farmers' market shall be limited to the number allowed in the
permit.
(5)
More stringent regulations allowed. Nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to prohibit a farmers' market, a farmers' market
federation or association or a co-op from imposing more stringent
requirements on its sellers than imposed by this chapter.
(6)
Educational institution. In addition to any and all applicable
requirements found in §§ 125-67 and 125-68, respectively, educational
institutions shall comply with the following additional standards:
As of May 3, 2004, there shall be no additional curb cuts
constructed within the two-hundred-foot setback along the eastern
boundary of the district serving buildings located outside said
setback.
(1)
In addition to the requirements of § 125-52D, and notwithstanding
any and all allowances in Article III, the uses allowed within the
requisite two-hundred-foot side setback are limited to: [Amended
6-12-2018]
(a) Office;
Classrooms and meeting rooms, each having a maximum
occupancy of 15 persons;
(b)
(c) Single-family housing, excluding student housing; and
(d) Indoor storage.
(2)
As of May 3, 2004, there shall be no additional parking area
constructed within 200 feet of the requisite side setback from the
eastern boundary of the district.
(3)
Q.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:573
All activities requiring a building permit as outlined in § 125-77
shall be in conformance with a campus facility plan document.
Such document shall be approved appropriately by the institution
and filed with the Town Clerk within 30 days of such approval. A
copy of this document shall be additionally filed with the Planning
Department and be available for public review. Within 10 business
days of the said filing with the Town, written notice of the receipt
of the plan shall be mailed by first-class mail notice to owners
of property within 300 feet of the outside property line of the
institution.
(4)
Affordable housing. [Added 5-2-2005; amended 5-2-2005]
Purpose. The Town finds that an adequate supply of affordable
housing for persons of moderate income is desirable for the public
health, safety and welfare in that it promotes a community rich
in economic, social and cultural diversity. It is therefore a public
purpose to make available and integrate in the Town an adequate
supply of housing for persons of all economic segments of the
community.
(1)
Applicability. Any reference to affordable housing shall comply with
the following provisions unless otherwise modified by the Planning
Board as per § 125-64.
(2)
Standards.
Affordable housing units shall be sold or rented to qualified
moderate-income buyers as defined. Preference shall be given
first to Town residents and then to employees of the Town or
of a public school in Bar Harbor. A determination of preference
shall only be instituted when the number of qualified and
interested buyers exceeds the number of available units. When
the number of units available exceeds the number of qualified
and interested buyers, the owner shall advertise in a
newspaper of general circulation that affordable housing is
available for sale or rent. All affordable housing units shall be
owner-occupied or, in the case of rental units, occupied by the
lessee. [Amended 6-13-200682]
(a)
(b) (Reserved)83
The applicant shall submit for Planning Board review and
acceptance an agreement which preserves the long-term
affordability of the units to moderate-income households. The
agreement shall be either a second mortgage or deed
(c)
(3)
R.
82.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
83.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection R(3)(b), regarding compatibility with the design of
other dwellings in the development, as amended, was repealed 11-4-2008.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:574
restriction, or a combination of the two. Agreements must
include but not be limited to: [Amended 6-13-200684]
A proven method to preserve long-term (99 years)
affordability to moderate-income buyers;
[1]
A formula for accruing limited equity to the buyer which
includes any physical improvements to the property;
[2]
An option giving the Town, the Mount Desert Island
Housing Authority or another qualified nonprofit
organization the right to purchase the affordable units if
no qualified buyers apply at the affordable price within
180 days;
[3]
The option to return housing to market rates only if there
are no qualified buyers within 180 days of the property
being on the market and a method to return excess profits
to the Town, Mount Desert Island Housing Authority or
another qualified nonprofit organization if the units are
returned to market rates;
[4]
Terms or covenants that may be enforced by the Town of
Bar Harbor without unreasonable legal expense;
[5]
Provisions for reimbursement of administrative costs
incurred by the Town of Bar Harbor if the Town is required
to enforce terms of the agreement or administer transfers
of the property; and
[6]
Identification of other third-party entities that may be
responsible for managing or supervising terms of the
agreement.
[7]
The mandatory affordable housing provisions shall run with the
land.
(d)
Affordable housing units shall be constructed and completed
at least concurrently with the remainder of a subdivision or
multifamily project. In developments where the applicant or its
agents, or its successors or assigns shall construct at least 50%
of the units, the approved affordable housing units shall be
constructed in proportion to the market rate units. The rate of
development shall be determined by dividing the total number
of units in the development by the total number of affordable
units. No building permit shall be issued for a market rate
unit in excess of the proportion of affordable housing units for
which a certificate of occupancy has been issued. [Amended
6-13-200685]
(e)
84.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:575
When calculating proportionality, any fractional sum shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole building unit.
(f)
Condominium documents shall state that:
The unit owner's percentage interest in the condominium
shall be based on the initial unit sales price (not square
footage of the unit);
[1]
[2] There shall be one vote per unit owner;
Condominium documents shall prohibit amendments to
affordability provisions;
[3]
Affordable units shall not be encumbered or mortgaged
without the written approval of the approved third-party
entity, which approval shall be granted or denied within 14
days of the request. [Amended 11-4-2008]
[4]
(g)
Affordable rents (including utilities) shall be limited to 30% of
the annual income of a household whose income is the median
income for Hancock County.
(h)
Buyers of affordable units shall:
Be first-time homebuyers and not have had an ownership
interest in a residence in three years preceding the date
of the closing of the loan except that a single parent, with
one or more children living with him or her, who has been
divorced or widowed within the preceding three years and
who no longer owns a home, or who, in the case of a
divorced person, is subject to a court order or separation
agreement to sell the home and divide the proceeds, or,
in the case of a widowed person, whose home is subject
to a binding purchase and sale agreement for sale, will
be considered a first time homebuyer, notwithstanding
prior home ownership during those preceding three years,
provided such widowed or divorced person is eligible in
other respects; and
[1]
[2] Have a moderate income as defined.
(i)
Renters of affordable units shall have a moderate income as
defined.
(j)
All applicants shall submit to the Planning Board an affirmative
marketing plan.
(k)
(l) Affordable housing lots. [Added 6-13-200686]
85.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:576
Any lot created to meet the provisions for affordable
housing may be sold or conveyed to the Mount Desert
Island Housing Authority, or to another qualified nonprofit
housing organization.
[1]
Any conveyance of the affordable lot(s) shall be concurrent
with the recording of the subdivision plat at the Hancock
County Registry of Deeds.
[2]
All deeds shall contain language that preserves long-term
(99 years) affordability to moderate-income buyers. This
language is subject to the approval by the Planning Board.
[3]
A covenant shall be placed on the lot giving the Town, the
Mount Desert Island Housing Authority or other qualified
nonprofit housing organization the right to purchase the
affordable lot if no qualified buyers apply at the affordable
price within 180 days.
[4]
Optional payment. In the Downtown Village Districts only, in lieu
of providing the requisite affordable housing units, the applicant
shall make a payment into a Town-managed fund dedicated to the
creation of affordable housing in Bar Harbor. The Town Council
shall determine how to use the funds. The amount of the payment
shall be calculated as follows: The number of required affordable
units x (annual average income for a family of four in Hancock
County x 3). Evidence of payment shall be provided prior to the
issuance of a building permit for the construction of the approved
plan. [Added 6-8-201087]
(4)
Planned Unit Development - Village (PUD-V). [Added 6-13-200688]
Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development - Village is
to provide an opportunity for residential subdivision
developments in the villages of Bar Harbor to embody the
principles of:
(a)
(1)
S.
86.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
87.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall not apply to any proceedings or
applications approved prior to the effective date of 7-8-2010, or to any proceedings or
applications deemed to be "pending" within the meaning of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302 as of
7-8-2010 It also provided that it shall not apply to any application for construction or
development-related permits for any project that received final subdivision and/or site
plan approval from the Town prior to 7-8-2010 or for which an application or proceeding
for subdivision and/or site plan approval was deemed "pending" within the meaning of 1
M.R.S.A. § 302 as of 7-8-2010.
88.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:577
Clustering of dwelling units to create public parks and
gardens;
[1]
[2] Compatible design;
Providing adequate access to local goods, services and
employment; and
[3]
Reducing negative impacts to the environment from the
development.
[4]
A PUD-V is also offered to seek development projects that:
[1] Include affordable housing;
Follow the guidelines for the Great American
Neighborhood;
[2]
[3] Complement the visual character of the district; and
Encourage infill development, specifically allowing for
growth where Town services, roads, and pedestrian access
already exist.
[4]
(b)
The intent of PUD-V is to encourage development which
benefits the Town as a whole by offering financial incentives.
The PUD seeks to provide for enhanced planned developments
by:
[1] Allowing greater freedom of design;
Improving the opportunity for flexibility and creativity in
the land development process; and
[2]
Undertaking techniques which foster community and
pedestrian access.
[3]
(c)
District and authority.
The Planned Unit Development-Village is an overlay option
to zoning in existing neighborhood districts. The districts in
which the PUD-V overlay is permitted are Downtown Village
I and II; Downtown Residential; Bar Harbor Residential; and
Village Residential, where served by the Town sewer system;
and Hulls Cove Business, where served by the Town sewer
system. Properties in the above-noted neighborhood districts
with a portion of land in the Shoreland Residential, Shoreland
Commercial I and II, Resource Protection and Stream
Protection Neighborhood Districts may apply for a PUD-V;
however, these properties must still meet shoreland standards
contained in § 125-68. [Amended 6-8-2010]
(a)
Applicants may choose to permit a project as a PUD-V;
otherwise the underlying zoning requirements apply.
(b)
(2)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:578
The Planning Board is the permitting authority for a PUD-V;
however, any other permits and approvals required must be
sought and received by the applicant. A PUD-V does not relieve
the applicant from obtaining any local, state and/or federal
permits that may be required.
(c)
PUD-V process.
The PUD-V process shall include the requirements of a
subdivision approval process as outlined in Articles V and VI.
Any modification upon approval shall be subject to the
requirements of § 125-58B.
(a)
In addition to Subsection S(3)(a) above, applicants shall
prepare a site analysis diagram graphically identifying major
physical features of the site, including but not limited to
existing structures and improvements, land cover type,
wetlands, watercourses and significant vernal pools, slopes
greater than 20%, and district boundaries. The site analysis
shall identify context of the neighborhood surrounding the
project area by showing graphically the relationship of
proposed new structures or alterations to nearby preexisting
structures in terms of character and intensity of use (e.g.,
scale, materials, setbacks, roof and cornice lines, and other
major design elements). The analysis shall also include a
graphic illustration of the visual impacts and viewshed
alterations that the proposed development will have on
neighboring properties because of the location and
configuration of proposed structures, parking areas, open
space, and gradient changes.
(b)
Prior to submitting an application for a PUD-V, and after the
submission of the sketch plan, the Planning Department will
hold a neighborhood meeting. Abutters within 300 feet of the
application parcel shall receive notice of this meeting.
(c)
(3)
Parcel size and eligibility.
The minimum size of a parcel seeking application for PUD-V
shall be the minimum lot size in its neighborhood district.
(a)
The application parcel cannot contain in the aggregate more
than 30% of the following land type(s):
[1] Wetlands and significant vernal pools;
[2] Sustained slopes greater than 20%;
Areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the shoreline
of a stream, great pond, river, coastal wetland or
significant vernal pool; [Amended 6-8-2010]
[3]
[4] Floodplains.
(b)
(4)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:579
An application for a PUD-V may consist of land in more than
one ownership, provided that all land comprising the parcel
lies entirely within the PUD-V overlay district and is
contiguous. Lots separated by a minor street as defined may be
considered contiguous for this purpose.
(c)
Proposed developments may include preexisting buildings,
provided that all PUD-V requirements are satisfied by each
new or existing building and these are included in calculations
for the PUD-V as a whole.
(d)
Permitted uses. The Planning Board may consider the allowance
of multifamily dwellings not otherwise allowed in the underlying
district when the construction of multifamily dwelling structures
will result in the creation and/or retention of larger buffers, open
space and recreation areas that might not be possible otherwise in
the development, reduce negative impacts on the environment and
will be consistent with the purpose and intent of this provision.
(5)
Intensity of development.
Number of allowable dwelling units.
Applications shall show the density allowed for a
conventional subdivision application. This density shall be
used in calculations for requisite open space, affordable
unit dedication and also as the base requirement that
the Planning Board may increase as noted below. This
calculation is the “base development density.” Land
encumbered at the time of the application by conservation
easement cannot be included in the calculation of base
development density.
[1]
An increase in the number of dwelling units above the base
development density shall be considered for the following
provisions:
For every additional affordable dwelling unit, an
additional market-rate dwelling unit may be allowed.
[a]
For 10% of open space dedicated on the application
parcel, an additional market-rate dwelling unit may be
allowed.
[b]
For the provision by deed and construction of active
recreation space, an additional market-rate dwelling
unit may be allowed.
[c]
For projects that meet, either by application or by
affidavit for adherence during construction, the
standards of Leadership in Energy & Environmental
Design of the U.S. Greenbuilding Council (“LEEDS”)
[d]
[2]
(a)
(6)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:580
or an approved equivalent, for all dwelling units, an
additional market-rate dwelling unit may be allowed.
For projects that propose to construct new pedestrian
amenities to connect the proposed development to
other areas, amenities or goods and services, an
additional market-rate dwelling unit may be allowed.
[e]
For projects that provide formal access to public
transportation, an additional market-rate dwelling
unit may be allowed.
[f]
For projects that restore or preserve an historic
resource existing on the property as part of the
application, an additional market-rate dwelling unit
may be allowed.
[g]
For projects that place all public utilities, other than
stormwater management systems, underground on
the application parcel, an additional market-rate
dwelling unit may be allowed.
[h]
A PUD-V may never exceed the allowable number of
dwelling units by more than twice the base development
density.
[3]
Affordable units and lots. In the final plan the minimum
number of affordable units or lots must be 20% of the base
development density. These units and lots must be in
compliance with § 125-69R.
(b)
Open space.
All PUDs with an application parcel greater than five acres
shall set aside by deed or easement an area in square
footage at least 20% of the application parcel as open
space.
[1]
Open space calculations may not include land that is under
conservation easement at the time of application.
[2]
[3] Open space shall be contiguous.
No more than 75% in the aggregate of the following land
types can be used in the calculation of open space:
[a] Wetlands and significant vernal pools;
[b] Sustained slopes greater than 20%;
[c] Stormwater management systems; and
[4]
(c)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:581
Area(s) within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high water line of a stream, great pond, river,
saltwater body, or significant vernal pool.
[d]
Restrictive language. The applicant shall present the
Planning Board with proposed language for incorporation
into deeds, recorded plans and declarations designed to
ensure the integrity, protection and maintenance of the
common open space. Such language shall be subject to the
approval of the Town Attorney to be sure it will accomplish
its intended purposes. The applicant will comply with all
reasonable requests of the Town to incorporate such
language in appropriate documentation to ensure the
purposes of this section will be met.
[5]
Setbacks and lot coverage.
Setbacks may be modified through review by the Planning
Board to ensure the purpose and intent of this chapter is
met.
[1]
The aggregate lot coverage of a PUD-V cannot exceed that
of the neighborhood district.
[2]
In no event shall height requirements be allowed to exceed
the requirements of the underlying neighborhood district.
[3]
(d)
Other standards. The standards found in § 125-67 may be
considered for modification in instances where the applicant
adequately shows that the proposed application meets the
purpose and intent of a PUD-V.
(e)
Criteria for approval.
In reviewing PUD-V applications, the Planning Board shall use
the requirements found in §§ 125-67 and 125-69 as applicable
and as may be modified to meet the purpose and intent of a
PUD-V.
(a)
The Planning Board also shall use the requirements of
§ 125-68, which shall not be modified, for review of property in
a shoreland zone(s) as may be applicable.
(b)
All Planning Board approvals of PUD-Vs are contingent upon
the development meeting the express purpose and intent of a
PUD-V.
(c)
(7)
Wireless communications facilities. [Added 6-10-2008]
Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide a uniform and
comprehensive set of performance standards and requirements to
be used by the Planning Board during the site plan review process
upon review of an application for the placement and construction
(1)
T.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:582
of a wireless communications tower. These standards and
requirements are intended to regulate the location and installation
of such facilities in order to:
Protect and preserve the aesthetic quality of Bar Harbor as set
forth in the goals, policies and objectives of the adopted Bar
Harbor Comprehensive Plan.
(a)
Protect and preserve the visual character of the nationally
designated Acadia All American Road and Acadia National
Park.
(b)
Protect adjacent properties from potential damage from tower
failure, falling ice and to prevent other hazards to public safety
through careful siting regulations and engineering
requirements. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(c)
Require co-location on existing and future wireless
communications towers and maximize the use of existing and
approved towers and other existing structures such as utility
poles and buildings to accommodate new communications
antennas in order to reduce the number of new towers needed
to serve the community's needs.
(d)
Exemptions. The following activities and structures are exempt
from site plan review:
A ground-, building- or tower-mounted antenna, operated by
a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the
Amateur Radio Service, which is no higher than the maximum
height allowed in the district in which it is located and is
not licensed or used for any commercial purpose. The Code
Enforcement Officer may permit additional height if, after
engineering documentation substantiating the need for the
excess height is submitted to and is acceptable to the Code
Enforcement Officer, the CEO determines that a height in
excess of the maximum height allowed in the district in which
it is located is technically necessary to successfully engage in
this activity.
(a)
Radio or television satellite dish antenna for the sole use of the
resident occupying a residential parcel on which the satellite
dish is located.
(b)
A single ground- or building-mounted received-only radio or
television antenna including any mast, for the sole use of the
occupant of a residential parcel on which the radio or
television antenna is located, with an antenna height not
exceeding the maximum height allowed in the district in which
it is located.
(c)
(2)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:583
A ground- or building-mounted citizens band radio or two-way
antenna, including any mast, if the height (post, and antenna
and support structure if not on the ground) does not exceed the
maximum height allowed in the district in which it is located.
(d)
A wireless facility that is integrated into an existing or
proposed church steeple, flagpole, light standard, power line
support device, water tower, or similar structure.
(e)
Any municipal, public safety or public works communications
facility.
(f)
Space requirements. The maximum height of any tower shall not
exceed 125 feet, including antenna arrays and other attachments,
subject to the approval of the Planning Board with possible
conditions and restrictions to meet the purpose of this chapter.
(3)
Mass of antennas per user. The mass of antennas, including
required antenna support structures, on a tower shall not exceed
1,900 cubic feet per array. The Planning Board may allow an
increase in the mass if it determines an increase is necessary
for the provision of services. The mass shall be determined by
the appropriate volumetric calculations using the smallest regular
rectilinear, cuboidal, conical, cylindrical or pyramidal geometric
shapes encompassing the entire perimeters of the array and all of
its parts and attachments.
(4)
Lot area requirement. A wireless communications tower may be
placed on a legally nonconforming lot that does not meet the
dimensional requirements of the districts it is in after a finding by
the Board of Appeals that such a tower siting will not jeopardize
the health, safety and welfare of surrounding lot owners. This
requirement does not apply to towers and antennas that are
exempted in § 125-69T(2).
(5)
Setbacks.
The center of the base of any wireless communications tower
must be set back a minimum of 105% of the tower height or the
required minimum setback of the district in which it is located,
whichever is greater.
(a)
No part of the structure, including anchors, overhead lines,
masts, etc., shall be located in the required district setback or
in any required buffer area both on the ground or in the air
space above the ground.
(b)
Accessory support buildings containing electronic equipment
and any other structures accessory to the wireless
communications tower shall meet the required district building
setback.
(c)
(6)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:584
If more than one wireless communications tower is proposed
on a single lot or parcel, they shall be clustered as closely
together as technically possible.
(d)
If other nonaccessory uses are located on the same lot or
parcel as a tower, all structures associated with such other
uses shall be located a minimum distance of 105% of the tower
height from the center of the base of the tower.
(e)
Co-location requirements.
Existing towers. Applicants for site plan review for a new
communications tower must send written notice by prepaid
first-class United States Mail to all other communications
tower owners and licensed communications providers in the
Town utilizing existing towers, stating their siting needs and/
or co-location capabilities in an effort to meet the tower colocation
requirement. Evidence that this notice requirement
has been fulfilled shall be submitted to the Planning Board
and shall include a name and address list, copy of the notice
which was sent, and a statement, under oath, that the notices
were sent as required. An application for a new wireless
communications tower must include evidence that existing or
previously approved towers cannot accommodate the
communications equipment (antennas, cables, etc.) planned
for the proposed tower. Such evidence would be:
Planned, necessary equipment would exceed the
structural capacity of existing and approved towers,
considering the existing and planned use of those towers,
and existing and approved towers cannot be reinforced to
accommodate planned or equivalent equipment.
[1]
Planned equipment will cause electromagnetic frequency
interference with other existing or planned equipment for
that tower, and the interference cannot be prevented or
mitigated.
[2]
Existing or approved towers do not have space on which
planned equipment can be placed so it can function
effectively.
[3]
Other documented reasons that make it technically or
financially unfeasible to place the equipment planned by
the applicant on existing and approved towers.
[4]
(a)
Construction of new towers. A proposal to construct a new
wireless communications tower must include evidence that the
tower can structurally support a minimum of three antenna
arrays for co-location purposes.
(b)
(7)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:585
Submissions. In addition to all of the relevant site plan review
submission requirements listed in § 125-66, the following
submissions shall be required unless waived by the Planning Board:
A report from a registered professional engineer in the State of
Maine that describes the communications tower, the technical
reasons for the tower design and the capacity of the tower,
including the number(s), type(s) and volume of antenna(s) that
it can accommodate and the basis for the calculation of
capacity.
(a)
For pole-mounted facilities, certification by a registered
professional engineer in the State of Maine that the design
is adequate to support, without failure, the maximum forces
expected from wind, earthquakes, ice/snow loading when the
pole is fully loaded with antennas, transmitters, other
equipment, and camouflaging, as described in the submitted
plan.
(b)
Elevation drawings, cross-sectional area or silhouette, of the
facility, drawn to scale and showing all measurements, both
linear and volumetric, showing front, sides and rear of the
proposed facility, including all fencing, supporting system for
transmission cables running between the tower and accessory
structures, control panels, antennas, and existing structures
and trees. Reference any design characteristics that have the
effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness.
(c)
Detail of the tower base or method of attachment to a
structure. If the facility will be attached to an existing building
or structure, provide measurements and elevations of the
structure.
(d)
Details of all accessory structures, including buildings, parking
areas, utilities, gates, access roads, etc.
(e)
A narrative and demonstration detailing the extent to which
the proposed facility would be visible from a designated scenic
resource (see definition) and Acadia National Park, the tree
line elevation of vegetation within 300 feet and the distance
to the proposed facility from the designated scenic resources
noted viewpoints. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(f)
A visual impact assessment, which shall include a photo
montage, field mockup, or other techniques, shall be prepared
by or on behalf of the applicant which identifies the potential
visual impacts at design capacity, of the proposed facility.
Consideration shall be given to views from public areas as
well as from private residences and from Acadia National Park,
archaeological and historic resources, including historic
districts, areas and structures, specifically those listed in the
(g)
(8)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:586
National Register of Historic Places, or eligible for inclusion.
The analysis of the impact on historical and archaeological
resources shall meet the requirements of the Maine State
Historic Preservation Officer in his/her review capacity for the
FCC. The overall analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts
of the proposed facility and other existing and foreseeable
communications facilities in the area and shall identify and
include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the
technological requirements of the proposed communications
service.
Site photos showing site vegetation, existing and adjacent
structures and views of and from the proposed site.
Topography and land uses on the proposed parcel and on
abutting properties.
(h)
Landscaping plan reflecting location of proposed screening
and fencing, planting areas, proposed plantings, existing plant
materials to be retained and trees or shrubs to be removed.
(i)
Identify any other communications facilities existing or
proposed on the site.
(j)
A written description of how the proposed facility fits into
the applicant's communications network, including a
demonstration of a coverage and/or capacity problem,
demonstration that all alternatives and existing structures
have been identified and fairly rejected, that the proposed
height is the minimum height necessary to achieve the
targeted coverage area and a description of how other tower
heights would change the coverage area. It should also
describe reasonable anticipated expansion of the proposed
facilities on the proposed site and related facilities in the
region and reasonable anticipated changes of technology and
their effect on expansions of the proposed facility. This
submission requirement does not require disclosure of
confidential business information.
(k)
A letter of intent that commits the tower owner and successors
in interest to:
Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request
for information from a potential co-location applicant.
[1]
[2] Negotiate in good faith for shared use by other parties.
(l)
Evidence that co-location on existing or approved towers is not
possible per co-location section above or in adjacent towns. If
the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing or
approved tower site, the applicant must assess whether such
tower site could be changed to accommodate the proposed
(m)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:587
tower and generally describe the means and projected cost of
shared use of the existing or approved tower site.
Proof of financial capacity to build, maintain, and remove the
proposed tower.
(n)
Design standards. The following design standards shall be met by
the applicant. The Planning Board, as part of the site plan review
process, shall determine if the applicant has complied with these
standards. All communications facilities shall be designed to blend
into the surrounding environment to the greatest extent feasible.
To this end, all of the following measures shall be implemented:
Towers shall be constructed of metal or other nonflammable
material unless specifically waived by the Planning Board due
to technical or engineering reasons.
(a)
Accessory facilities shall be adjacent to the tower base unless
an alternative location will be less visually obtrusive or
topographic considerations require an alternative location.
(b)
Accessory facilities shall be constructed out of nonreflective
exterior materials with earthtoned colors or shall be placed
underground, if possible.
(c)
New accessory facilities shall be no taller than one story in
height and shall be treated to look like a building or facility
typically found in the area.
(d)
All buildings, poles, towers, antenna supports, antennas and
other components of each communications facility site shall
be initially painted and thereafter repainted as necessary with
a matte finish paint. The color(s) selected shall be one that
the Planning Board determines will minimize their visibility to
the greatest extent feasible. To this end, improvements that
will be primarily viewed against soils or trees shall be painted
colors matching these landscapes, while elements which rise
above the horizon shall be painted a blue gray that matches
the typical sky color at that location unless the Planning Board
determines that an alternative proposal will minimize visibility.
(e)
The applicant shall provide a plan to camouflage the proposed
facility to the greatest extent possible.
(f)
The Planning Board may require special design of the facilities
where findings of particular sensitivity are made (e.g.,
proximity to historic or aesthetically significant structures,
views and/or community features).
(g)
Sufficient anticlimbing measures and other security measures
preventing access to the site shall be incorporated into the
(h)
(9)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:588
facility, as needed, to reduce the potential for trespass and
injury.
Only security lighting is permitted. All outdoor lighting shall
employ full cutoff (i.e., night-sky friendly) fixtures to prevent or
reduce light pollution and glare. Signals, lights, or illumination
shall not be permitted on a communications tower unless
required by the Federal Communications Commission, Federal
Aviation Administration, or other federal agency.
(i)
Advertising and commercial signs shall not be permitted on a
communications facility.
(j)
Guy wires shall not be permitted as part of a communications
facility.
(k)
Location. All communications facilities shall be located so as to
minimize their visibility and to minimize the total number of towers
in the Town. The following measures shall guide the location.
Communications facilities shall not be sited in areas of high
visibility as determined by the Planning Board to meet the
purpose of this chapter unless the facility is designed to
minimize its profile by blending with the surrounding existing
natural and man-made environment in such a manner as to
be effectively unnoticeable. A communications tower that is
located within the viewshed of a scenic vista, scenic landscape,
or scenic road as determined by the Planning Board shall not
exceed the height of vegetation at the proposed location.
(a)
No facility shall be located so as to create a significant impact
to the health or survival of rare, threatened or endangered
plant or animal species. [Amended 11-4-2008]
(b)
(c) No facility shall be located within a shoreland district.
No facility shall be located within 1,500 feet of a municipal
school, private compulsory school or child-care center as
defined in this chapter, at the time of application. [Amended
11-4-2008]
(d)
(10)
Standards. In addition to the criteria and standards listed in
§ 125-67, these additional criteria and standards shall be utilized
by the Planning Board in reviewing applications for site plan review
of proposed communications facilities:
Mitigation measures have been utilized to screen antennas and
towers from view from public rights-of-way or scenic vistas,
either by landscaping, fencing or other architectural
screening.
(a)
Antennas shall be as small as technically possible in order to
minimize visual impact.
(b)
(11)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:589
Creative design measures have been employed to camouflage
facilities by integrating them with existing buildings and
among other uses.
(c)
Other technically feasible sites have been investigated, and if
available, the proposed facility has been relocated in order to
minimize the effect of the location on visually sensitive areas
such as residential communities, historical areas, open space
areas and sites identified on the Favorite Places and Distinctive
Features Map in the Comprehensive Plan.
(d)
Co-location, where technically feasible and visually desirable,
on an existing tower, has been investigated, and if technically
and financially feasible, the proposed facility is co-located.
(e)
Use of an existing community facility site, such as utility poles,
has been investigated as a potential site for a tower, antennas
and other equipment and, if available and technically feasible
and visually desirable, is proposed as the site for the facility.
(f)
Adequate bonding for removal of the communications tower,
required as set forth below in § 125-69T(13)(c) has been
submitted.
(g)
Amendments. Any change to proposed towers requires site plan
approval. Once a tower has been erected and is operational,
changes to the facility that do not increase the height of the facility
shall not require site plan approval unless such changes exceed
the design criteria and additional standards and criteria previously
approved in the original site plan approval. If the height of the
facility will not increase and the design standards and additional
standards and criteria previously approved in the original site plan
approval remain consistent, changes to the facility shall require a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
(12)
Removal of communications facilities.
If the tower ceases to be used or if the use of the tower
is abandoned for any reason, it shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the facility to notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of the date of abandonment or cessation of use. If the
owner fails to give the required notice, the CEO shall make
a determination of such date, which determination shall be
conclusive as to the date of abandonment or cessation of use.
(a)
In the case of a tower which is abandoned or the use of which
ceases, it shall be removed within one year of its abandonment
or cessation of use. All aboveground structures, equipment,
foundations, guy anchors, utilities and access roads or
driveways specifically constructed to service the tower,
structures, equipment or utilities shall be removed and the
(b)
(13)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:590
land returned to a condition as near to the original
preconstruction condition as possible.
At the time of approval, the applicant for a new tower shall
submit to the Town a bond or other financial surety outlined
in Article IX, Performance Guarantees, of the Land Use
Ordinance, to be approved by the Finance Director, in the
amount of 150% of the estimated demolition cost of the tower
and the removal of all accessory facilities as described above,
such cost to be determined by an independent registered
professional engineer in the State of Maine and the amount
shall be acceptable to the Town's Finance Director. The bond
or other financial surety shall be in effect for as long as the
tower is in place.
(c)
The bond shall be used by the Town to demolish a tower
which is abandoned or the use of which has ceased, accessory
facilities and associated abandoned structures only if the
owner has not done so within the required one-year period.
(d)
The owner may apply to the Finance Director for release of the
bond at such time that the owner or assigns remove the tower,
accessory facilities and associated abandoned structures as
described above and such completed removal is found to be
satisfactory by the Code Enforcement Officer. The cost of
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be borne by
the owner.
(e)
Inspections and monitoring. The following procedure shall be
undertaken by the owner of the tower:
Inspection of towers by an independent tower inspection firm
shall be performed to insure structural integrity. Such
inspections shall be performed as follows:
Monopole towers at least once every seven years following
completion of construction. The inspection shall take place
between the sixth and seventh year of the repeat
sequence.
[1]
Self-supporting towers at least once every five years
following completion of construction. The inspection shall
take place between the fourth and fifth year of the repeat
sequence.
[2]
(a)
The inspection report shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer within 30 days of its receipt by the tower
owner. Based upon the results of the inspection, the CEO may
require repair or demolition of the tower.
(b)
The cost of such inspections, reports, repairs or demolition
required under this Subsection T shall be borne entirely by the
(c)
(14)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:591
tower owner. Required repairs shall be completed within 90
days or less as required by the CEO for safety reasons.
Failure to provide required inspection reports in the required
time schedule shall be deemed prima facie evidence of
abandonment.
(d)
The owner of a wireless communications facility shall pay for
an independent radio frequency engineer approved by the
Town in accordance with § 125-65D of the Land Use Ordinance
to evaluate the electromagnetic radiation emitted from all
users of the wireless communications facility every year, with
the first evaluation occurring within 30 days after transmission
begins. The levels of electromagnetic radiation emissions must
comply with the most up-to-date FCC standards at the time
of the monitoring test. A report detailing the monitoring test
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer within 30
days of completion of the monitoring test. Failure to provide
required inspection reports in the required time schedule shall
be a violation of the Land Use Ordinance.
(e)
Should the monitoring of a facility reveal that the
electromagnetic radiation emitted from the site exceeds the
current FCC standards and guidelines, the owner(s) of all
facilities utilizing the site shall be notified. In accordance with
FCC requirements, the owner(s) must immediately reduce
power or cease operation as necessary to protect persons
having access to the site, tower, or antennas. In addition, the
owner(s) shall submit to the Town an analysis of what caused
the problem and a plan for the reduction of emissions to a
level in compliance with the current FCC standards within
10 business days. Failure to accomplish this reduction of
emissions within 15 business days of initial notification of
noncompliance shall be a violation of the Land Use Ordinance.
(f)
Small wind energy systems. [Added 11-3-2009]
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the placement
and construction of small wind energy systems (SWES) while
preserving the Town's visual character, minimizing environmental
impacts and protecting the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of Bar Harbor.
(1)
Permitting authority. An SWES for residential use shall be
permitted through the minor site plan process as outlined in Article
V of the Bar Harbor Land Use Ordinance (LUO). An SWES for
nonresidential use shall be permitted by the Planning Board.
(2)
An SWES on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by
the Town of Bar Harbor is exempt from the provisions of this
subsection.
(3)
U.
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:592
Location. An SWES is a permitted use in all districts except for
historic districts. On lots less than five acres, no more than one
SWES shall be allowed. On lots of five acres or more, up to three
SWES shall be allowed.
(4)
Setbacks. All parts of an SWES shall be set back from all property
lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the wind system
structure measured from the ground to the system's highest point
or the required minimum setback of the district in which it is
located, whichever is greater.
(5)
Height. An SWES shall have a maximum height of 60 feet for
residential uses and 80 feet for nonresidential uses as measured
from the ground level to the system's highest point.
(6)
Noise. The SWES shall not exceed 55 dBA as measured at the
property line in all districts except during short-term weather
events such as severe windstorms.
(7)
Submission requirements. For all small wind energy systems and
in addition to all the relevant site plan review submission
requirements listed in § 125-66, the following submissions shall be
required unless waived by the Planning Board:
A completed application checklist provided by the Planning
Department.
(a)
Description of the project, including specific information on the
type, size, tower type and height, rotor material and diameter,
rated power output, performance, safety and noise,
manufacturer, model and serial number of the SWES.
(b)
A site plan showing the planned location of the SWES and
location of and distance to setback lines, property lines, roads,
driveways, ROWs and any overhead utility lines on the subject
property and adjacent properties within 300 feet.
(c)
A scaled representation of the SWES showing system height
and evidence the proposed height does not exceed the height
recommended by the manufacturer of the system.
(d)
A line drawing of the electrical components of the system in
sufficient detail to establish that the installation conforms to all
applicable electrical codes.
(e)
(f) Emergency and normal shutdown procedures.
If connection to the publicly regulated utility grid is proposed,
a copy of the contract between applicant and utility verifying
that the proposed connection is acceptable and/or other
evidence making clear that the utility is aware of the proposed
connection and finds it acceptable.
(g)
(8)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:593
(h) Photographs of the proposed site.
The Planning Board may require a scenic assessment for an
SWES for nonresidential use consisting of one or more of the
following:
A visual analysis composed of elevation drawings of the
proposed SWES and any other proposed structures,
showing height above ground level. The analysis shall also
indicate the color treatment of the system's components
and any visual screening incorporated into the site that is
intended to lessen the system's visual prominence.
[1]
A landscaping plan indicating the proposed placement of
the facility on the site; location of existing trees and other
significant site features; and the method of fencing, if any.
[2]
A narrative discussing the extent to which the SWES
would be visible from a designated scenic resource, the
tree line elevation of vegetation within 100 feet and the
distance to the proposed facility from the designated
scenic resources noted viewpoints.
[3]
(i)
Design standards.
Residential design standards. All components of an SWES used
to generate electricity, including blades, and all accessory
parts shall not have a diameter of more than 20 feet.
(a)
Nonresidential design standards. All components of an SWES
used to generate electricity, including blades, and all accessory
parts shall not have a diameter of more than 30 feet. For
mixed-use properties, the use with the most dedicated square
footage shall determine the allowable diameter.
(b)
The minimum distance between the ground and any wind
turbine blades of an SWES shall be 25 feet as measured at the
lowest arc of the blades.
(c)
An SWES shall be equipped with both manual and automatic
over-speed controls.
(d)
The SWES shall be operated and located such that no
disruptive electromagnetic interference with signal
transmission or reception is caused beyond the site. If it has
been demonstrated that the system is causing disruptive
interference beyond the site, the system operator shall
promptly eliminate the disruptive interference or cease
operation of the system.
(e)
The SWES shall be designed and installed such that
unauthorized public access via step bolts or a ladder is
prevented for a minimum of 12 feet above the ground.
(f)
(9)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:594
The SWES shall be a nonreflective surface to minimize any
visual disruptions.
(g)
All on-site electrical wires associated with the system shall be
installed underground except for "tie-ins" to a public utility
company transmission poles, towers and lines. This standard
may be modified by the permitting authority if the project
terrain is determined to be unsuitable for underground
installation.
(h)
(i) The SWES shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA.
The SWES shall not display any permanent or temporary signs,
writing, symbols, logos or any graphic representation of any
kind except appropriate manufacturer's or installer's
identification and warning signs..
(j)
(k) The SWES shall not have guy wires.
Abandonment: An SWES which is not generating electricity for
12 consecutive months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be
dismantled and resolved from the property by the owner within
120 days of receipt of notice from the town. An SWES owner may
request in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer an extension of
up to one year if the owner is actively pursuing the repair of the
SWES for future use.
(10)
Purpose of conditional use. The purpose of this section is to establish
procedures and standards to enable the Planning Board to review
applications for conditional uses. A "conditional use" is a structure
or use that is generally not appropriate in a given district, but with
restrictions and if controlled as to location, size and off-site impacts
may have no adverse effects upon the public health, safety or welfare,
surrounding properties, the natural environment, or on municipal
services. The only structures or uses that shall be permitted as
conditional uses are those approved as conditional uses by the Planning
Board. Conditional use may not be applied to uses in the Shoreland
Districts. [Added 11-2-2010; amended 6-12-2018]
Conditional use approval required. A building, structure or parcel
of land may be used for a conditional use if the use is specifically
listed as a conditional use within a specified land use district.
Conditional use approval is granted by the Planning Board. The
process for conditional use approval shall include all pertinent
sections of Article V and Article XIII.
(1)
Process for review of conditional use.
A conditionally permitted use shall be subject to the review
procedures for major site plan included in § 125-61 of Article
V.
(a)
(2)
V.
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:595
A conditionally permitted use shall be subject to the
submission requirements for major site plan included in
§ 125-66 of Article V.
A conditionally permitted use shall be eligible for a waiver
request pursuant to § 125-63 of Article V.
[1]
A conditionally permitted use shall be eligible for a
modification of standards pursuant to § 125-64 of Article
V.
[2]
(b)
Action on the application for a conditional use permit. The Planning
Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application for a conditional use permit. In addition to the findings
required by § 125-67, the Planning Board may authorize issuance
of a conditional use permit based upon the following findings:
The proposed use will not create hazards to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic on the streets, roads and sidewalks serving
the proposed use as determined by the size and condition
of such streets, roads, sidewalks, lighting, drainage, intensity
of use by both pedestrians and vehicles, and the visibility
afforded to pedestrians and the operators of motor vehicles;
(a)
The proposed use will not create nuisances to neighboring
properties because of odors, fumes, glare, hours of operation,
noise, vibration or fire hazard, or unreasonably restricted
access of light and air to neighboring properties. Furthermore,
the proposed use will allow abutting property owners
continued peaceful enjoyment their land;
(b)
The proposed location for the use has no peculiar physical
characteristics due to its size, shape, topography, or soils that
will create or aggravate adverse environmental impacts on
surrounding properties;
(c)
The proposed use will not have an adverse impact on
significant scenic vistas or on significant wildlife habitat that
could be avoided by reasonable modification of the plan.
(d)
The proposed use will not adversely affect the value of adjacent
properties; and
(e)
The design and external appearance of any proposed building
will constitute an attractive and compatible addition to its
neighborhood as determined by the Design Review Board
pursuant to § 125-114.
(f)
(3)
Conditions of approval.
The Planning Board shall attach conditions to its approval of a
conditional use to ensure the findings noted above will be met.
(a)
(4)
§ 125-69 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-69
109:596
The Planning Board shall require that the terms of any
conditions of approval be recorded in the Hancock County
Registry of Deeds prior to issuance of a building permit.
(b)
Duration of conditional use approval.
Provided that all conditions and standards of approval are met,
a conditional use shall be a continuing grant of permission
for as long as the property is used for such purposes. The
conditional use shall expire if the owner:
Physically alters the property and/or structure so it can no
longer be used for the conditional use; or
[1]
Ceases to use the property for the approved conditional
use for one year or more; or
[2]
Fails to initiate the operation or conduct of the conditional
use within one year of the date of the Planning Board's
vote to grant said approval.
[3]
(a)
A conditional use may be expanded in area or function only
with the granting of a new conditional use approval by the
Planning Board. Other modifications to an approved plan shall
be subject to § 125-61G on minor site plan.
(b)
(5)
§ 125-69 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-69
109:597

ARTICLE VI
Subdivision Review
§ 125-70. Applicability of site plan provisions.
Except as expressly modified herein, all provisions of Article V, including
but not limited to review procedure, fees, submission requirements and
standards, shall govern the review of proposed subdivisions in the Town
of Bar Harbor and all references therein to site plans shall be deemed to
include subdivision plans.
§ 125-71. Prohibitions.
§ 125-72. Preapplication sketch plan.
No plan of a division of land within the municipality which would
constitute a subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until
a subdivision plan has been approved by the Board in accordance with
this article.
A.
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or
agree to convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved
by the Planning Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
B.
Development of a subdivision without Planning Board approval shall
be a violation of law. Development includes grading or construction
of roads, grading of land or lots, or construction of buildings which
requires a subdivision plan approved as provided in this article and
recorded in the Registry of Deeds. Construction of temporary
accessways with a maximum traveled width of 12 feet, other site work
or field investigations for the sole purpose of obtaining requisite site
information (including, but not limited to mineral explorations and
drilling of test wells) delineated in § 125-66 for application to the
Planning Board shall not be considered development activity. The Code
Enforcement Officer, through the issuance of a building permit, shall
approve said accessways that meet the requirement and intent of this
allowance. No work on or construction of said accessways shall
commence prior to the Planning Board's review of a sketch plan for the
site. [Amended 11-4-2003; 11-2-2004; 5-2-2005]
C.
Contents. Prior to requesting a review of a proposed subdivision plan
and pursuing the procedure set forth in Article V, an applicant shall
submit a preapplication sketch which shall show, in simple sketch form,
the proposed layout of the streets, lots and other features in relation to
existing conditions. The sketch plan, which may be a freehand penciled
sketch describing or outlining the existing conditions of the site and
showing the proposed development, shall be superimposed on or
accompanied by a copy of the Assessor's map of the site and shall be
accompanied by:
A.
§ 125-70 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-72
109:599
A copy of that portion of a USGS topographic map encompassing
the site, showing an outline of the proposed subdivision;
(1)
Any written request for the waiver of submissions that the
applicant intends to submit pursuant to § 125-63;
(2)
An outline of data on existing covenants, medium-intensity soil
survey and soil interpretation sheets, and available community
facilities and utilities, and by information describing the
subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot
width and depth, price range, business areas, playgrounds, park
areas and other public areas, proposed protective covenants, and
proposed utilities and street improvements; and
(3)
The names and addresses of all property owners within 300 feet of
the property being subdivided.
(4)
Fee. Each preapplication sketch plan shall be accompanied by an
administrative fee and a notice fee, which fees shall, from time to time,
be set by the Bar Harbor Town Council.
B.
Time. A preapplication sketch plan, together with supporting
documentation, shall be submitted to the Planning Department at least
15 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the applicant
wishes to have the sketch plan reviewed by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall review a sketch plan within 40 days following its
submission to the Planning Department.
C.
Form. A preapplication sketch and supporting documentation, together
with a form provided by the Planning Department, shall be submitted
in the form and quantity described in § 125-61B, except that each
submission shall be conspicuously labeled "Sketch Plan Exhibit 1,"
"Sketch Plan Exhibit 2," and so on, in consecutive fashion.
D.
Review of sketch plan. At the time of its review of a preapplication
sketch plan, the Planning Board shall entertain brief public comment
on the proposal for the limited purpose of informing the applicant of the
nature of any public concerns about the project so that such concerns
may be considered by the applicant in preparing his/her application.
[Amended 6-13-200689]
Upon its review of a preapplication sketch plan, the Planning Board
shall:
Set a date for a site inspection by a member or members of the
Board within 30 days;
(a)
Make specific suggestions to be incorporated by the applicant
in subsequent submissions;
(b)
(1)
E.
89.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-72 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-72
109:600
§ 125-73. Site inspection.
§ 125-74. Review of subdivision application. [Amended 6-13-200691]
(c) Act on the applicant’s request for submission waivers, if any;
Determine the need to hold a neighborhood meeting in
accordance with § 125-74A.
(d)
The Planning Board shall inform the applicant of the foregoing
within 10 business days of its review of a preapplication sketch
plan.
(2)
Rights not vested. The submission or review of or public comments
about a preapplication sketch plan or the conduct of a site inspection
shall not be construed to be a substantive review of the proposed
subdivision as defined by 1 M.R.S.A. § 302. No application for
subdivision review shall be deemed pending until the Planning Board
has determined the subdivision application to be complete.
F.
Flagging. Prior to the site inspection the applicant shall place flagging
along the center lines of any proposed streets, at the approximate
intersections of street center lines and at all corners of proposed lots.
Failure of the applicant to place such flagging in a timely fashion shall
delay a scheduled site inspection.
A.
Public proceeding. A site inspection shall constitute a public proceeding
as defined by 1 M.R.S.A. § 402(2). Planning Board members may make
inquiries of the owner or developer to develop a better understanding
of the site as well as to provide comments on the proposed
development. [Amended 6-13-200690]
B.
The Planning Department will hold a neighborhood meeting upon a
finding by the Planning Board that one is necessary. The neighborhood
meeting will be held after the submission of the sketch plan and before
the filing of the major site plan review application for subdivision.
Abutters within 300 feet of the application parcel shall receive notice of
this meeting.
A.
Deadline. Within six months of the site inspection, the applicant shall
submit to the Planning Department, pursuant to § 125-61B(1), an
application for approval of a subdivision, provided that said time shall
be extended upon the written request of the applicant if necessary
to allow the applicant sufficient time to obtain any permits required
by § 125-66E. The review procedure for subdivisions shall follow the
procedure set forth in Article V, including but not limited to application
B.
90.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-72 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-74
109:601
§ 125-75. Approval and recording. [Amended 5-2-2005; 6-13-200692]
§ 125-76. Revision of subdivision.93 [Added 5-2-2005]
completeness review pursuant to § 125-61E and a public hearing
pursuant to § 125-61F, except that the public hearing shall take place
within 30 days of the application being deemed complete. In order to
obtain such an extension the applicant shall provide proof that he/she
has initiated and is actively pursuing any necessary permit process.
If the applicant fails to comply with the time requirements of this
subsection, the Planning Board may, without prejudice, refuse to act on
the application and require the resubmission of a preapplication sketch
plan.
Form. The submissions presented as part of a subdivision application
shall be submitted in the form and quantity described in § 125-61B,
except that each submission shall be conspicuously labeled
"Subdivision Exhibit 1," "Subdivision Exhibit 2" and so on in
consecutive fashion, and, where necessary or unless otherwise
indicated, maps may be drawn at a scale of up to 100 feet to the inch.
C.
Application. An application for the review of a subdivision shall conform
to the layout shown on the sketch plan plus any recommendations
made by the Planning Board at the sketch plan review, § 125-72, and
shall contain all applicable submission requirements of § 125-66, except
those that have been waived.
D.
Upon the approval of a subdivision plan or a revised subdivision plan,
the Planning Board shall sign and date both reproducible copies of the
final plan, one of which shall be retained by the Planning Department
and one of which shall be returned to the applicant for recording in
the Hancock County Registry of Deeds. The applicant shall submit
both copies of the final plan within 45 days of the final approval by
the Planning Board or, in the case of minor subdivision review, by
the Planning Department, for signature by the Planning Board. Within
90 days of the date when a plan is signed by the Planning Board,
the applicant shall provide the Planning Department with proof of
recording or the plan shall become null and void.
A.
The Planning Board shall not accept or approve final plans that are not
sealed and signed by the professional land surveyor.
B.
Subject to the limitations of this section, all revisions of a subdivision
plan previously approved by the Bar Harbor Planning Board, regardless
of the date of approval, except those eligible for minor site plan review
under § 125-58B(1), shall be reviewed as a new subdivision.
A.
92.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
93.Editor's Note: Former § 125-76, Revision of subdivision, as amended, was repealed
5-5-2003.
§ 125-74 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-76
109:602
Application. An application for the revision of an approved subdivision
plan shall comply with the requirements of applications for subdivision
as set forth in Article VI, §§ 125-70 through 125-75 inclusive, except
that all maps, plans and plats shall bear the words "REVISED PLAN."
At the written request of the applicant, the Planning Board may limit
the required application submissions to that information necessary to
determine whether the proposed revisions will meet the applicable
standards and is suitable for recording in the Hancock County Registry
of Deeds.
B.
Scope of review. The scope of the Planning Board's review in
considering a proposed revision to a previously approved subdivision
shall be limited to those portions of the plan that have been changed.
C.
§ 125-76 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-76
109:603

ARTICLE VII
Permits
§ 125-77. Permit required for certain activities. [Amended
5-7-1991; 11-2-1999]
After the effective date of this chapter, a written permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer shall be required for the following activities,
regardless of whether such activities have received site plan or subdivision
approval or whether they also require review by the Design Review Board
pursuant to Article XIII, Design Review:
Flood hazard areas. All construction or earthmoving activities or other
improvements within the one-hundred-year floodplain designated on
the Flood Insurance Rate Maps published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
A.
B. New construction. New construction of buildings and structures.
Alteration. Alteration of a building, structure, or land, or parts thereof,
including but not limited to: [Amended 5-3-2004]
(1) Change in size of windows or doors;
Repair of foundations, whether concrete, cinder block, granite and
posts, or piles;
(2)
(3) Interior renovations for change in use;
(4) Remodeling interior walls to create new rooms;
(5) Enclosing open frame porch;
(6) Installing skylights;
(7) Erection of fences;
(8) Construction of new steps;
(9) Creation of roads or driveways;
Erection of panels for winter closure or the erection of winter storm
vestibules in the Downtown Village or Waterfront Development
Districts; provided, however, that a permit need only be obtained
in the first year of the useful life of the structure to be erected.
[Amended 6-8-2010]
(10)
C.
Placement of signs. Placement of signs except temporary signs.
[Amended 5-3-2004]
D.
Moving or demolition. All buildings or structures which are removed
from or moved onto, or moved around within, a lot or demolished.
E.
Change of use. The change of any premises from one category of land
use to any other land use.
F.
§ 125-77 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-77
109:605
§ 125-78. Prohibitions. [Amended 6-13-200694]
§ 125-79. Procedure.
Activities. Any other activities described in Article III as requiring a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer.
G.
No activity or use requiring a permit under this article shall be
commenced unless and until the property owner has received any
required permits for the Code Enforcement Officer.
A.
No building permit shall be approved for a particular property if the
property owner is in violation of this chapter or of any other previously
approved subdivision or site plan on said property.
B.
Application. All applications for permits shall be submitted in writing
in duplicate to the Code Enforcement Officer on forms provided for the
purpose, together with such fees as shall, from time to time, be set by
the Town Council.
A.
Submissions. All applications for a permit shall be accompanied by
a plan accurately drawn to scale or showing actual dimensions or
distances and showing:
The actual shape and dimensions of the lot for which a permit is
sought.
(1)
The location and size of all buildings, structures, water bodies, and
other significant features currently existing on the lot.
(2)
The location and building plans of new buildings, structures or
portions thereof to be constructed.
(3)
(4) The existing and intended use of each building or structure.
Where applicable, the location of soils test pits, subsurface sewage
disposal system, parking lots and driveways, signs, buffer strips
and private wells.
(5)
Such other information as may be reasonably required by the
Code Enforcement Officer to provide for the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
(6)
B.
To whom issued. No permit shall be issued except to the owner of
record or his authorized agent. Written proof of authorization shall be
required.
C.
Compliance with this chapter. All activities undertaken pursuant to
a permit issued under this article shall comply with all applicable
standards set forth in Article V. Each application and each permit shall
D.
94.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-77 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-79
109:606
§ 125-80. Certificate of occupancy.
A certificate of occupancy, certifying that all applicable provisions of this
chapter have been satisfied, shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer:
bear the following conspicuous notations which, on the application,
shall be acknowledged in writing by the applicant: "The undersigned
applicant acknowledges that the applicant and the person on whose
behalf a permit is sought are responsible to ensure that the proposed
activity complies with all applicable standards of the Bar Harbor Land
Use Ordinance."
Deadline for decision. The Code Enforcement Officer shall, within 30
days of receipt of an application, issue the permit, if all proposed
construction and uses meet the provisions of this chapter, refer the
applicant to the Planning Board for site plan review under Article V,
or deny the application. All decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer
shall be in writing. Failure of the Code Enforcement Officer to act
within 30 days shall constitute denial of the application.
E.
Copies. One copy of the application, with the permit or other written
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer, shall be returned to the
applicant and one copy, with a copy of the permit or written decision,
shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer as a permanent
public record. The applicant shall cause any permit issued to be
conspicuously posted on the lot where the activity will occur at a
location clearly visible from the street.
F.
Other permits required. No permit shall be issued for any structure
or use until all other necessary federal, state and local permits and
approvals have been obtained. The issuance of a permit under this
article shall not be deemed a permit under any federal or state statutes
or other ordinance of the Town of Bar Harbor. It is the responsibility
of the landowner or applicant to comply with all other laws and
regulations.
G.
After a building, structure or part thereof has been erected, altered,
enlarged or moved pursuant to a permit, site plan approval or
subdivision approval, for the proposed use before the building or
structure or part thereof may be used or occupied;
A.
After a site has been modified or otherwise developed pursuant to
a permit, site plan approval, or subdivision approval to ensure all
terms, conditions and the plan approved by the Planning Board, the
Design Review Board, the Board of Appeals, the Planning Department
or the Code Enforcement Officer, as applicable, have been met; [Added
6-8-201095]
B.
95.Editor's Note: This amendment also redesignated former Subsections B through E as
Subsections C through F, respectively.
§ 125-79 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-80
109:607
After a building has been modified to accommodate additional dwelling
units, before such units may be used or occupied;
C.
After a building or structure has been modified to accommodate a home
occupation, before said home or structure may be used or occupied for
a home occupation;
D.
E. Before a change in use of a nonconforming structure or lot;
Before the occupancy and use, or change in use, of vacant land, except
for the raising of crops.
F.
§ 125-80 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-80
109:608
ARTICLE VIII
Standard Conditions
§ 125-81. Applicability.
All land use activities allowed by this chapter, regardless of whether any
permit or approval is required therefor, shall be conducted only in
compliance with the following conditions.
§ 125-82. Performance guarantees.
No activity or construction shall be commenced until the applicant has
provided the Town with performance guarantees, including plant
maintenance guarantees, sufficient to ensure the installation of
improvements required by the Town.
§ 125-83. Site conditions.
§ 125-84. Acceptance not implied.
The approval by the Planning Board of any plan shall not be deemed to
constitute or be evidence of any acceptance by the Town of any street,
easement, or other open space shown on such plan. When a park,
playground, or other recreation area shall have been shown on the plan
to be dedicated to the Town, approval of the plan shall not constitute an
acceptance by the Town of such areas. The Planning Board shall require the
plan to contain appropriate notes to this effect. The Planning Board may
also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the
During construction, the site shall be maintained and left each day
in a safe and sanitary manner, and any condition which could lead to
personal injury or property damage shall be immediately corrected by
the developer upon an order by the Code Enforcement Officer or other
authorized personnel. The developer shall make provision for disposal
of oil and grease from equipment, and the site area should be regularly
sprayed to control dust from construction activity.
A.
Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, roots and debris, and excess or scrap
building materials shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the
request of and to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer prior
to issuing an occupancy permit.
B.
No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or site
by the removal of earth to another lot or site other than as shown
on an approved site plan. Minimal changes in elevations or contours
necessitated by field conditions may be made only after approval by
the Code Enforcement Officer. All the changes necessitated by field
conditions shall be shown on the final plan and indicated as a change
from the preliminary, or if final approval has been granted, the changes
shall be shown on the as-built plans.
C.
§ 125-81 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-84
109:609
municipal officers covering future deed and title, dedication, and provision
for the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of any
such dedicated area.
§ 125-85. Sale of lots.
§ 125-86. Public utilities.
§ 125-87. Maintenance.
Prior to the sale of any lot in an approved subdivision, the subdivider
shall provide the Planning Board with a letter from a registered land
surveyor stating that all monumentation shown on the plan has been
installed and with proof that the subdivision plan has been recorded in
the Hancock County Registry of Deeds.
A.
No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or
agree to convey any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown
on the approved plan as a separate lot.
B.
No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed
before the street upon which the lot fronts is completed in accordance
with these regulations up to and including the entire frontage of the
lot. No unit in a multifamily development shall be occupied before the
street upon which the unit is accessed is completed in accordance with
these regulations.
C.
No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company
of any kind shall serve any development for which a final plan has not
been approved by the Planning Board.
A.
No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company
of any kind may install services to any new structure located in a
shoreland district unless written authorization attesting to the validity
and currency of all local permits required under this chapter or any
previous ordinance has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Following installation of service, the company or district shall forward
the written authorization to the Code Enforcement Officer, indicating
thereon that the installation has been completed. [Added 11-5-1991]
B.
The developer shall be required to maintain all improvements and
provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of
the improvements by the Town.
A.
All land use activities allowed by this chapter shall, for the duration of
such activities, comply with all applicable standards set forth herein.
B.
§ 125-84 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-88
109:610
§ 125-88. Modifications.96 [Added 11-2-2004]
No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made to any plan,
approval or permit after approval has been given unless the revised plan,
approval or permit is first submitted to and approved by the appropriate
permitting body. This includes approvals by the Planning Board, Design
Review Board, Appeals Board, Planning Department, and Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 125-89. Inspection.
§ 125-90. Time frames for completion.
By undertaking an activity allowed by this chapter, an owner implicitly
grants to the Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee, the right
to enter and have access to the premises at which the activity is taking
place at all reasonable and proper times during and immediately upon
the completion of construction, to ensure compliance with all applicable
standards set forth in this chapter.
A.
At least five days prior to commencing each major phase of construction
of required improvements, the developer or builder shall notify the
Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when he/she proposes
to commence construction of such improvements, so that the municipal
officers can cause inspection to be made to ensure that all municipal
specifications and requirements shall be met during the construction
of required improvements and to ensure the satisfactory completion of
improvements and utilities required by the Planning Board.
B.
At the close of each summer construction season the Town shall, at
the expense of the subdivider, have the site inspected by a qualified
individual. By December 1 of each year during which construction was
done on the site, the inspector shall submit a report to the Planning
Board based on that inspection, addressing whether stormwater and
erosion control measures (both temporary and permanent) are in place,
are properly installed, and appear adequate to do the job they were
designed for. The report shall also include a discussion of and
recommendations for any problems which were encountered.
C.
Permits. Activities or uses for which a permit from the Code
Enforcement Officer is required shall be commenced within six months
and, except for activities and uses which are by their nature ongoing,
shall be substantially completed within 12 months of the issuance of the
permit. If a substantial start is made within one year of the issuance of
the permit, the applicant shall have one additional year to complete the
project, at which time the permit shall expire. Failure of the applicant
to abide by the time requirements of this subsection shall render the
permit null and void and require the applicant to obtain a new permit
before the activity or use may proceed further. [Amended 6-8-2010]
A.
96.Editor's Note: Former § 125-88, Modifications, was repealed 5-5-2003.
§ 125-88 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-90
109:611
Planning Board approvals. Activities or uses for which approval of the
Planning Board is required shall be commenced within six months
unless the Planning Board grants one or more extensions of time for
periods of not more than six months each. The six month time frame
shall commence upon demonstration that all conditions included in a
decision have been met. Except for activities which are by their nature
ongoing, the approved activity or use shall be substantially completed
within 18 months of the commencement unless the Planning Board,
within the time originally allotted, extends the time for completion by
up to 12 months. Any extension to commence or complete an approved
activity or use shall be granted only upon a finding by the Planning
Board that the developer has made progress toward commencement or
completion or that progress has been prevented by reasons beyond the
control of the developer and that any required performance guarantees
have been updated accordingly and revised to provide for increased
costs. Failure of the developer to abide by the time requirements of
this subsection shall render the approval null and void and require the
developer to reapply for Planning Board approval before the activity
or use may proceed further. The Planning Board reserves the right to
refuse an extension for commencement or completion if the applicant
fails to show due diligence in making progress on the approved activity
or use. Upon determining that a development's approval has expired
under this subsection, the Planning Board shall have a notice to that
effect placed in the Hancock County Registry of Deeds. [Amended
6-14-2011]
B.
Phased development.
Permissive. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection B,
the Planning Board, at the time of granting final approval to a
plan, upon the written request of an applicant, may permit the
development to be completed in two or more phases, subject to
such conditions as the Planning Board deems necessary to ensure
orderly development and to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
(1)
Mandatory. Notwithstanding the requirements of Subsection B, if
the head of any municipal or quasi-municipal department notified
of a proposed development informs the Planning Board that his
or her department or district does not have adequate facilities
to service the development, or if the Superintendent of Schools
indicates that there is less than 20% excess classroom capacity
existing in the schools which will serve the development,
considering previously approved but not built developments, the
Planning Board shall require the project to be completed in two
or more phases, subject to such conditions as the Planning Board
deems necessary in order to allow the orderly planning, financing
and provision of public services to the development and to prevent
classroom overcrowding. The Planning Board shall not, under the
(2)
C.
§ 125-90 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-90
109:612
§ 125-91. Construction standards. [Amended 5-4-1992]
All construction or development permitted in the Town of Bar Harbor shall:
§ 125-92. Transferability.
terms of this subsection, require the completion of a development
over a period longer than three years.
Comply with the standards set forth in the following codes and
ordinances:
Such edition of the National Electrical Code, (NEC), published by
the National Fire Protection Association, as may be adopted by the
Bar Harbor Town Council or as may be required or recognized by
the State of Maine;
(1)
Such edition, or portions thereof, of the Code for Safety to Life
in Buildings and Structures (ANSI/NFPA 101), published by the
National Fire Protection Association, as may be adopted by the
Bar Harbor Town Council pursuant to Chapter 85, Fire Prevention,
§ 85-1 of the Bar Harbor Code or as may be required or recognized
by the State of Maine;
(2)
Such edition, or portions thereof, of all applicable codes and
standards as may be adopted by the Bar Harbor Town Council
pursuant to Chapter 36, Building Construction, of the Bar Harbor
Code; [Amended 5-2-2005]
(3)
(4) The State of Maine Plumbing Code;
Chapters 36, 70, 85 and 90 of the Bar Harbor Code and all other
applicable sections of said Code and any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto.
(5)
A.
Comply with all applicable requirements of the Energy Efficient
Building Performance Standards set forth in 10 M.R.S.A. § 1412 et seq.
B.
Comply with all applicable standards for construction for the physically
disabled set forth in 5 M.R.S.A. § 4593 and 25 M.R.S.A. § 2701 et seq.
C.
Comply with all applicable requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
D.
Permits. No permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
transferable to any other person or entity.
A.
Planning Board approvals. No approval granted by the Planning Board
shall be transferable to any other person or entity until and unless
the Planning Board finds, upon the written request of the proposed
transferee, that:
B.
§ 125-90 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-92
109:613
The proposed transferee has adequate technical and financial
capacity to complete the development as initially approved;
(1)
Sufficient performance guarantees have been provided by the
proposed transferee to ensure all required improvements will be
completed as initially approved.
(2)
§ 125-92 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-92
109:614
ARTICLE IX
Performance Guarantees
§ 125-93. Required improvements. [Amended 6-8-2010]
§ 125-94. Contents of guarantee.
A performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account inflation,
provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for
the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the developer,
and a date after which the developer will be in default and the Town
shall have access to the funds to finish construction. The conditions and
amount of a performance guarantee shall be determined by the Planning
Board with the advice of the Public Works Director, the Town Council
and/or the Town Attorney. In establishing the amount of a performance
guarantee, the Town may seek independent verification of the accuracy of
the developer's cost estimates or may set the amount in accordance with
the amount of the contract between the developer and the contractor who
Applicants whose developments are subject to site plan or subdivision
review shall provide performance guarantees sufficient to ensure the
completion of the following improvements in the Town's rights-of-way,
easements or property:
(1) Monuments required by § 135-69N(1);
Planting, buffering or screening required by § 125-67E(12) and H
or 125-69L(6);
(2)
(3) Street signs;
(4) Streets;
(5) Sidewalks;
(6) Water supply facilities, including fire hydrants or ponds;
(7) Sewage disposal facilities;
(8) Stormwater drainage facilities;
(9) Utilities;
(10)Restoration of mining sites pursuant to § 125-69L(5).
A.
Performance guarantees may also be used for improvements on private
property. An applicant may request permission to provide a
performance guarantee to assure that all terms, conditions and plans
approved by the Planning Board, the Design Review Board, the Board of
Appeals, or the Planning Department will be constructed within a year
of the lawful issuance of an occupancy permit. Said permission shall be
reviewed by the permitting authority and as required in this article.
B.
§ 125-93 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-94
109:615
will be installing the required improvements. The amount of a performance
guarantee shall be adequate to cover the entire construction costs of all
required improvements, taking into account the proposed time span of the
construction schedule and the inflation rate for construction costs.
§ 125-95. Types of guarantees.
A performance guarantee may take any one of the following forms:
Escrow account. A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow
account may be made by either a certified check made out to the
Town, the direct deposit into a savings account, or the purchase of a
certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the developer, the
Town shall be named as owner and the consent of the Town shall be
required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account
shall be returned to the developer unless the expenditure of the interest
by the Town is necessary in order to complete the required
improvements.
A.
Performance bond. A performance bond, issued by a surety company
approved by the Town Council or the Town Manager, may be made
payable to the Town. A performance bond shall detail the conditions of
the bond, the method for release of the bond or portions of the bond
to the developer, and the procedures for collection by the Town. The
bond documents shall specifically reference the development for which
approval is sought.
B.
Irrevocable letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit, issued by
a financial institution approved by the Town Council or the Town
Manager, may establish funding for the development from which the
Town may draw if construction is inadequate. An irrevocable letter of
credit shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction
of the development and may not be used for any other project or loan.
C.
Conditional agreement. In the case of a subdivision, the Planning
Board, at its discretion, may provide for the developer to enter into
a binding agreement with the Town in lieu of other performance
guarantees. Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the final
plan on the condition that no lots may be sold or built upon until either:
It is certified by the Planning Board, or its agent, that all of the
required improvements have been installed in accordance with this
chapter and the regulations of the appropriate utilities; or
(1)
A performance guarantee, acceptable to the Town, is submitted
in an amount necessary to cover the completion of the required
improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for
the portions of the required improvements already installed. Notice
of the agreement and any conditions shall be on the final plan
which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
(2)
D.
§ 125-94 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-96
109:616
§ 125-96. Release of guarantee.
Prior to the release of any part of a performance guarantee, the Town
Manager shall determine to his/her satisfaction, in part upon the report
of the Code Enforcement Officer, his/her designee, and whatever other
agencies and departments may be included, that the completed
improvements meet or exceed the design and construction standards for
that portion of the improvements for which the release is requested.
§ 125-97. Default.
If, upon inspection, the Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee finds
that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the application,
he/she shall so report in writing to the municipal officers, the Planning
Board, and the developer. The municipal officers shall take any steps
necessary to preserve the Town's rights.
§ 125-98. Plant maintenance guarantees.
In addition to any performance guarantee provided pursuant to § 125-93,
an applicant shall furnish to the Town security equal to at least 10% of the
value of all live plantings required by § 125-67E(12) and H or 125-69L(6).
Such security shall be binding for a minimum of three years and shall
be subject to the condition that required live plantings be maintained in
accordance with the terms of the approved plan and in a good and healthy
condition.
§ 125-96 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-98
109:617

ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 125-99. Violation deemed a nuisance. [Amended 11-2-2004]
Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed to be a nuisance. Failure to
comply with the terms and conditions of any permit or approval granted
under this chapter shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 125-100. Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 11-5-1991]
Authority. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or
reappointed annually by July 1 and, if certified in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4451, shall have all of the powers and authorities described
in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452, as the same may be amended. [Amended
11-2-2004]
A.
Enforcement and notice of violation. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and the terms and
conditions of any permit or approval granted under this chapter,
including approvals from the Planning Board, the Design Review Board,
the Board of Appeals, the Planning Department and the Code
Enforcement Officer. If, after investigation, the Code Enforcement
Officer finds that any provision of this chapter or any term or condition
of any permit or approval granted under this chapter is being violated,
he/she shall give written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of such violation to the owner and to the occupant of such
premises, and to any other person responsible for such violation,
indicating the nature of the violation and ordering that action necessary
to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings
or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or
structures, and abatement of nuisance conditions, be taken within some
designated reasonable time. A copy of such notice shall be submitted
to the Town Council and shall be maintained as a permanent record.
[Amended 11-2-2004]
B.
Inspection and investigation. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
conduct on-site inspections to ensure compliance with all applicable
laws and all terms and conditions attached to permits and approvals
under this chapter (including subdivision approvals). The Code
Enforcement Officer shall also investigate all complaints of alleged
violations of this chapter. [Amended 11-2-2004]
C.
Records. The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of
all essential transactions of the office, including applications submitted,
permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied by the Board
of Appeals, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court
actions, violations investigated, violations found, and fees collected.
On an annual basis, a summary of this record shall be submitted to
the Director of the Bureau of Land and Water Quality within the
Department of Environmental Protection.
D.
§ 125-99 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-101
109:619
§ 125-101. Proceedings; violations and penalties.
Actions and consent agreements. [Amended 11-5-1991]
If, after notice given pursuant to § 125-100B, the violation or
nuisance condition is not abated or corrected within the specified
time, the Code Enforcement Officer shall report same to the Town
Council. The Code Enforcement Officer's report shall indicate the
additional enforcement actions that he/she intends to take and
whether the Town Attorney has been consulted or will subsequently
be involved. At its next meeting, the Town Council shall vote to
accept the Code Enforcement Officer's report. The Town Council
shall not entertain comment from the person alleged to have
violated this chapter nor shall it take any evidence relating to
whether a violation has in fact occurred. [Amended 5-4-1998]
(1)
The Town Council or its authorized agent is hereby authorized to
enter into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of
eliminating violations of this chapter and recovering fines without
court action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure
or use to continue in a shoreland district unless there is clear
and convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was
constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice
given by an authorized municipal official and there is no evidence
that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the removal of the
structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health
and safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
(2)
A.
Fines and penalties.
Any person who conveys, offers or agrees to convey any land in
a subdivision which has not been approved as required by this
chapter or who violates any term or condition of an approval from
the Planning Board, Design Review Board, Board of Appeals,
Planning Department or Code Enforcement Officer or who
continues to violate any other provision of this chapter after
receiving notice of such violation shall be subject to such fines,
penalties, actions and orders as are authorized by 30-A M.R.S.A.
§ 4452, as same may be amended. A fine or penalty may be imposed
for each violation. Each day of violation after notification shall
constitute a separate offense with respect to each violation.
[Amended 11-5-1991; 11-2-2004]
(1)
Any contractor involved in any activity regulated by the provisions
of this chapter may be held liable for fines for violating this chapter
if the necessary permits for said activity have not been obtained.
[Amended 11-5-1991]
(2)
Any person, including, but limited to, a landowner, the landowner's
agent, tenant, contractor or seller at a farmers' market, who
(3)
B.
§ 125-101 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-101
109:620
violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable for the
penalties set forth herein. [Added 3-24-1998]
Suspension or revocation of approvals or permits.
The Code Enforcement Officer may suspend an approval or permit
if:
(a) It was granted on incomplete or false information;
Continuation of the land use activity authorized would result in
the violation of federal or state law or local ordinances;
(b)
The continuation of the land use activity authorized is
endangering or may endanger the safety or general welfare of
the community during the construction or work for which the
approval or permit was granted;
(c)
The applicant or his/her agent is exceeding the scope of the
work for which the permit was issued;
(d)
The Code Enforcement Officer determines that he/ she is
unable to rule on the continued validity of an approval or
permit, in which case he/she shall suspend the approval or
permit, without penalty, and require the holder to file an
appeal.
(e)
The Code Enforcement Officer determines that any term or
condition of an approval by the Planning Board, the Design
Review Board, the Board of Appeals, the Planning Department
or the Code Enforcement Officer has not been met. [Added
11-2-2004]
(f)
(1)
The Code Enforcement Officer shall suspend an approval or permit
by furnishing to the applicant a written notice of suspension
stating:
(a) The reason for the suspension;
(b) The corrective measures to be taken; and
The period of time given to the applicant to correct the
violation or potential violation.
(c)
(2)
A suspension shall cease when the Code Enforcement Officer
certifies that the violation or potential violation ceases to exist.
When a cause for suspension has been removed or corrected, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall so certify, in writing, and state:
(a) The reason for the suspension;
(b) The corrective measures taken;
(3)
C.
§ 125-101 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-101
109:621
The period of time which the applicant had to correct the
violation; and
(c)
(d) A statement that all applicable penalties have been paid.
If, within the time specified in a notice of suspension for correction,
the violation has not been corrected or removed, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall revoke the approval or permit by
furnishing to the applicant a written notice of revocation setting
forth the reasons therefor.
(4)
During the period of a suspension or revocation, no work shall
continue on a project for which an approval or permit was granted
except in the interests of public safety and protection of the
property in place at the time of revocation, such work having
the written approval of the Code Enforcement Officer. No such
work for which an approval or permit has been revoked shall be
resumed until and unless a new approval or permit is obtained by
the applicant.
(5)
Attorneys' fees and costs. An applicant shall pay to the Town all
attorneys' fees, court costs and out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
Town in any enforcement action undertaken to correct the applicant's
violation of this chapter.
D.
§ 125-101 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-101
109:622
ARTICLE XI
Appeals and Variances
§ 125-102. Variances.
Authority. A variance may be granted by the Board of Appeals from the
restrictions imposed by this chapter on lot coverage and front, side or
rear setback only where a strict application of such restrictions to the
petitioner and the petitioner's property would cause undue hardship.
A variance shall not be granted to permit a use or structure otherwise
prohibited by this chapter. [Amended 5-2-1994]
A.
Hardship defined. "Undue hardship" shall mean that:
The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a
variance is granted;
(1)
The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the
property and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
(2)
The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
(3)
The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner.
(4)
B.
Application. An application for a variance shall include the following:
A completed application on a form prescribed by the Planning
Department.
(1)
An administrative fee and a public notice fee, which fees shall, from
time to time, be set by the Bar Harbor Town Council.
(2)
If a variance is sought for a project already completed, a late fee
which shall, from time to time, be set by the Bar Harbor Council.
(3)
A written statement, which may be accompanied by diagrams or
photographs and such other evidence as the petitioner may choose
to submit, demonstrating:
(a) The exact nature of the hardship alleged;
(b) The physical circumstances that create the alleged hardship;
That such physical circumstances are peculiar to the property
in question and are not substantially duplicated on other
property adjoining or nearby in the same neighborhood or
zoning district;
(c)
That the relief sought would not adversely affect property
adjoining or nearby in the same neighborhood or the same
zoning district and would not endanger the public health,
(d)
(4)
C.
§ 125-102 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-102
109:623
safety or convenience and would not be contrary to this
chapter or the Bar Harbor Comprehensive Plan; and
That all other elements of undue hardship, as defined above,
are present.
(e)
Submissions generally.
At least 20 days prior to the Board of Appeals meeting at which
a petitioner wishes to be heard, the petitioner shall provide to
the Planning Department copies of all application materials in
the form and quantity described in § 125-61B, except that each
submission shall be conspicuously labeled "Variance Exhibit 1,"
"Variance Exhibit 2," and so on, in consecutive fashion. The
petitioner shall also provide the Commissioner of the Department
of Environmental Protection with one copy of all application
materials in the form and quantity described in § 125-61B at least
20 days prior to the Board meeting. Any comments received from
the Commissioner prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall
be made part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by
the Board of Appeals. Comments from the Commissioner must be
received at least two days prior to a hearing in order to be included
in the record. [Amended 11-4-2008; 11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
(1)
At least two days prior to the public hearing on a variance request,
any other person wishing to present documentary evidence to the
Board of Appeals shall provide to the Planning Department copies
of all such evidence in form and quantity described in § 125-61B,
except that each submission shall be conspicuously labeled with
that person's surname followed by "Exhibit 1," "Exhibit 2" and so
on, in consecutive fashion. [Amended 11-5-1991; 5-4-1992]
(2)
D.
Hearing. Within 45 days of the Planning Department's receipt of the
required copies of a variance application, unless delay is caused by the
petitioner's failure to comply with the requirements of Subsection D(1),
the Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on said application
in accordance with the following: [Amended 11-5-1991; 5-3-2004]
Published notice. Notice of said hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Bar Harbor at least
10 days prior to the hearing date.
(1)
Mailed notice. At least 10 days prior to the hearing date, written
notice of said hearing shall also be mailed by U.S. Mail first-class
postage to the applicant, to the owners of all property within 300
feet of the property in question, and to the Bar Harbor Town
Council and the Bar Harbor Planning Board, each of which shall
be parties. The owners of property shall be considered to be those
shown on the Town's tax list as the persons against whom taxes are
assessed. The Board of Appeals shall, in each case, maintain a list
of property owners so notified. Notice shall be deemed received if
(2)
E.
§ 125-102 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-102
109:624
mailed to an owner's last known address according to the Town tax
records. Failure of any property owner actually to receive notice
shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any actions of
the Board of Appeals. [Amended 6-10-2008]
Contents of notice. Notice of said hearing shall identify the
petitioner and the property involved, describe the specific nature
of the proposal, state the date, time and place of the hearing, and
explain how the recipient of the notice may attend and present
evidence.
(3)
Rules. Said hearing shall be conducted according to rules adopted
by the Board of Appeals.
(4)
Representation. At any hearing a party may be represented by
an agent or attorney; provided, however, that if any party is not
present, any person acting as that party's agent or attorney shall
provide written evidence of such authority.
(5)
Continuation. Any hearing may be continued or recessed to another
time for good cause shown.
(6)
Staff support. The Code Enforcement Officer and Planning Director
may attend all hearings and present to the Board of Appeals plans,
photographs or other materials they deem appropriate for the
clearer understanding of a pending application.
(7)
Deliberation and decision. Within 30 days after the public hearing on
an application for a variance, the Board of Appeals shall deliberate to
determine whether to grant the variance. If the Board of Appeals finds
that the petitioner has demonstrated an undue hardship as defined
above, it shall issue an order granting the variance requested, subject
to such terms and conditions it considers advisable to protect the
public's health, safety and general welfare. If the Board of Appeals
finds that the petitioner has not demonstrated an undue hardship, it
shall issue an order denying the variance. In either case the Board of
Appeals shall, within seven working days after the completion of its
deliberations, mail or hand deliver to the petitioner, the petitioner's
representative, the Chairpersons of the Bar Harbor Planning Board and
Town Council, and, if a variance is granted for property located within
a shoreland zone, to the Department of Environmental Protection a
written copy of its decision, including specific written findings of fact
supporting the decision. [Amended 11-5-1991]
F.
Certificate of variance. If the Board of Appeals grants a variance under
this section, a certificate indicating the current property owner,
identifying the property by reference to the last recorded deed in its
chain of title, and indicating the fact that a variance, including any
conditions thereof, has been granted, and the date of the granting, shall
be prepared in recordable form. The certificate must be signed by the
Planning Director or his/her designee and recorded in the Hancock
G.
§ 125-102 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-102
109:625
§ 125-103. Administrative appeals. [Amended 5-3-1999; 11-2-1999;
5-3-2004; 11-7-2006]
County Registry of Deeds within 30 days of the granting of the variance
or the variance is void. A variance is not valid until a certificate thereof
has been recorded in accordance with this section.
Authority. The Board of Appeals may, upon written application of an
aggrieved party received by the Planning Department within 30 days
of any decision or enforcement action by a municipal body or official
who or which interprets this chapter, hear appeals from such decision.
For purposes of this section, the term "decision" is limited to an order,
decision, ruling or enforcement action made in writing.
A.
Application. An application for an administrative appeal shall include
the following and must be filed with the Planning Department within 30
days of the decision or action being appealed:
A completed application for appellate or de novo review on a form
prescribed by the Planning Department;
(1)
An administrative fee and a public notice fee, which fees shall, from
time to time, be set by the Bar Harbor Town Council;
(2)
In the case of an appeal to be heard by appellate review, a notice of
the applicable parts of the record to be transcribed at the expense
of the appellant;
(3)
B.
Submissions generally.
Appellate review hearings. [Amended 6-10-2008]
At least 20 days prior to the Board of Appeals meeting at which
an appellant is to be heard in an appellate review hearing, the
appellant shall file with the Planning Department 12 copies of
the parts of the record on appeal upon which the appellant
plans to rely, along with 12 copies of a written statement
setting forth the appellant's position as to the basis for the
appeal and the relief requested.
(a)
No later than seven days prior to the public hearing on the
appeal, any other person wishing to present either parts of
the record on appeal not submitted by the appellant or a
written statement setting forth that person's position on the
appeal may file 12 copies of such materials with the Planning
Department.
(b)
(1)
Evidentiary appeals.
At least 20 days prior to the Board of Appeals meeting at which
an appellant wishes to be heard, the appellant shall provide
to the Planning Department 10 copies of all documentary
evidence, except that each submission shall be conspicuously
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 125-102 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-103
109:626
labeled "Appellant's Exhibit 1," "Appellant's Exhibit 2" and so
on, in consecutive fashion, along with 10 copies of a written
statement setting forth the appellant's position as to the basis
for the appeal and the relief requested.
No later than seven days prior to the public hearing on an
appeal, any other person wishing to present documentary
evidence to the Board of Appeals shall provide to the Planning
Department copies of all such evidence, except that each
submission shall be conspicuously labeled with that person's
surname followed by "Exhibit 1," "Exhibit 2" and so on, in
consecutive fashion.
(b)
Hearing.
Appellate review hearings.
All appeals from decisions of the Planning Board, the Design
Review Board and all other decisions in which the applicant
had a fair opportunity to present evidence shall be strictly by
appellate review.
(a)
Appellate review hearings shall be limited to review of the
record on appeal. The appellant and other parties may submit
written argument and use illustrative aids that highlight or
otherwise help the Board understand the record on appeal but
may not introduce any evidence that was not presented to the
decision-maker below. The record on appeal shall consist of:
[1] Transcripts of the hearings held below;
Exhibits and other documentary evidence submitted to or
considered by the decision-maker below; and
[2]
The decision being appealed, factual findings made by the
decision-maker below and any other rulings or decisions
made by the decision-maker below that are relevant to the
issues on appeal.
[3]
(b)
Within 45 days of the Planning Department's receipt of the
required copies of an application for an administrative appeal,
the Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing, which
hearing shall not be a de novo hearing, on said application.
(c)
Published notice. Notice of said hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Bar Harbor at
least 10 days prior to the hearing date.
(d)
Mailed notice. At least 10 days prior to the hearing date,
written notice of said hearing shall also be mailed by U.S.
Mail first-class postage to the appellant, to the owners of all
property within 300 feet of the property in question, and to
the Bar Harbor Town Council, Design Review Board, and the
(e)
(1)
D.
§ 125-103 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-103
109:627
Bar Harbor Planning Board. The owners of property shall be
considered to be those shown on the Town's tax list as the
persons against whom taxes are assessed. The Planning
Department shall, in each case, maintain a list of property
owners so notified. Notice shall be deemed received if mailed
to an owner's last known address according to the Town tax
records. Failure of any property owner actually to receive
notice shall not necessitate another hearing or invalidate any
actions of the Board of Appeals.
Contents of notice. Notice of said hearing shall identify the
petitioner and the property involved, describe the specific
nature of the proposal, state the date, time and place of the
hearing, and explain how the recipient of the notice may attend
and participate.
(f)
Rules. Said hearing shall be conducted according to rules
adopted by the Board of Appeals.
(g)
Representation. At any hearing a party may be represented by
an agent or attorney; provided, however, that if any party is
not present, any non-attorney acting as that party's agent or
attorney shall provide written evidence of such authority.
(h)
Continuation. Any hearing may be continued or recessed to
another time for good cause shown.
(i)
Staff support. The Code Enforcement Officer and Planning
Director may attend all hearings and present to the Board of
Appeals plans, photographs or other materials that are part
of the record on appeal that they deem appropriate for the
clearer understanding of a pending application.
(j)
Public participation. If during the public comment part of the
hearing a member of the public attempts to testify or otherwise
offer evidence that was not presented to the decision-maker
below, the Board shall during its deliberations ignore the
evidence so presented.
(k)
Deliberation and decision. Within 30 days after the public
hearing on an application for administrative appeal, the Board
of Appeals shall deliberate to determine whether the record on
appeal shows that the decision appealed is clearly contrary to
the specific provisions of this chapter. The Board shall defer
to all findings of fact by the decision-maker below that are
supported by substantial evidence.
If the Board of Appeals finds that the decision is, in fact,
contrary to the specific provisions of this chapter, it may
reverse the decision, subject to such terms and conditions
it considers advisable to protect the public's health, safety
and general welfare, or it may vacate the decision and may
[1]
(l)
§ 125-103 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-103
109:628
remand it to the Planning Board, Design Review Board
or the Code Enforcement Officer for further proceedings
consistent with Board of Appeals' decision.
If the Board of Appeals does not find that the decision
appealed is clearly contrary to the specific provision of this
chapter, it shall deny the appeal.
[2]
In either case, the Board of Appeals shall, within seven
days of the completion of its deliberations, mail or hand
deliver to the Department of Environmental Protection
a written copy of its decision, including written reasons
supporting the decision, and within seven days of the
completion of its deliberations, mail or hand deliver to
the appellant, the appellant's representative and the
Chairpersons of the Bar Harbor Planning Board, Design
Review Board and Town Council a written copy of its
decision, including specific written reasons supporting the
decision. [Amended 6-10-2008; 6-8-2010]
[3]
Evidentiary hearings.
Appeals from a notice of violation, the granting of a permit by
the CEO and all other decisions or actions taken at which the
appellant did not have a fair opportunity to present evidence to
the decision-maker shall be by evidentiary hearing.
(a)
The procedure set forth for appellate review hearings in
Subsection D(1)(c) through (j) shall apply to appeals by
evidentiary hearing, except that the appellant and other
interested parties may submit documentary evidence and
other exhibits within the time limits set forth in § 125-103C
above and may present oral testimony at the hearing.
(b)
Deliberations and decision. Within 30 days after the public
hearing on an application for an administrative appeal, the
Board of Appeals shall deliberate to determine if a
preponderance of the evidence presented in the appeal shows
that the appellant is entitled to the relief requested.
If the Board of Appeals finds that the appellant is entitled
to relief, it may reverse the decision, subject to such terms
and conditions it considers advisable to protect the
public's health, safety and general welfare, or it may
vacate the decision and may remand it to the Planning
Board, Design Review Board or the Code Enforcement
Officer for further proceedings consistent with the Board
of Appeals' decision.
[1]
If the Board of Appeals does not find that the
preponderance of the evidence shows that the appellant is
entitled to relief, it shall deny the appeal.
[2]
(c)
(2)
§ 125-103 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-103
109:629
§ 125-104. Proceedings to be recorded.
All proceedings of the Board of Appeals, including public hearings and
deliberations, but except proceedings legally conducted in executive
session, shall be electronically or stenographically recorded.
§ 125-105. Failure to act.
Failure of the Board of Appeals to act within any of the time requirements
set forth herein shall constitute a denial.
§ 125-106. Reconsideration. [Amended 11-4-2003; 11-7-2006;
6-10-2008]
Upon the written request and the payment of such fee as may be established
by the Bar Harbor Town Council, by any party, made within 10 days from the
hearing at which a decision was made pursuant to this section, the Board of
Appeals may reconsider such decision and, in doing so, may conduct further
hearings. A request for reconsideration shall set forth in detail the reasons
that the request should be granted. At its next regularly scheduled meeting,
the Board of Appeals shall meet to decide whether it shall grant the request
and to establish the procedural guidelines for any reconsideration. In no
event shall the procedures associated with a reconsideration, including any
hearing and the time for deliberation, extend beyond 45 days from the date
of the hearing at which a decision was made. In the event of a request for
reconsideration, the time for taking an appeal to Superior Court shall be
extended to 30 days from the date of the Board of Appeals' ultimate decision
on such request.
§ 125-107. Appeal to Superior Court. [Amended 11-7-2006]
Any party may, within 45 days of the date of the vote on the original
decision made pursuant to this article, take an appeal to Superior Court in
accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
In either case the Board of Appeals shall, within seven
days of the completion of its deliberations, mail or hand
deliver to the Department of Environmental Protection
a written copy of its decision, including written reasons
supporting the decision, and within seven days of the
completion of its deliberations, mail or hand deliver to
the appellant, the appellant's representative and the
Chairpersons of the Bar Harbor Planning Board, Design
Review Board and Town Council a written copy of its
decision, including specific findings of fact supporting the
decision. [Amended 6-10-2008; 6-8-2010]
[3]
§ 125-103 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-107
109:630
ARTICLE XII
Construction and Definitions
§ 125-108. Construction of language.
Language used in this chapter shall be construed as follows:
In the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, all words other
than those specifically defined herein, except construction or structurerelated
terminology, shall have the meaning implied by their context
in the chapter or their ordinarily accepted meanings as found in the
current edition of Webster's Collegiate Dictionary; provided, however,
that with respect to any permitted use that is not defined in § 125-109,
such use shall be defined by reference to the Standard Industrial
Classification and only then, if not defined therein, by reference to
the current edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. For
construction or structure-related terminology not specified otherwise
herein, the applicable definitions provided in the applicable codes as
referenced in § 125-91 shall apply. [Amended 5-6-1996; 5-3-2004]
A.
The words "person," "applicant" and "developer" include individuals,
firms, associations, corporations, partnerships, trusts or other legal
entities.
B.
Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses
or derivative forms.
C.
Words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural
shall include the singular.
D.
The masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the feminine shall
include the masculine.
E.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and the word "may" is
permissive.
F.
G. The word "building" includes the word "structure."
H. The world "dwelling" includes the word "residence."
I. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall
be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to
be used or occupied."
J.
The word "Town" or "municipality" means the Town of Bar Harbor,
Maine.
K.
In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any map, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
L.
In the case of reference to "Planning Board" findings or decisions, these
shall also include the "Code Enforcement Officer" or other Planning
M.
§ 125-108 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-108
109:631
§ 125-109. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the following meanings:
ABUTTING — Having a common border with, or being separated from such
common border by an alley, easement, street, road, public way or private
way.
ACCESS — A means of approach or entry to or exit from property.
ACCESSORY PROJECT — A change to an appendage of a structure that
includes signage, awnings, canopies, umbrellas, outdoor displays, lighting,
or landscaping.[Added 11-2-1999]
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — See "structure."
ACCESSORY USE — See "use."
ACRE — A measure of land containing 43,560 square feet.
ACTIVE RECREATION — See "recreation."
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Lots/units which may be purchased or rented
for occupancy by people with up to 120% of moderate income as established
by the State Planning Office or the Hancock County Planning
Commission.[Added 5-2-2005; amended 11-4-2008]
AGGRIEVED PERSON — An owner of land whose property is directly or
indirectly affected by the granting or denial of a permit or variance under
this chapter; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or variance
has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have
suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such
permit or variance.[Amended 11-3-2009]
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Land clearing, tilling, fertilizing, including
spreading and disposal of manure and manure sludge, liming, planting,
pesticide application, harvesting of cultivated crops, pasturing of livestock,
poultry and other similar or related activities, but not including
construction, creation or maintenance of land management roads or forest
management or timber harvesting activities. Noncommercial gardens are
not considered agricultural activities, regardless of size.[Amended
11-5-1991; 11-4-2003]
AGRICULTURE, AVOCATIONAL — Farming, raising of animals or crops as
an accessory use to one’s primary residence which is greater than the
intensity of homestead agriculture but less than the intensity of commercial
agriculture; or, farming, raising of animals or crops on a site other than
Department and Town staff for decisions in a capacity of delegated
authority for the Planning Board or as may be required to apply
standards of the Land Use Ordinance for uses or structures for which
the Code Enforcement Officer has authority for review and permitting
under Article III, or, for minor site plan review and subdivision for the
Planning Department. [Amended 11-4-2003; 6-12-2018]
§ 125-108 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:632
one’s primary residence and of an intensity less than that of commercial
agriculture.[Added 11-4-2003]
AGRICULTURE, COMMERCIAL — Production of crops or animals and
involving more than five acres of cultivated soil or keeping of more than
100 poultry or other animals raised for meat or other by-product.[Added
11-4-2003]
AGRICULTURE, HOMESTEAD — Minor crop raising and animal husbandry
as an accessory use to one’s primary residence that does not involve tilling
of more than one acre of soil, or keeping of more than 20 adult poultry
and/or five hoofed animals; raising or keeping of swine is not considered
homestead agriculture.[Added 11-4-2003]
ALLEY — A thoroughfare either used or shown on any recorded description
of the subject parcel(s) which is not more than 30 feet wide and which
affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — A change, addition, or modification requiring construction,
including any change in the location of structural members of buildings or
structures, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or of the
means of egress. The term includes enlargement, whether by extending on a
side or by increasing in height, but does not include decorative or cosmetic
changes.
ANTENNA ARRAY — Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs
or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio or
electromagnetic frequency signals.[Added 6-10-2008]
APPEAL — A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination,
order or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this chapter as expressly
authorized by the provisions of § 125-103.
AQUACULTURE — The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater,
estuarine, or marine plant or animal species.[Added 11-5-1991]
ARCHITECTURAL MERIT — A building or structure shall be deemed to
have architectural merit if it embodies distinctive characteristics of a type,
period or method of construction, represents the work of a master architect
or builder, or possesses high artistic value.[Added 11-2-1999]
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain having a
one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
ARTIST STUDIO — An art profession home occupation for gain and support
which is conducted entirely within a residential dwelling unit or structure
accessory to the dwelling unit. Retail sales of products made on the
premises are allowed in residential districts; accessory retail sales of
products made on the premises and other products are allowed in
commercial and corridor districts.[Added 6-8-2010]
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below, and wholly or
partly within, the roof framing.
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Anyone having written authorization to act in
behalf of a property owner, signed by the property owner.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:633
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE — A place where, with or without the
attendant sale of engine fuels, the following services may be carried out:
general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and
repair; and painting and undercoating of automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT — A lot arranged, designed, or used for the
storage and display for sale of any motor vehicle or any type of trailer
provided the trailer is unoccupied, and where no repair work is done except
minor incidental repair of automobiles or trailers displayed and sold on the
premises.
AUTOMOBILE SALVAGE YARD — A yard, field or other screened area
where salvaged automobiles or automobile parts are stored, bought, sold,
exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, but not including the
storage of used cars in operable condition or the keeping of junked
automobiles in violation of Chapter 109, § 109-8.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION (FILLING STATION) — Any premises
used for supplying gasoline and oil at retail, direct to the customer,
including the sale of minor accessories and minor services for automobiles.
AWNING — A temporary or permanent canvas roof-like structure extending
over any place as a shelter from the sun, wind, or rain such as a door,
window, porch, or patio.[Added 11-2-1999]
BANNER — A sign on any lightweight material, either enclosed or not
enclosed in a rigid frame, and secured, mounted, suspended or displayed in
a manner to allow movement caused by wind.[Added 11-5-1991]
BASAL AREA — The area of a cross section of a tree stem at 4.5 feet above
ground level and inclusive of bark.[Added 6-8-2010]
BASEMENT — Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of
six feet or more and having more than 50% of its volume below the existing
ground level.[Amended 11-3-2009]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST I — Overnight accommodations and a morning meal
in an owner-occupied dwelling unit constructed before June 8, 2010,
provided to transients for compensation. Breakfast is included in the room
rate.[Amended 6-8-2010]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST II — Overnight accommodations and a morning
meal in a dwelling unit occupied by the owner/innkeeper or a designated
employee constructed before June 8, 2010, provided to transients for
compensation. Breakfast is included in the room rate.[Added 6-8-2010]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST III — Overnight accommodations and a morning
meal in a dwelling unit occupied by the owner/innkeeper or a designated
employee provided to transients for compensation. Breakfast is included in
the room rate.[Added 6-8-2010]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST IV — Overnight accommodations, a morning meal,
and additional meals in a dwelling unit occupied by the owner/innkeeper
or a designated employee constructed before June 8, 2010, provided to
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:634
transients for compensation. Breakfast is included in the room rate. The
meals may be open to the public.[Added 6-8-2010]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST V — Overnight accommodations, a morning meal,
and additional meals in a dwelling unit occupied by the owner/innkeeper or
a designated employee provided to transients for compensation. Breakfast
is included in the room rate. The meals may be open to the public.[Added
6-8-2010]
BILLBOARD — See "sign."
BLOCK FACE — The buildings located along a side of a street within a
block.[Added 11-2-1999]
BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITY — A facility designed primarily for the
launching and landing of watercraft and which may include an access
ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.[Added
11-5-1991]
BOAT YARD, COMMERCIAL — A place, usually adjacent to navigable
waters, where, as a business or gainful occupation, boats are hauled, stored,
repaired or constructed.
BRICK — A block of clay hardened by heat and used for building, paving,
etc.[Added 11-2-1999]
BUFFERS — Fences, landscaping, berms and mounds used to minimize any
adverse impacts or nuisance of the site on adjacent areas.
BUILDING — Any roofed structure built, maintained, or intended for use for
the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind.
This term is inclusive of any thereof. Where independent units with separate
entrances are divided by walls, each unit is a building.
BUILDING AREA — Total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main
finished grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps. All dimensions shall be
measured between exterior faces of walls.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The area of the lot covered by building
area.[Added 5-1-1995]
BUILDING FRONT LINE — Line parallel to the front lot line transecting
that point in the building face which is closest to the front lot line. This
face includes porches whether enclosed or unenclosed but does not include
steps.
BUILT — Erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, moved,
extended, filled, excavated, paved and the like.
CALIPER — A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its
trunk measured six inches above natural grade.[Amended 11-6-2001]
CAMPGROUND — Any land area specifically designed and developed,
containing two or more individual campsites which accommodate that
segment of the traveling public seeking temporary camping
accommodations for tents, recreational vehicles or towed travel trailers for
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:635
compensation. Accessory uses, subject to a site plan review, include camper
services and facilities such as shower and laundry facilities, electricity,
fresh water, propane and gas sales, ice, outlet for camping supplies and
equipment, recreational services and the like.
CAMPGROUND (SHORELAND DISTRICTS) — Any area or tract of land to
accommodate two or more parties in temporary living quarters, including,
but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.[Added
6-8-2010]
CAMPSITE, PRIVATE — An area of land which is not associated with a
campground but which is developed for repeated camping by only one
group not to exceed 10 individuals and which involves site improvements
which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area,
fireplace, or tent platform.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 11-3-2009]
CANOPY — The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a
wooded area.[Added 11-2-1999; amended 11-4-2008]
CEMETERY — Property used for the interment of the dead.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — A document or form attesting to
the Design Review Board's approval of specific activities issued pursuant to
Article XIII, Design Review.[Added 11-2-1999]
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Official certification that a premises
conforms to provisions of this chapter and may be used or occupied. Such
a certificate is granted for new construction or for alteration of or addition
to existing structures. Unless such a certificate is issued, a structure cannot
be used or occupied.
CHANGE IN USE — The change from an existing use to another use,
including, without limitation, the addition of a new use to an existing use.
CHANNEL — A watercourse between defined banks created by the action
of surface water and characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation and
by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits
or exposed soil parent material or bedrock.
CHILD-CARE CENTER — A building for providing licensed care and
protection for three or more children under 13 years of age.[Amended
6-8-2010]
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A licensed child-care center, family child care or
nursery school.[Added 6-8-2010]
CHILD CARE, FAMILY — Licensed care and protection that is provided in
a dwelling unit on a regular basis for three to 12 children under 13 years
of age who are not the children of the provider or who are not residing
in the provider's home. If a provider is caring for children living in that
provider's home and is caring for no more than two other children, then the
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:636
use is customary to a dwelling unit and is not regulated herein.97[Amended
6-8-2010]
CLUB — Any voluntary association of persons organized for fraternal,
social, religious, benevolent, recreational, literary, patriotic, scientific, or
political purposes whose facilities are open to members but not the general
public and which is principally engaged in activities which are not
customarily carried on for pecuniary gain.
CLUB, PRIVATE — An incorporated club which is organized and operated to
provide athletic, social, recreational, patriotic, fraternal or cultural activity
or entertainment for its members and their guests and which is operated
for profit. Any private club which has been in existence and operation for
five consecutive years may make a part or all of its facilities available to
the public for a fee and may sell food and beverages to the public on the
following conditions:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — A person appointed by the municipal
officers to administer and enforce this chapter. Reference to the Code
Enforcement Officer may be construed to include Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector and the like where applicable.
CO-LOCATION — The use of a communications facility by more than one
communications provider.[Added 6-10-2008]
COMMERCIAL FISH PIER — A permanent structure used for berthing,
loading and unloading of commercial fishing vessels. The structure may also
be used for commercial purposes, such as chartering fishing boats or selling
locally caught fish for profit.[Added 11-2-2010]
COMMERCIAL USE — The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than
a home occupation as defined below, the intent and result of which activity
That it continues to operate for the same purpose for which it is
organized and has been operated;
A.
That the club and all of its facilities are operated under a lease or
otherwise by a nonprofit membership corporation composed exclusively
of members of the club;
B.
That any net profit from the operation of the club, after payment of all
current expenses, shall be used solely for the payment or retirement of
long-term indebtedness of the club, or for the improvement of the club
facilities, or be invested in an endowment fund for the benefit of the
club; and
C.
That the market value of all the property and assets owned by the
club less the total amount of any liens thereon shall equal or exceed
$100,000.98
D.
97.Editor's Note: The former definition of “church,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-2-2005. For current provisions, see the definition of “place of
worship.”
98.Editor's Note: The former definition of "cluster development," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 6-13-2006.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:637
is the production of income from the buying and selling of goods or services,
exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — Any structure, antenna, tower, or other
device which provides the capacity to transmit information through such
methods as, but not limited to, radio/television transmission, commercial
mobile wireless services, unlicensed wireless services, cellular phone
services, specialized mobile radio communications (MR), common carrier
wireless exchange phone services, and personal communications service
(PAS) or pager services.[Added 6-10-2008]
COMPATIBLE DESIGN — The visual relationship between adjacent
buildings within 300 feet and the immediate streetscape, in terms of
consistency of materials, building elements, building mass, and other
constructed elements of the village environment, such that abrupt or severe
differences are avoided.[Added 6-13-200699]
COMPLEMENT THE VISUAL CHARACTER OF THE (DESIGN REVIEW
OVERLAY) DISTRICT — Designed in a manner that is architecturally and
visually similar to the predominate pattern of buildings and relationship of
buildings to the street within the district.[Added 11-2-1999]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — Any part or element of the overall plan or
policy for development of the Town as defined by 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4321 et
seq.
CONDITIONAL USE — A land use that, because of its unique characteristics
or potential impact on the Town, surrounding neighbors, or adjacent land
uses, may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if
certain conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental
impacts. By classifying certain uses as conditionally permitted, separate
regulations can be imposed to evaluate and mitigate potential adverse
impacts.[Added 11-2-2010]
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Planning Board
stating that the conditional use meets all conditions set forth in the Land
Use Ordinance. It is a mechanism that allows the ability to permit specific
uses not otherwise allowed, as long as the landowner or business owner
meets certain conditions.[Added 11-2-2010]
CONDOMINIUM — As defined in the Maine Condominium Act of 1983,100
real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and
the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the
owners of those portions under a declaration, duly recorded pursuant to this
Act. A condominium is a legal form of ownership, not a land development
type. Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the
common elements are vested in the unit owners.
99.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
100. Editor's Note: See 33 M.R.S.A. § 1601-101 et seq.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:638
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION — A building that at any time before
creation of the condominium was occupied wholly or partially by one or
more persons other than purchasers and persons who occupy with the
consent of purchasers.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A facility used for conferences and seminars,
with accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and eating, recreation,
entertainment, resource facilities, meeting rooms, fitness and health center,
and retail stores and services primarily for conference center
guests.[Added 6-8-2010]
CONGREGATE HOUSING — A private, licensed establishment operated for
the purpose of providing domiciliary care for a group of persons who by
reason of age or physical condition do not desire to but are financially
capable of providing such care for themselves, and who are not in need of
medical or nursing treatment except in the case of temporary illness.
CONTIGUOUS LOTS — Lots which adjoin at any line or point or are
separated at any point by a body of water less than 15 feet wide.
CONVENTIONAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision planned under the
dimensional controls found in Article III.[Added 6-13-2006101; amended
11-4-2008]
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street with only one outlet and having the other end
for the reversal of traffic movement.102
DECK — A level structure adjacent to a building elevated above the surface
of the ground which may have a railing, but no roof, awning or other
covering.
DECORATIVE CHANGES — Repainting; re-siding; re-roofing; or adding,
removing or replacing trim, railings, or other nonstructural architectural
details.
DEDICATION — The transfer of property interests from private to public
ownership for a public purpose. The transfer may be of a fee simple interest
or of a less than fee simple interest, including an easement.
DESIGNATED SCENIC RESOURCE — That specific location, view or
corridor, which is identified as a scenic resource in the Town’s
Comprehensive Plan (Figure II.A.1). Such scenic resources shall consist
of:[Added 6-10-2008]
A three-dimensional area extending out from a particular viewpoint on
a public way or within a public recreational area, focusing on a single
object, such as a mountain, a lake, or a bay, or a group of objects,
such as a downtown skyline or mountain range, or island, resulting in a
panoramic view corridor; or
A.
101. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
102. Editor’s Note: The definition of “dbh,” added 11-4-2008, which immediately followed, was
repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:639
DEVELOPED AREA — Any area on which a site improvement or change is
made, including buildings, landscaping, parking areas and streets.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner of a lot or parcel of any land
proposed for inclusion in a development, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any buildings; any use or change in use of
any buildings or land; or any extension of any use of land or any clearing,
grading, or other movement of land for which permission may be required
pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT (SHORELAND DISTRICT) — A change in land use
involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the addition or
alteration of structures or other construction not naturally
occurring.[Added 6-8-2010]
DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS — Numerical standards relating to
spatial relationships, including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore
frontage and height.[Added 11-5-1991]
DISABILITY — Any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement,
congenital defect or mental condition caused by bodily injury, accident,
disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness; and also includes
the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician or, in the case of mental handicap,
by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory
impairment which required special education, vocational rehabilitation or
related services.[Added 11-4-2008]
DISTRICT — A specified portion of the Town, delineated on the Official
Zoning Map, within which certain regulations and requirements, or various
combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of this chapter.
DOCK — See "structure, water-related."
DORMER — A modification of a roof which increases the elevation of a
portion of that roof for the purpose of providing either more interior space
or a window.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface or ground water from land by drains,
grading or other means. Drainage includes the control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after development, and includes
the means necessary for water supply preservation and prevention or
alleviation of flooding.
DRIVE-UP WINDOW — A window where one can pull up in a vehicle to place
an order for food or beverage, pay for and receive the food or beverage,
Lateral terrain features such as valley sides or woodland as observed
to either side of the observer, constraining the view into a narrow or
particular field, as seen from a viewpoint on a public way or within a
public recreational area.
B.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:640
and drive away, without ever having to get out of the vehicle.[Added
11-6-2001]
DRIVEWAY — A vehicular accessway of any length constructed in
accordance with the standards set forth is this chapter, serving two singlefamily
dwellings or one two-family dwelling or less.[Amended 5-6-1996;
11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
DRIVEWAY, ONE-WAY — A driveway on which vehicles are allowed to
travel in only one direction and which has two separate connections to a
street.[Added 5-6-1996]
DRIVEWAY, TWO-WAY — A driveway on which vehicles are allowed to travel
in two directions.[Added 5-6-1996]
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential
occupancy and containing one or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY I — A building or portion thereof or multiple
buildings on a lot used for residential occupancy by three or four families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the
building in each of three or four separate and independent dwelling
units.[Amended 11-7-2006]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY II — A building or portion thereof, or multiple
buildings, located on a lot or on a contiguous parcel or area of land, used
for residential occupancy for five or more families living independently of
each other and doing their own cooking in the building in each of five
or more separate and independent dwelling units.[Amended 11-7-2006;
6-9-2009]
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A building designed or
intended to be used exclusively for residential occupancy by one family
only and containing only one dwelling unit and having no roof, wall or floor
in common with any other dwelling unit. The term shall include modular,
prefabricated and manufactured homes.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached or semidetached building used for
residential occupancy by two families living independently of each other
and doing their own cooking in the building in each of two separate and
independent dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms which is designed, equipped
and intended exclusively for use as residential living quarters by only one
family, which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and
sanitary facilities, and which is separate and independent from other such
rooms or groups of rooms.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY — A single self-contained dwelling unit
which is part of, attached to, or located on the premises of a principal singlefamily
dwelling unit. This dwelling unit consists of one or more rooms with
separate kitchen and bathroom facilities that occupies no more than 1/3 of
the gross floor area of the principal single-family dwelling. The calculation
of size of the accessory dwelling is exclusive of any garage, basement, shed
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:641
or other accessory use structure attached to or part of such single-family
dwelling.[Added 6-13-2006]
DWELLING UNIT (SHORELAND DISTRICTS) — A room or group of rooms
designed and equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or
temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing
cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes
and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities
regardless of the time period rented. Recreational vehicles are not
residential dwelling units.[Added 6-8-2010]
EARTH — Topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, rock, or other minerals.
EASEMENT — Authorization of a property owner of use by another of any
designated part of the owner's property for a specified purpose.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — A building or group of buildings in which
post-secondary students are housed, fed, instructed and governed while
working toward undergraduate, graduate or postgraduate degrees in a
university or college setting.
ELEEMOSYNARY INSTITUTION — A nonprofit establishment for public
use, including, but not limited to, libraries.[Amended 11-5-2013]
ELEVATION DRAWING — A technical drawing of the facade of a building or
structure showing the placement and design of windows, doors, trim, and
other structural and ornamental details.[Added 11-2-1999]
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS — Operations conducted for the public health,
safety or general welfare, such as protecting of resources from immediate
destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue human
beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area or volume of an existing
building, an increase in the size or volume of any other structure, an
increase in the ground area of that portion of a tract of land occupied by an
existing use.[Amended 6-8-2010]
ERECT — To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create,
paint, draw or in any other way bring into being or establish.[Added
11-2-1999]
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The construction, alteration or maintenance of
gas, electrical, communications facilities owned by the Town, steam, fuel
or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, supply or disposal
systems. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires, mains, drains,
sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic
signals, hydrants, generators, wells, wellheads and similar accessories but
shall include structures which are necessary for the furnishing of such
services.[Amended 5-2-2005; 6-10-2008]
ESTABLISHED PATTERN OF — The situation in which the substantial
majority of buildings or structures within a block face, or the two buildings
on either side of the subject property, exhibit a reasonably consistent
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:642
pattern with respect to a physical feature such as height, facade proportion,
setback, etc.[Added 11-2-1999]
EXIT AISLE — The minimum area within a building or structure reasonably
necessary to allow patrons to move into and out of those areas that are
included within the definition of "net leasable area."[Added 3-24-1998]
EXPANSION — See "enlargement."
EXPANSION OF A COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The addition of towers,
increased height and/or increased footprints of any buildings or structures
of the existing facility.[Added 6-10-2008]
EXTENSION — An increase in the amount of existing floor area used for an
existing use within an existing building.
EXTERIOR WALLS OF TRADITIONAL SITE-BUILT APPEARANCE — Siding
materials such as clapboards, shingles and shakes, including synthetic or
metal siding manufactured to closely resemble clapboards, shingles and
shakes. This term shall also include masonry, brick, stucco, and wood board
and batten.
EXTRACTION — [Amended 11-5-1991]
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration or its lawful successor.[Added
6-10-2008]
FACADE — An exterior wall of a building or structure.[Added 11-2-1999]
FAMILY — Two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or
guardianship, or not more than five persons not so related, occupying
a dwelling unit (including a vacation rental) and living as a single
housekeeping unit, such a group to be distinguished from a group
occupying a boardinghouse, lodging house, club, fraternity or transient
accommodations.[Amended 6-13-2006; 11-8-2011]
FARM AND FOOD PRODUCTS — Any agricultural, horticultural, forest
or other product of the soil or water, including but not limited to fruits,
vegetables, eggs, dairy products, meat and meat products, poultry and
poultry products, fish and fish products, grain and grain products, honey,
The excavation, processing, storage or removal from its natural location
of soil, sand, gravel, rock, topsoil, loam, clay, peat or other mineral
deposits, not including:
The excavation of material incidental to approved construction of
buildings, driveways or parking areas;
(1)
The excavation of material incidental to and at the site of
construction or repair of streets; or
(2)
The excavation, processing or storage of less than 10 cubic yards
of material on a lot within a one-year period.
(3)
A.
The stripping of loam, topsoil and peat from a lot is expressly prohibited
by this chapter.
B.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:643
nuts, maple products, apple cider, fruit juice, wine, ornamental or vegetable
plants, nursery products, firewood and Christmas trees.[Added
3-24-1998]
FARMERS' MARKET — A building, structure or place used by two or more
farmers for the direct sale of farm and food products to consumers, at which
no seller may sell a product unless at least 75% of the product offered
by that seller was grown or processed by that seller or under that seller's
direction. A product not grown or processed by a seller must have been
purchased directly from another farmer.[Added 3-24-1998]
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or its lawful
successor.[Added 6-10-2008]
FENCE — A structure commonly made of wooden or metal posts, boards,
rails, bricks, stones, PVC, wire mesh, masonry or similar materials, erected
for the purpose of enclosing a yard or portion thereof, for screening or
decoration, or for marking the general location of a lot boundary. A fence,
for purposes of this definition, includes all posts or other supports as well
as all ornamentation, decorations and finials.[Added 5-7-1991; amended
11-2-1999]
FILLING — Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or
water.
FISHERIES, SIGNIFICANT — Areas identified by a governmental agency,
such as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, the Atlantic
Salmon Authority, and the Maine Department of Marine Resources, as
having significant value as fisheries and any areas identified in the
municipality's Comprehensive Plan.[Added 5-3-1999]
FIXTURE — The assembly that holds the lamp (bulb) in a lighting system.
It includes the elements designed to give light output control, such as
a reflector (mirror) or refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the
attachment parts.[Added 11-4-2008]
FLOOD- OR SPOTLIGHT — A light designed to flood a well-defined area
with light, with a reflector or optical assembly that concentrates the light
output in a particular direction or spot.[Added 11-4-2008]
FLOODPLAIN — Land subject to inundation by storm or flood water caused
by overflow from the normal high water mark of any coastal or inland
waters or as defined or identified by the Flood Boundary Maps of the Town
of Bar Harbor.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the one-hundredyear
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot in height.[Added 11-4-2008]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure
enclosed by exterior walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed
portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:644
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The decimal representation of the gross floor
area of all principal structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. Both
the mean and the median values used to determine maximum floor area
ratio are calculated using the FARs for all properties within the district
within 300 feet of the subject property.[Added 6-13-2006;103 amended
6-12-2007]
The mean is the sum of all values in the set of FARs divided by the
number of values in the set. For example, the mean, or average, of the
set {1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11} is 6.
Mean = sum total of values divided by the number of values
Mean = (1+3+5+7+9+11)/6
Mean = 36/6
Mean = 6
A.
The median is the middle value of the set of FARs ranked in ascending
order. To find the median, use the formula (n+1)/2th value, where “n”
equals the number of values in the set. When there is an even number
of values in a set, the median is the average of the two middle values.
Example of a set with an odd number of values:
Set: {1, 3, 5, 7, 8}
There are five values in this set.
Median = (n+1)/2th value, where n = the number of values in the
set
M = (5+1)/2
M = 6/2
Median = 3, the third number in the set.
The median value is 5.
(1)
Example of a set with an even number of values:
Set: {1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8}
M = (6+1)/2
M = 7/2
M = 3.5
The two middle values are 3 and 5.
The median value is the average of these two numbers, or 4, i.e.
(3+5)/2.
(2)
B.
103. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:645
FOOTCANDLE ("FC") — The basic unit of luminance (the amount of light
falling on a surface). Footcandle measurements are made with a light meter.
One footcandle is equivalent to the luminance produced on one square foot
of surface area by a source of one standard candle at a distance of one
foot.[Added 11-4-2008]
FOOTCANDLES (AVERAGE) — The amount of light measured between the
brightest and the darkest areas. It may be measured at ground level of three
feet above the ground.[Added 11-4-2008]
FOOTCANDLES (HORIZONTAL) — The measure of the illumination striking
a horizontal plane.[Added 11-4-2008]
FOOTCANDLES (VERTICAL) — The measure of the illumination striking a
vertical plane.[Added 11-4-2008]
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment in which food
or beverages are processed or otherwise prepared for eventual human
consumption and may be served or sold on the premises; in the Downtown
Village District, this use shall not include fresh or frozen fish, meat or
poultry processing.[Added 6-8-2010]
FOOD PROCESSING FACILITY — A place housing any operation which
changes the chemical composition or physical properties of food materials
consumed by humans. An example would be a creamery where dairy
products such as butter, cheese and ice cream are made. The term does not
include slaughterhouses or restaurants where food is prepared and sold at
retail.
FOOTPRINT AREA — The total area, calculated in square feet, of a site, if
viewed from above, covered by structures or improvements, including areas
under roof overhangs and under decks.104[Added 5-6-1996]
FOUNDATION — The supporting substructure of a building or other
structure, excluding wooden sills and post supports, but including
basements, slabs, frost walls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.[Amended 11-4-2008]
FRONTAGE, ROAD — The linear distance measured along the lot line which
separates the lot from a public or private road, but not including a private
driveway providing access to more than one lot.
FRONTAGE, SHORE — The length of a lot bordering on a water body or
wetland measured in a straight line between the intersections of the lot
lines with the shoreline.[Amended 11-5-1991; 11-3-2009]
FULL CUTOFF — A shielded fixture that directs all light towards the ground
by preventing all transmission of light above a horizontal line as specified
by the IES.[Added 11-4-2008]
FUNCTIONALLY WATER-DEPENDENT USES — Those uses that require,
for their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require
direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland waters and that can not
104. Editor’s Note: The definition of “forest management activities,” which immediately
followed, was repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:646
be located away from these waters. The uses include but are not limited
to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding
recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish
storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock
and port facilities, shipyards and boat-building facilities, marinas,
navigation aids, basins and channels, retaining walls, industrial uses
dependent upon waterborne transportation or requiring large volumes of
cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated
at an inland site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to
coastal or inland waters.[Added 11-4-2008]
GALLERY — A retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
drawings, photography, paintings, sculpture and the like to customers for
their own individual or household use. Accessory uses may include
restaurant.105[Added 6-8-2010]
GARAGE, RESIDENTIAL — An accessory building or a portion of the
principal dwelling unit(s) used for parking or temporary storage of
automobiles of residential occupants of the premises. Not more than one
space may regularly be used by the private passenger automobile of a
person not resident on the premises.[Amended 11-4-2008]
GLARE — The interfering brilliance of a light source at various viewing
angles.[Added 11-4-2008]
GLARE (DISABILITY) — Glare which reduces visual performance due to
light scattered in the eye, reducing the contrast of the image.[Added
11-4-2008]
GOVERNMENT FACILITY/USE — A governmental or public service use for
the general benefit of the citizens funded in whole or in part by the state,
federal government, Town of Bar Harbor or a quasi-public organization,
including, by way of illustration and without limitation, public parks and
recreational facilities, visitor information offices.[Amended 6-8-2010]
GRADE — In relation to buildings, the average of the finished ground level
at the center of each wall of a building.
GRAVEL PIT — See "extraction."
GREAT AMERICAN NEIGHBORHOOD, THE — An initiative of the Maine
State Planning Office to encourage developments that have the following
features as defined:[Added 6-13-2006106]
Walkability: Pedestrian access to other neighborhoods and commercial
areas;
A.
Civic core: a portion of the development lot or a building to allow for
public gathering;
B.
105. Editor's Note: The former definition of "garage, commercial," which immediately followed,
was repealed 6-13-2017. See now the definition of "parking garage."
106. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:647
GREAT POND — See "water bodies, great pond."[Added 11-5-1991]
GREAT POND CLASSIFIED GPA — See "water bodies, great pond classified
GPA."[Added 11-5-1991]
GREENHOUSE, COMMERCIAL — An enclosed building, permanent or
portable, which is used for the growth of small plants to be sold at wholesale
or retail.
GREENHOUSE, NONCOMMERCIAL — An accessory building to a
residence designed or used for the growth of small plants.107
GROCERY STORE — A small neighborhood establishment retailing food and
related commodities, as distinguished from a supermarket.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
enclosed floors of a building, excluding basements, areas beyond exterior
walls, and any space with a floor to ceiling height of less than six feet six
inches.[Added 6-13-2006108]
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA) — The total area, in square feet, of a
building or structure, measured from the interior faces of exterior walls
and, in shared buildings or structures, from the center line of each interior
wall dividing separately leased or separately owned space. For the sole
purpose of calculating required parking spaces, GLA shall include only the
area used for, or in support of, the principal use.[Amended 11-4-2003;
11-4-2008]
GROUND COVER — Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the
partially decayed organic matter of the forest floor.[Added 11-4-2008]
GUEST ROOM — A room in a hotel, motel, tourist home or bed-andbreakfast
offered to the public for compensation in which room no provision
is made for cooking and which room is only for transient occupancy.
GUIDE TO LIVABLE DESIGN, THE — A document published by the Maine
State Planning Office and GrowSmart Maine, dated June 2004, or as most
recently amended.[Added 6-13-2006109]
HANDICAPPED ACCESS — A ramp or other method of access that is
accessible to the handicapped (a maximum pitch of 8.33% is often specified
for a ramp).[Added 11-2-1999]
Neighborhood boundaries: Joining neighborhoods together by vehicles;
and
C.
Protection from excessive traffic: street planning standards to
discourage speeds over 35 miles per hour.
D.
107. Editor's Note: The former definition of "grocery store," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 6-8-2010.
108. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
109. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:648
HEALTH INSTITUTION — A hospital, clinic, nursing home, boarding care
facility, retirement community or any other place for the treatment or
diagnosis of human ailments, excluding professional offices.[Amended
5-3-1999]
HEIGHT (ALL UPLAND DISTRICTS EXCEPT DOWNTOWN VILLAGE
DISTRICTS) — The vertical distance between the mean original grade and
the highest point of any structure except a building and, for buildings,
the top of the highest roof beams of a flat roof, or the mean level of the
highest gable or slope of a hip roof, excluding chimneys, church steeples,
water tanks or towers, ornamental cupolas, towers or turrets, antennas,
transmission towers, mechanical rooms, and windmills.[Amended
11-5-1991; 5-4-1992; 5-2-1994; 11-2-1999; 11-4-2003; 6-8-2010]
HEIGHT (DOWNTOWN VILLAGE DISTRICTS) — The vertical distance
between the mean original grade and the highest point of any structure,
excluding chimneys, church steeples, silos, water tanks or towers,
ornamental cupolas, towers or turrets, antennas, transmission towers,
mechanical rooms, and windmills.[Added 11-4-2003; amended
11-4-2008; 6-8-2010]
HEIGHT (SHORELAND ZONING DISTRICTS) — The vertical distance
between the mean original grade at the downhill side of the structure and
the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, church steeples,
silos, water tanks or towers, ornamental cupolas, towers or turrets,
antennas, transmission towers, mechanical rooms, and windmills.[Added
5-2-1994]
HID LIGHTING — High-intensity discharge lighting, a family of bulb type
including mercury vapor, metal halide, and high-pressure or low-pressure
sodium, which glow when an electric current is passed through a gas
mixture inside the bulb.[Added 11-4-2008]
HIGH-INTENSITY SOIL SURVEY — A map prepared by a Maine certified
soil scientist identifying the soil types down to 1/10 acre or less at a scale
equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The soils shall be identified in
accordance with the National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map shall show
the location of all test pits or auger samples used to identify the soils and
shall be accompanied by a log of each sample point identifying the depth to
seasonal high water table or bedrock at that point. Single soil test pits and
their evaluation for suitability for subsurface wastewater disposal systems
shall not be considered to constitute high-intensity soil surveys.
HISTORIC BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure meeting
the criteria set forth in § 125-112D(1) and listed on the list of historic
buildings and structures.[Added 11-2-1999]
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area of the Town of Bar Harbor which contains
improvements which have a special character or special historical or
aesthetic interest or value and represent one or more periods or styles of
architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of Bar Harbor and
cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a distinct section
of the Town.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:649
HISTORIC MERIT — Those buildings classified as historic that retain
original features and possess historic and architectural merit of a degree
warranting their preservation.[Added 11-2-1999]
HISTORIC OR ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES — Areas identified by a
governmental agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation Commission
as having significant value as historic or archaeological resources and
any areas identified by the municipality's Comprehensive Plan.[Added
5-3-1999]
HOLIDAY LIGHTING — Festoon-type lights, limited to small, individual, lowwattage
bulbs on a string.[Added 11-4-2008]
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, trade, arts, occupation or profession
conducted for gain and support which is customarily carried on entirely
within a residential dwelling unit or structure accessory to the dwelling
unit which is clearly accessory and incidental to and compatible with the
surrounding residential uses.[Amended 6-8-2010]
HOSPITAL — A health institution providing health services, primarily for
inpatients, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including
as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories,
outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff
offices.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations for
transients and which may include additional accessory facilities and
services available to the general public, as well as a conference
center.[Amended 6-8-2010]
IES DEFINITION — The Illumination Engineering Society North America
Lighting Handbook. The most recent edition shall be used for the definition
of terms used in this chapter but not defined herein. In the case of conflict
with the terms of this chapter, the most-restrictive definition will
apply.[Added 11-4-2008]
INCREASE IN NONCONFORMITY OF A STRUCTURE — Any change in a
structure or property which causes further deviation from the dimensional
standard(s) creating the nonconformity, such as but not limited to reduction
in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot
coverage, or increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure
expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause
no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing
structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example,
there is no increase in nonconformity with the setback requirement for
water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the expansion extends no
further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing
nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally,
provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body, tributary
stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the existing structure from
that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are
expansions which infill irregularly shaped structures.[Added 11-4-2008]
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:650
INDUSTRY — Use of a premises for assembling, fabricating, finishing,
manufacturing, packaging, or processing, including but not limited to
assembly plants, laboratories, power plants, pumping stations and repair
shops.
INSTITUTIONAL — A use, building or structure devoted to some public,
governmental, educational, charitable, religious, medical or similar
purpose.110[Amended 6-8-2010]
KENNEL — A place where five or more dogs or wolf hybrids are kept
in a single location under one ownership for breeding, hunting, show,
training, field trials, sledding, competition or exhibition purposes. The sale
or exchange of one litter of puppies within a twelve-month period alone does
not constitute the operation of a kennel.[Added 6-14-2011]
KENNEL, BOARDING — Any place, building, tract of land, or abode in or
on which three or more privately owned companion animals are kept at any
one time for their owners in return for a fee or compensation and includes
a facility where three or more companion animals are kept for training
purposes for compensation.[Added 6-14-2011]
LAKES and PONDS — Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain
water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or may result
from excavation.111[Amended 6-8-2010]
LIGHT (DIRECT) — The light emitted directly from the lamp, off the
reflector or diffuser of a luminaire.[Added 11-4-2008]
LIGHT (INDIRECT) — Direct light that has been reflected or
scattered.[Added 11-4-2008]
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The fabrication or processing of materials into
the finished product, the weight of which shall not exceed 300 pounds.
Fabrication relates to stamping, cutting or otherwise shaping the processed
materials into useful objects or products. Light manufacturing does not
include the refining or other initial processing of basic raw materials such
as metal ores, lumber or rubber.
LIGHT SOURCE — The lamp or enclosing bulb or reflective
enclosure.[Added 11-4-2008]
LIGHT TRESPASS — The light projected onto a property from a fixture not
located on that property.[Added 11-4-2008]
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a
building or contiguous to a group of buildings for the temporary parking of
a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials
and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
LODGING — See "transient accommodations."
110. Editor's Note: The former definitions of "kennel, commercial" and "kennel,
noncommercial," which immediately followed this definition were repealed 6-14-2011; see
now the definitions of "kennel" and "kennel, boarding."
111. Editor’s Note: The definition of “licensed forester,” added 11-4-2008, which immediately
followed, was repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:651
LOGO — A single or multicolored symbolic design unique to a business or
product, service facility, or point of interest and used to identify its product
or services.[Added 11-2-1999]
LOT — A contiguous area of land undivided by any street or private road,
in one ownership or leasehold, with ascertainable boundaries established
by deed or some other instrument of record. An area of land undivided by
any street or private road and which is owned in common by members of
a condominium shall be considered one lot notwithstanding the fact that
each member may be entitled under the declaration to an exclusive area
of occupation. A dwelling unit within a condominium development shall
not be deemed a lot unless individual members of the condominium shall
individually own in fee an area of the land that meets the minimum lot size
requirements of this chapter.[Amended 5-6-1996; 6-9-2009]
LOT AREA — The area contained within the boundary lines of a lot minus:
[Amended 11-5-1991; 11-7-2006; 11-4-2008]
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — Except as otherwise provided in § 125-67B(8), the
footprint area of all structures and improvements calculated as a
percentage of the area of the lot shall be considered to be lot coverage,
including but not limited to principal and accessory buildings; all improved
vehicular and pedestrian surfaces, such as parking lots, roads, driveways,
maneuvering spaces, and pedestrian walkways, regardless of the
construction material employed; graveled areas and other nonvegetated
surfaces. Unimproved natural surfaces of a site shall not constitute lot
coverage, regardless of whether they are vegetated. Boats stored in cradles
above an unimproved natural surface shall not constitute lot coverage.
However, in the case of lumber yards, areas of stored lumber shall
constitute lot coverage.[Amended 5-6-1996; 11-4-2003; 11-7-2006;
6-8-2010; 6-12-2018]
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT FRONTAGE — See "frontage, road." When a lot has more than one
street lot line, lot width shall be measured, and the minimum lot width
required by this chapter shall be provided, at each such line.
LOT LINE — A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
or from a street or any other public or private space, as defined
below:[Amended 11-2-2004]
Land below the normal high water line of a water body or upland edge
of a wetland;
A.
B. Sustained slopes greater than 20%.
Land held in a conservation easement that limits the use of the land to
activities that are no more intense than passive recreation; and
C.
D. Areas beneath roads serving more than two lots.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:652
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A single lot of record which, at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, does not comply with
the minimum lot size, minimum area per family, minimum road frontage,
shore frontage, minimum lot width or maximum lot coverage requirements
of the district in which it is located.[Amended 5-2-1994; 6-13-2006112;
11-7-2006; 11-3-2009]
LOT OF RECORD — Any validly recorded lot which at the time of its
recordation complied with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations.
LOT STANDARDS — Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships,
including but not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage, height,
coverage, road frontage and density.
LOT WIDTH — The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot or
the width of an imaginary square that will fit entirely within the lines of a
lot. When only two lot lines extend into the Shoreland Zone, both lot lines
shall be considered to be side lot lines.[Amended 11-5-1991; 5-6-1996;
11-3-2009]
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — This is a reference to the document
entitled "LID Guidance Manual for Maine Communities - Approaches for
Implementation of Low Impact Development Practices at the Local Level,"
dated September 21, 2007, prepared for the Maine Coastal Program State
Planning Office, Augusta, Maine, as may be amended or updated by the
source.[Added 11-4-2008]
LUMEN — A unit used to measure the actual amount of light that is
produced by a light source. The lumen quantifies the amount of light
energy produced by a lamp at the lamp, not by the energy input, which is
indicated by the wattage. For example, a one-hundred-watt incandescent
light produces 1,800 lumens, but a seventy-watt high-pressure sodium lamp
produces 6,000 lumens. (Lumen output is listed by the manufacturer on the
packaging.)[Added 11-4-2008]
LOT LINE, FRONT — In the case of a lot abutting only one street, the
street line separating such lot from such street; in the case of a double
frontage lot, each street line separating such lot from a street shall be
considered to be the front lot line. In the case of a lot with no road
frontage, the front lot line shall be considered to be the line parallel to
the front of the building.
A.
LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line which is parallel to and most distant
from the front lot line of a lot. In the case of an irregular, triangular,
or gore-shaped lot, a line 20 feet in length, entirely within the lot,
parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line shall be
considered to be the rear lot line. In the case of corner lots there shall
be no rear lot lines.
B.
C. LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
112. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:653
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting fixture, including the lamp, the
housing, and optics.[Added 11-4-2008]
MANUFACTURED HOUSING — A structural unit designed for human
occupancy, constructed in a manufacturing facility and then transported by
the use of its own chassis, or placed on an independent chassis, to a building
site, as defined more specifically in 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4358(1)(A).
MARINA — A business establishment having frontage on navigable water
within the Town and providing for hire offshore mooring or docking facilities
for boats and accessory services and facilities, such as boat sales, rental and
storage, marine supplies and equipment, marine engine and hull repairs,
construction and outfitting of pleasure craft, fuel and oil, electricity, fresh
water, ice, shower and laundry facilities and on-premises restaurant.
MARKET VALUE — The estimated price a property will bring in the open
market and under prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing
seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property and with
prevailing general price levels.
MECHANICAL SPACE — An enclosed space, not designed for human
habitation, for the housing of mechanical services, including but not limited
to heating, ventilation, air-conditioning, refrigeration or elevator
equipment. Attic space below a pitched roof shall not be considered
mechanical space.[Added 5-2-1994; amended 11-4-2003]
MEDICAL CLINIC — An office building used by members of the medical
professions for the diagnosis and outpatient treatment of human ailments;
doctors' offices are included in this definition.[Amended 6-8-2010]
MINERAL EXPLORATION — Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods
of determining the nature or extent of mineral resources which create
minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable measures to
restore the land to its original condition.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under unified ownership approved
by the Town of Bar Harbor for the placement of three or more manufactured
homes.
MODERATE INCOME — Family income which is between 80% and 150% of
median family income for Hancock County.[Added 5-2-2005]
MOTEL — A facility providing sleeping accommodations for transients with
additional accessory facilities and services available to transients at the
motel only.[Amended 6-8-2010]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle which is self-propelled and designed
for carrying persons or property or which is used for the transportation of
persons.
MOTOR VEHICLE, UNSERVICEABLE — Any motor vehicle which is
wrecked or dismantled, cannot be operated legally on any public highway,
or which is not being used for the purpose for which it was manufactured.
MUNICIPAL USE — Buildings or land which is owned by the Town of Bar
Harbor and operated under its supervision.[Amended 6-8-2010]
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:654
MUSEUM — A nonprofit institution operated principally for the purpose of
preserving and exhibiting objects of historical, cultural, scientific or artistic
interest and which may also engage in retail sales of items related to its
principal purpose. Restaurants as an accessory use are permitted only in
the Downtown and Salisbury Cove Corridor Districts.[Amended 6-8-2010]
NATIVE — Indigenous to the local forests.[Added 11-4-2008]
NATURAL AREAS AND NATURAL COMMUNITIES, UNIQUE — Areas
identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Department of
Conservation Natural Areas Program as having significant value as natural
areas and any areas identified in the municipality's Comprehensive
Plan.[Added 5-3-1999]
NET LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area leased, rented or owned
to house a particular use, including but not limited to customer seating,
waiting and reception areas, lounge and bar areas, kitchens, and offices,
but not including rest rooms, exit aisles, closets, and basements, attics and
rooms devoted exclusively to storage.[Added 3-24-1998]
NONCONFORMING LOT — See "lot, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — See "structure, nonconforming."
NONCONFORMING USE — See "use, nonconforming."
NORMAL HIGH WATER LINE (NONTIDAL WATERS) — That line which
is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils due
to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation and which
distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support
nonforested wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the same
or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during
the period of normal high water are considered part of the river or great
pond.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 11-4-2008]
NORMAL MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — Any work necessary to maintain
an improvement or structure in its original or previously improved state or
condition. Normal maintenance and repair shall not include reconstruction,
change in design, change in structure, change in uses, change in location,
or change in size or capacity.
NURSERY, COMMERCIAL — An enterprise which conducts the retail and
wholesale sale of plants grown on the site, as well as accessory items
(but not power equipment such as gas or electric lawn mowers and farm
implements) directly related to their care and maintenance. The accessory
items normally sold are clay pots, potting soil, fertilizers, insecticides,
hanging baskets, rakes and shovels.
NURSING HOME — A facility for the care of the aged or infirm, or a place
of rest for those suffering bodily disorders, but not including facilities for
surgical care or institutions for the care and treatment of mental illness,
alcoholism, or narcotics addiction.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:655
OPEN SPACE — The portion of a lot or site which is maintained in its
natural state to preserve scenic resources, farm and forest land, wetlands,
groundwater recharge areas, wildlife habitat, public access to water bodies,
and other important or environmentally sensitive areas or to be used for
outdoor recreation purposes.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING — The nighttime illumination of an outside area or
object by a device that produces light by any means.[Added 11-4-2008]
OWNER — The person or persons having the right of legal title to, beneficial
interest in, or a contractual right to purchase a lot or parcel of land.
PARCEL — The area within the boundary lines of a development.
PARKING AREA (SHORELAND DISTRICT) — An open area used for parking
one or more vehicles, excluding an area associated with a driveway used for
parking two vehicles or fewer.[Added 6-8-2010]
PARKING DECK — As a principal use, or an accessory use in the Shoreland
Maritime Activities District, a structure of no more than two levels for
parking vehicles on a deck supported above grade. Parking decks shall
utilize site grade differential to access parking. Parking decks may be public
or private. A parking deck used solely in conjunction with a multifamily
dwelling or hotel shall not be construed to be a parking deck but rather
a permitted accessory structure and use, even though not on the same
premises as the multifamily dwelling or hotel.[Added 6-13-2017]
PARKING DEMAND — The amount of parking spaces needed by the users
of a particular structure or tract of land.
PARKING GARAGE — As a principal use, a multistory structure used for
parking vehicles, either public or private, either self-service or valet, for
such parking or storage. A garage used solely in conjunction with a
multifamily dwelling or hotel shall not be construed to be a parking garage
but rather a permitted accessory structure and use, even though not on the
same premises as the multifamily dwelling or hotel.[Added 6-13-2017]
PARKING LOT — An open area other than a street used for the parking of
more than four automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for
compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or customers.
PARKING SPACE — A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, meeting the
size requirements of § 125-67E, together with a driveway connecting the
parking space with a street, road or alley and permitting ingress and egress
of that automobile without the necessity of moving any other automobile.
PASSENGER TERMINAL — A transportation facility where passengers
embark on or disembark from carriers such as ferries and buses that
provide transportation to passengers for hire by land or sea. Passenger
terminals typically include some or all of the following: ticket counters,
waiting areas, management offices, baggage handling facilities, restroom
facilities, visitor center, cruise ship operations. A passenger terminal use on
the waterfront may include moorage for cruise ships and/or vessels engaged
in transporting passengers for hire. Activities commonly found aboard such
vessels, whether moored, docked or under way, that are incidental to the
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:656
transport of passengers shall be considered part of the passenger terminal
use and shall not be treated as separate uses.[Added 6-13-2017]
PATIO — A level area adjacent to a dwelling unit constructed of stone,
cement or other material, located at ground level, with no railing or other
structure above the level of the ground. In all shoreland districts a patio
shall be considered a structure.[Amended 6-8-2010]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — A financial guarantee to ensure that all
improvements, facilities or work required by this chapter, regulations and
the approved plans and specifications of a development.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — A criterion established to control the use
of land and structures. The purpose of performance standards is to provide
detailed regulations and restrictions by means of minimum criteria which
must be met by uses in order to protect neighbors from adverse impacts of
adjoining land uses and to protect the general health, safety and welfare of
citizens of Bar Harbor.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality,
trust, estate, partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint
or common interest, or other legal entity.[Added 11-5-1991]
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and maintained
by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence and is not attached
to or affixed to the ground or a structure. It does not include merchandise
which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
PERSONAL SERVICES — A business which provides services but not goods,
such as hairdressers, shoe repair, and the like.
PHOTO SIMULATION — A computer representation of the appearance of
a building or scene showing how it currently looks or how it will look
after specified activities (i.e., the construction of a building, renovations,
landscaping, etc.) have occurred.[Added 11-2-1999]
PIER — See "structure, water-related."
PLACE OF WORSHIP — [Added 5-2-2005]
PLASTIC — Any group of synthetic or natural organic materials that may be
shaped when soft and then hardened.[Added 11-2-1999]
POND — See "water bodies."113
A church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or other facility that is used for
prayer by persons of similar beliefs;
A.
A special purpose building that is architecturally designed and
particularly adapted for the primary use of conducting formal religious
services on a regular basis.
B.
113. Editor's Note: See now the definition of "lakes and ponds."
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:657
PORTICO — A porch-like structure consisting of a roof supported by
columns.[Added 11-2-1999]
PREMISES — One or more parcels of land which are in the same ownership
and are contiguous, and including all buildings and other structures
thereon.[Added 11-2-1999]
PRIVATE STREET — See "street."
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING — A building in which there is located
the office of a professional, such as an architect, accountant, dentist, lawyer,
and the like, or in which a business conducts its administrative, financial or
clerical operations, but not including any manufacturing or sale of goods or
merchandise.[Amended 6-8-2010]
PROPERTY, HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION — A property whereby the property
owner qualifies for the homestead exemption under 36 M.R.S.A. §§ 681
through 689, respectively.[Added 6-13-2006]
PROPERTY, NONHOMESTEAD EXEMPTION — A property whereby the
property owner does not qualify for the homestead exemption under 36
M.R.S.A. §§ 681 through 689, respectively.[Added 6-13-2006]
PUBLIC FACILITY — Any facility, including but not limited to buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which is owned, leased, or otherwise
operated, or funded by a governmental body or public entity.[Added
11-4-2008]
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement, facility or service, together
with customary improvements, necessary to provide for public needs, such
as vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, storm sewers, flood-control
improvements, water supply and distribution facilities, sanitary sewage
disposal and treatment, and public utility and energy services.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department,
board or commission authorized by the Maine Public Utilities Commission
to furnish gas, steam, electricity, communication facilities, or transportation
of water to the public.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY — Structures such as electric substations or
similar facilities of a scale and character commonly found only in a few
specialized locations in the Town, necessary to the delivery of electricity
or other services regulated by the Maine Public Utilities Commission, but
excluding wind turbines and wireless communication towers.[Added
6-9-2015]
PUBLIC UTILITY INSTALLATION — The act of connecting to utilities
services such as electricity, water, sewer, telephone and cable television, as
accessory to a permitted use or structure.[Added 6-9-2015]
RECENT FLOODPLAIN SOILS — The following soil series as described and
identified by the National Cooperative Soil Survey:[Added 11-5-1991]
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:658
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
RECONSTRUCTION — The restoration, remodeling or rebuilding of a
nonconforming structure, whether necessitated by deterioration,
obsolescence, casualty or other occurrence, where the costs of such work
equal or exceed the value of the property in its existing condition.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Recreation activities which necessitate some
degree of structural or mechanical components for participation in the
activity.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the
conduct of sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual
recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.[Added
11-3-2009]
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Outdoor recreational activities which involve
no structures or motorized equipment, such as skiing, horseback riding,
cycling, hiking, walking, picnicking and the like.
RECREATION VEHICLE — A vehicle or vehicular attachment designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons which is not a
dwelling and which may include a pickup camper, travel trailer, tent trailer,
camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and
not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground and
must be registered with any state's division of motor vehicles.[Amended
11-5-1991]
RENOVATION — A modification to the architectural style, general design
and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or structure,
including the kind and texture of the building materials and the type and
style of all windows, doors, light fixtures, other appurtenant fixtures and
other features, such as landscaping, i.e., walks, fences, trees, driveways
and parking areas. In addition, all activities that affect the exterior and
which require a building permit are also included in this definition.[Added
11-2-1999]
REPLACEMENT SYSTEM — A system intended to replace:[Added
11-4-2008]
RESEARCH FACILITY — A building or part of a building devoted to
scientific inquiry and ancillary functions. No manufacturing is conducted on
the premises except as related to the scientific research being conducted;
said activities shall be solely for eleemosynary purposes.
RESEARCH PRODUCTION FACILITY — A building or part of a building
devoted to the propagation, maintenance and distribution of animals, or
An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded
with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure; or
A.
B. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:659
other biological materials, for use in scientific inquiry; said activities shall
be solely for eleemosynary purposes.114
RESTAURANT [Amended 5-2-1994; 11-6-2001] —
RESTAURANT, TAKEOUT [Added 5-2-1994; amended 11-6-2001] —
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any business, housed in a permanent
structure, engaged primarily in the sale of goods and services to the
ultimate consumer for direct consumption or use but not for resale.
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A combined facility providing independent
living and one or more of congregate housing, assisted living, or care of
the aged, infirm or those suffering physical disorders or other conditions
requiring special care or residential arrangements, but not including the
care and treatment, principally, of alcoholism, narcotics addiction, or
mental illness other than senile dementia, Alzheimer's, and similar mental
illness, and which facility may include and provide shared community space,
shared dining facilities, personal care and assistance, recreational
activities, specialized shared services such as medical services, nursing
services and physical and other types of therapy, or similar types of
service.[Added 5-3-1999]
An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food or
beverages to consumers in a ready-to-consume state and whose
principal method of operation includes one or both of the following
characteristics:
Customers normally are served their food and beverages by a
restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which food and
beverages are consumed; or
(1)
A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are
consumed on the restaurant premises.
(2)
A.
Drive-up windows for the procurement of food are not an approved use
in the Town of Bar Harbor.
B.
An establishment whose principal business is the sale of food or
beverages to consumers in a ready-to-consume state, which is not
licensed to serve alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises,
with all of the following characteristics:
(1) Six or fewer counter seats or stand-up counter spaces for patrons;
A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are
consumed off of the premises; and
(2)
(3) No tables are available for the use of customers.
A.
Drive-up windows for the procurement of food are not an approved use
in the Town of Bar Harbor.
B.
114. Editor’s Note: The definition of “residual basal area,” added 11-4-2008, which immediately
followed, was repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:660
RIPRAP — Rocks, irregularly shaped and at least six inches in diameter,
used for erosion control and soil stabilization, typically used on ground
slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or less.
RIVER — See "water bodies."
ROAD — See "street."
ROADSIDE STAND — A roadside stand selling at retail on the premises only
farm produce, campfire wood, or garden, greenhouse or nursery products
and, between Labor Day and Christmas, cut Christmas trees, garlands,
wreaths and wreath materials primarily produced on the property.
SALT MARSH — Areas of coastal wetland (most often along coastal bays)
that support salt-tolerant species and where, at average high tide during
the growing season, the soil is irregularly inundated by tidal waters. The
predominant species is salt marsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora). More
open areas often support widgeon grass, eelgrass, and Sago
pondweed.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 11-4-2008]
SALT MEADOW — Areas of a coastal wetland that support salt-tolerant
plant species bordering the landward side of salt marshes or open coastal
water, where the soil is saturated during the growing season but which
is rarely inundated by tidal water. Indigenous plant species include salt
meadow cordgrass (Spartina patens) and black rush; common threesquare
occurs in fresher areas.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 11-4-2008]
SCHOOL, MUNICIPAL — A facility owned by the Town of Bar Harbor within
which educational classes for any grades, kindergarten through 12, are
conducted pursuant to a program approved by the State Board of Education
or similar governmental agency.
SCHOOL, PRIVATE — A privately owned facility within which instruction is
provided for a fee.[Amended 5-4-1998]
SCHOOL, PRIVATE COMPULSORY — A privately owned facility within
which educational classes for any grades, kindergarten through eighth
grade, shall be conducted pursuant to a program approved for attendance
purposes under state law pursuant to 20-A M.R.S.A. § 2901, or any
corresponding provision of any future law, and recognized by the Maine
Department of Education (or similar government agency) as providing an
equivalent instruction alternative to public school instruction and within
which early childhood development classes may also be conducted.[Added
5-3-1999]
SCREENING — A hedge or buffer strip at least five feet wide consisting
of densely planted shrubs or trees at least four feet in height at time of
planting and eventually reaching a mature height of at least six feet in
height, but not exceeding eight feet, which provides an effective visual
barrier.
SEASONAL CLOSURE — The closing of a business for a period of more than
90 consecutive days with the intent to reopen.[Added 11-2-1999]
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:661
SEPTAGE — Waste, refuse, effluent, sludge and any other materials from
septic tanks, cesspools or any other similar facilities.[Added 11-5-1991]
SEPTIC SYSTEM — See "subsurface sewage disposal system."[Added
11-5-1991]
SERVICE DROP — Any utility line extension which does not cross or run
beneath any portion of a water body, provided that:[Added 11-5-1991]
SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing assistance,
as opposed to products, to individuals, business, industry, government and
other enterprises.[Added 6-8-2010]
SETBACK — The horizontal distance from a lot line or normal high water
line of a water body or tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the
nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object,
activity or area.[Amended 11-5-1991; 11-4-2008]
SETBACK, FRONT — Setback between the front lot line and the nearest
part of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object, activity
or area.[Amended 11-5-1991]
SETBACK, REAR — Setback between the rear lot line and the nearest part
of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object, activity or
area.[Amended 11-5-1991]
SETBACK, SIDE — Setback between a side lot line and the nearest part
of a structure, road, parking space or other regulated object, activity or
area.[Amended 11-5-1991]
SHIP CHANDLERY — A retail store located within a marina selling supplies
and equipment for boats.
SHORELAND DISTRICT OR ZONE — The land area located within 250 feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of any great pond or river;
within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a coastal wetland,
including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet of the upland
edge of a freshwater wetland; or within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high water line of a stream.[Amended 11-5-1991; 11-4-2008]
In the case of electrical service:
The placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is
located entirely on the premises of the customer requesting service
or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
(1)
(2) The total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet.
A.
In the case of telephone service:
The extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation
of telephone wires to existing utility poles; or
(1)
The extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
replacement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length.
(2)
B.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:662
SHORELINE — The normal high water line, or upland edge of a freshwater
or coastal wetland.[Added 11-4-2008]
SIGN — An object, device or display, or part thereof, whether freestanding,
portable, affixed to a building or otherwise, situated outdoors or indoors,
which is directed at persons outside or off the premises, used to advertise,
identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means,
including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination or projected images. This definition shall not, however, be
construed to include merchandise or decorative displays.[Amended
11-5-1991]
SIGN AREA — The exposed surface of the sign, including all ornamentation,
embellishment, background, and symbols, but excluding the structure
which does not form a part of the message of the sign measured in square
feet. Regardless of the shape of the sign, the area of a sign shall be
the smallest rectangle which encloses the whole message. The total sign
area for a premise means the sum of the areas of all signs visible from
public streets, sidewalks, parks, etc. This includes small signs attached to
the principal sign for a premises. Examples of the latter are exemplified
by small signs indicating "fireplaces," "swimming pool," or "Master Card,
Diners Club or American Express accepted." For a sign with a double
signboard or display area, where the sign faces are parallel and the faces
duplicate one another, only one side shall be counted in calculating
allowable area.[Amended 11-5-1991; 6-9-2009]
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign that is not fixed or otherwise attached to
a principal or accessory structure.[Amended 6-9-2009]
SIGNIFICANT RIVER SEGMENTS — See 38 M.R.S.A. § 437.[Added
11-5-1991]
SIGNIFICANT VERNAL POOL — A naturally occurring temporary to
permanent inland body of water that forms in a shallow depression and
typically fills during the spring or fall and may dry during the summer.
The vernal pool contains no viable populations of predatory fish, and it
provides the primary breeding habitat for wood frogs, spotted salamanders,
blue-spotted salamanders or fairy shrimp. The presence of any one or
more of these species is usually conclusive evidence of a vernal pool. Only
significant vernal pools that have been mapped or identified by a Townauthorized
agency prior to project approval shall be considered as being
within this definition. A significant vernal pool further means that there
are multiple species present, or that the vernal pool is part of a corridor
of other vernal pools, or that the pool is adjacent to a wetland.[Added
6-13-2006115]
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign with a light source
incorporated into the body of the sign and where light emanates through,
115. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:663
or from, the message of the sign; there are four types, as follows:[Added
6-14-2016]
SIGN, OFFICIAL BUSINESS DIRECTIONAL — A sign erected and
maintained in accordance with the Maine Traveler Information Services
Act, 23 M.R.S.A. § 1901 et seq. which points the way to public
accommodations and facilities or other commercial facilities.[Amended
11-5-1991]
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — Any sign designed, intended or used for
advertising a product, property, business, entertainment, service,
amusement or the like and not located where the matter advertised is
available or occurs.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign not designed or intended to be permanently
affixed into the ground or to a structure.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign projecting more than six inches from a wall
surface of a building.[Added 6-9-2009]
SIGN, ROOF — Any sign painted on, integral to, or attached to the roof of a
building.[Amended 6-9-2009]
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign of a temporary nature, to be displayed less
than 30 days, exemplified by the following: political posters, charitable
signs, construction signs, carnival signs, garage sale signs, lawn sale signs,
TYPE 1; CABINET WITH TRANSLUCENT FACE — An internally
illuminated sign with a cabinet style fixture with full or nearly full
translucent face(s) and/or sides, through which light from an internal
source passes.
A.
TYPE 2; CABINET WITH LIGHT LIMITING FACE — An internally
illuminated sign with an opaque surround cabinet style fixture with
light limiting translucent face(s), flush translucent sign graphics within
an opaque background field, through which light from an internal
source passes. This type of sign has two acceptable categories:
Twenty percent (or less) translucent face/80% (or greater) opaque
background field.
(1)
Thirty percent (or less) translucent face/70% (or greater) opaque
background field.
(2)
B.
TYPE 3; CHANNEL LETTER — An internally illuminated sign comprised
of three-dimensional sign graphic letters and logos, each with its own
internal light source, in which the dimensional faces are internally
illuminated and affixed to the sign or structure upon which the channel
letters are mounted.
C.
TYPE 4; HALO — An internally illuminated sign comprised of
dimensional sign graphics, which cast a halo-like glow along the sides
of the graphics, or cast light backward onto the face of the sign or
structure upon which the graphics are mounted.
D.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:664
rummage sale signs, all signs advertising sales or promotions, and "for rent"
signs.[Amended 11-5-1991]
SIGN, WALL — Any sign painted on, or attached parallel to and projecting
not more than six inches from, the wall surface of a building.[Amended
11-5-1991]
SIGN, WINDOW/DOOR — Any sign visible from the exterior of a building or
structure which is painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed to or placed
within six inches of a window or door.116[Amended 11-5-1991; 6-9-2009]
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM — A wind energy conversion system
consisting of a wind turbine, a tower, and associated control or conversion
electronics, which has a rated capacity of not more than 100 kW.[Added
11-3-2009]
STABLE, COMMERCIAL — A building or land where horses are kept for
remuneration, hire, sale, boarding, riding or showing.
STABLE, NONCOMMERCIAL — An accessory building to a residence
designed or used for the accommodation of horses owned and used
exclusively by occupants of the residence to which it is accessory.
STREAM — See "water bodies."
STREET — Public and private ways such as avenues, boulevards, highways,
roads and other rights-of-way consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, asphalt or other surfacing material and constructed for or created
by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles, as well as areas on
subdivision plans designated as rights-of-way or streets, except such ways
as have been discontinued or abandoned. If a vehicular accessway meets
the definition of a driveway, it shall not be considered a street unless
agreed to by the developer or unless said accessway is required to meet
road frontage requirements, in which case street standards shall
apply.[Amended 5-6-1996]
STREET, ARTERIAL — A major thoroughfare which serves as a major
trafficway for travel between and through the municipality.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street servicing at least 25 lots or dwelling units,
or streets which serve as feeders to arterial streets and collectors of traffic
from minor streets.[Amended 5-6-1996]
STREET, INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL — Streets servicing exclusively
industrial or commercial uses.[Amended 5-6-1996]
STREET, MINOR — A street servicing fewer than 25 lots or dwelling
units.[Amended 5-6-1996]
STREET, PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — A street servicing fewer than 15 lots
or dwelling units which is not intended to be dedicated as a public way
and which will be maintained by a developer, property owner or group of
property owners or a street which is not intended to be dedicated as a
116. Editor’s Note: The definitions of “skid road or skid trail,” and “slash,” added 11-4-2008,
which immediately followed, were repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:665
pubic way but which is constructed in accordance with the standards for a
minor or collector street, depending on the number of lots or dwelling units
served.[Amended 5-6-1996]
STRUCTURAL PROJECT — Projects involving the design, construction,
renovation and/or maintenance of the actual structure of a building.[Added
11-2-1999]
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on, above or below the surface of the land or water.[Amended
5-3-1999]
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY —
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure which, at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, does not meet the
dimensional, height, or setback requirements of the district in which it is
located.[Amended 11-5-1991; 11-7-2006]
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL — A structure other than one which is used for
purposes wholly incidental or accessory to the use of another structure or
use on the same lot.[Amended 11-5-1991]
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure established for a fixed period
of time with the intent to completely remove same from the lot upon the
expiration of such time.
STRUCTURE, WATER-RELATED — A structure, including a pier, dock,
wharf, float, crib, piling, boathouse, breakwater or causeway, the utility of
which depends on its extending over or below the normal high-water line of
a water body or within a wetland. See "use, water-dependent."[Amended
11-5-1991; 6-8-2010]
STRUCTURE, WATER-RELATED, PERMANENT — Structures which extend
over or below the normal high-water line of a water body or within wetland
for seven months or more in any period of 12 consecutive
months.[Amended 11-5-1991; 6-8-2010]
STRUCTURE, WATER-RELATED, TEMPORARY — Structures which extend
over or below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a
A structure which is:
(1) Subordinate to and serves a principal structure or a principal use;
Subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure
or use served;
(2)
Located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served,
except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this
chapter; and
(3)
(4) Customarily incidental to the principal structure or use.
A.
Any portion of a principal structure devoted or intended to be devoted
to an accessory use is not an accessory structure.
B.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:666
wetland for less than seven months in any period of 12 consecutive
months.[Amended 11-5-1991; 6-8-2010]
STUDENT HOUSING — (Applicable only in the Educational Institution
District) Structures or portions therein where sleeping accommodations are
provided to undergraduate students, graduate students, or any individual
attending the college in either matriculated or nonmatriculated status, in
one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy
and single management.[Added 5-3-2004]
SUBDIVISION — See 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4401(4).
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION — Completion of 30% of a permitted
structure or use measured as a percentage of the estimated total
cost.[Added 11-5-1991]
SUBSTANTIAL START — The actual start date of construction is considered,
but not limited to, construction, repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, and
additions which occur within six months from the date the permit for such
work was issued. Construction activities that do not require a building
permit are not considered starting construction. The start of construction
includes, but is not limited to, the placement of a structure on a site, setting
forms for the pouring of a slab or footings, the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation or installation of more than 10 cubic yards of fill.
The start of construction also includes, but is not limited to, the removal or
installation of interior or exterior doors, windows, walls, alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The start of
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading or
filling of less than 10 cubic yards of fill. All activities, uses or construction
allowed by a building permit must be started within six months from the
date the permit was issued or the permit is null and void.[Added 6-8-2010]
SUBSTANTIVE REVIEW — A review of a completed application to
determine whether it complies with the review standards set forth in this
chapter and with other applicable requirements of law.
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any system designed to
dispose of waste or wastewater on or beneath the surface of the earth;
includes but is not limited to septic tanks, disposal fields, grandfathered
cesspools, holding tanks, and pretreatment filter, piping, or any other
fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include
any discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. § 414, any surface
wastewater disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or
wastewater treatment system.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 11-4-2008;
11-3-2009]
SUBSURFACE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, REPLACEMENT SYSTEM —
A system intended to replace:[Added 11-5-1991]
An existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded
with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure; or
A.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:667
SUSTAINED SLOPE — A change in elevation where the referenced percent
grade is substantially maintained or exceeded throughout the measured
area.[Added 11-5-1991]
SWIMMING POOL — An outdoor artificial receptacle or other container,
whether in or above the ground, used or intended to be used to contain
water for swimming or bathing and designed for a water depth of 24 inches
or more.
TENANT SIGNAGE PLAN — A plan approved by a building owner which
outlines design guidelines for tenant signage. Such a plan may include, but
is not limited to the following elements: size limitations and locations of
signage. The tenant signage plan shall be reviewed by the Design Review
Board, and upon approval by the Board the building owner shall be issued
a certificate of appropriateness certifying the approval of the plan.[Added
11-8-2011]
TENT — A temporary collapsible shelter of canvas or similar material
stretched and sustained by poles made fast by ropes attached to pegs
into the ground and used for camping outdoors or as a temporary
building.[Added 11-2-1999]
THEATER — A fully enclosed building used for display or presentation to
the public of films, plays or other kinds of performances.
TIDAL AREA — Any area upon which tidal action occurs.[Amended
6-8-2010]
TIDAL WATERS — All waters affected by tidal action during the highest
annual tide or mean highest high-water mark, whichever number requires
the furthest setback from the water for the given year of measurement
maximum spring tide.117[Added 11-4-2008; amended 6-8-2010]
TRANSIENT — A person staying at a place that does not constitute his or
her home or usual dwelling unit for less than 30 days.
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATIONS —
B. Any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
TA-1 — Bed-and-breakfast accommodations in the private, year-round
residence of the host family who live on the premises (one to three
rooms; maximum six guests). Breakfast is the only meal provided.
A.
TA-2 — A building or buildings where for compensation lodging is
provided (four to 25 rooms). No meals are served.
B.
TA-3 — An existing building, constructed and completed prior to June
10, 1986, where for compensation lodging is provided (four to 10
rooms). TA-3 is permitted in districts where it is felt that lodging for
transients is necessary to preserve or maintain many of Bar Harbor's
residential structures: [Amended 11-5-1991; 11-2-2004]
C.
117. Editor’s Note: The definition of “timber harvesting,” as amended, which immediately
followed, was repealed 6-12-2018.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:668
TRANSPORTATION FACILITIES — Structures and grounds used for
transportation service activities, such as ticket booths and waiting shelters
No building shall be expanded in floor area or volume by more than
10% over the lifetime of the building;
(1)
There shall not be constructed any exterior stairway or fire escape
enclosed or otherwise above the ground floor visible from the
street on which the building fronts; and
(2)
(3) Breakfast is the only meal provided.
TA-4 — An existing building, constructed and completed prior to June
10, 1986, where for compensation lodging is provided (11 to 25 rooms).
TA-4 is permitted in districts where it is felt that lodging for transients
is necessary to preserve or maintain many of Bar Harbor's residential
structures: [Amended 11-5-1991; 11-2-2004]
No building shall be expanded in floor area or volume by more than
10% over the lifetime of the building;
(1)
There shall not be constructed any exterior stairway or fire escape
enclosed or otherwise above the ground floor visible from the
street on which the building fronts; and
(2)
(3) Breakfast is the only meal provided.
D.
TA-5 — A building or buildings where for compensation lodging and
one or more meals for guests only are provided (four to 25 rooms).
[Amended 5-6-2002]
E.
TA-6 — An existing building, constructed and completed prior to June
10, 1986, where for compensation lodging and meals for guests only
are provided (four to 25 rooms). TA-6 is permitted in districts where it
is felt that lodging for transients is necessary to preserve or maintain
many of Bar Harbor's residential structures: [Amended 11-5-1991;
11-2-2004]
No building shall be expanded in floor area or volume by more than
10% over the lifetime of the building;
(1)
There shall not be constructed any exterior stairway or fire escape
enclosed or otherwise above the ground floor visible from the
street on which the building fronts.
(2)
F.
TA-7 — A building or buildings where for compensation lodging and
meals are provided (four to 25 rooms). Accessory uses subject to site
plan review include restaurant, gift shop and the like.
G.
TA-8 — A building or buildings where for compensation lodging and
meals are provided (25 or more rooms). Accessory uses subject to site
plan review include restaurant, cocktail lounge, gift shop, conference
room, recreational facilities, such as swimming pool, game courts, and
recreational rooms, and the like.
H.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:669
for bus, taxi, touring van or ferry passengers. The term does not include
parking lots or major ferry terminal facilities such as the one for the
Bluenose.
TRIBUTARY STREAM — A channel between defined banks created by the
action of surface water, whether intermittent or perennial, and which is
characterized by the lack of upland vegetation or presence of aquatic
vegetation and by the presence of a bed devoid of topsoil containing
waterborne deposits on exposed soil, parent material or bedrock and which
flows to a water body or wetland as defined. This definition does not
include the term “stream” as defined elsewhere in this chapter, and only
applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the Shoreland
Zone of the receiving water body or wetland.[Added 11-5-1991; amended
6-13-2006; 11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
UMBRELLA — A portable, usually cloth, canopy to provide protection
against the weather that is fastened to a frame with hinged ribs that
radiate from the center pole which may be attached to a patio table.[Added
11-2-1999]
UNDERTAKING ESTABLISHMENT — A dwelling or other structure used
and occupied by a professional licensed mortician for burial preparation and
funeral services.
UPLAND EDGE — See "wetland, upland edge."[Added 11-5-1991]
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or any building or structure
thereon is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY —
USE, FUNCTIONALLY WATER DEPENDENT — Those uses that require, for
their primary purpose, location on submerged lands or that require direct
access to, or location in, inland waters and that cannot be located away
from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to commercial
and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat
A use which is:
(1) Subordinate to and serves a principal use;
Subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use
served;
(2)
Located on the same lot as the principal use served, except as
otherwise expressly authorized by this chapter; and
(3)
(4) Customarily incidental to the principal use.
A.
An accessory use shall not include any use injurious or offensive to the
neighborhood as initially determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B.
Allowed off-street parking shall always be considered a permitted
accessory use when required or provided to serve a permitted use in
any district. [Added 6-13-2017]
C.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:670
storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail
and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities,
shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and
channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon waterborne
transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water
that cannot be reasonably located or operated at an inland site, and uses
that primarily provide general public access to inland and tidal
waters.[Added 6-8-2010]
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use which, at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this chapter, is not a permitted use in the district in which
it is situated.
USE, PERMITTED — A use which may be established in a particular district,
provided it conforms to all the requirements, standards, and regulations of
such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL — A use other than one which is wholly incidental or
accessory to another use on the same lot.[Amended 11-5-1991]
USE, TEMPORARY — A use established for a fixed period of time with the
intent to discontinue such upon the expiration of such time. Such uses do
not involve the construction or alteration of any permanent structure.118
UTILITIES — All public services, such as electricity, water, sanitary sewer,
stormwater drainage, telephone and cable television.
VACATION RENTAL — The use of a dwelling unit for rent to a family for
a period of less than 30 days and a minimum of five days. Time-share
property, as most recently defined in 33 M.R.S.A § 591, is also included in
this definition.[Added 6-13-2006]
VEGETATION — All live trees, shrubs, and other plants, including, without
limitation, trees both over and under four inches in diameter measured at 4
1/2 feet above ground level.[Amended 6-8-2010]
VELOCITY ZONE — An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore
to the inland limit of the primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high-velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources.[Added 6-8-2010]
VETERINARY HOSPITAL OR CLINIC — A building used for the diagnosis,
care and treatment of ailing or injured animals which may include overnight
accommodations. The overnight boarding of healthy animals shall be
considered a kennel.
VIEWSHED — An elevated or unobstructed location, position, or area that
permits an unhindered panoramic vista of particular interest or pleasure or
unique view to or from a particular point.[Added 11-3-2009]
VISUAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT — An assessment of impacts to the
viewshed from and to a proposed development. The assessment should
accurately show the proposed project to scale within the visual context of
118. Editor's Note: The former definition of "use, water-dependent," as amended 11-5-1991,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 6-8-2010.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:671
the viewshed. There are six components of a visual impact assessment:
defining the project setting and viewshed, identifying key views for visual
assessment, analyzing existing visual character, a depiction of the visual
appearance of project alternatives, an assessment of the visual impacts of
project alternatives and a proposal for methods to mitigate adverse visual
impacts.[Added 11-3-2009]
VISUALLY COMPATIBLE — A design that is visually or architecturally
harmonious with the predominate pattern of buildings when viewed from a
public street.[Added 11-2-1999]
VISUALLY COMPLEMENT — See "complement the visual character of the
district."[Added 11-2-1999]
VOLUME OF A STRUCTURE — The volume of all portions of a structure
enclosed by a roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the exterior
faces of these walls and roof.
WALLS, FREESTANDING OR ORNAMENTAL — Structural or nonstructural
walls that are not part of a building or structure, such as retaining walls or
walls for enclosing or screening areas or facilities.[Added 11-2-1999]
WAREHOUSING AND STORAGE FACILITY — A structure for the storage of
merchandise or commodities, including bulk storage and bulk sales outlet.
WATER BODIES, GREAT POND — Any inland body of water which in a
natural state has a surface area in excess of 10 acres, and any inland body
of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess
of 30 acres except for the purposes of this chapter, where the artificially
formed or increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land
held by a single owner.[Added 11-5-1991]
WATER BODIES, GREAT POND CLASSIFIED GPA — Any great pond
classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 465-A. This classification includes
some but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined as great
ponds.[Added 11-5-1991]
WATER BODIES, RIVER — Any free-flowing body of water from that point at
which it provides drainage for a watershed of 25 square miles to its mouth.
WATER BODIES, STREAM — A free-flowing body of water from the outlet
of a great pond or the confluence of two perennial streams, as depicted by
a solid blue line on the most recent edition of a United States Geological
Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map or, if not available, a fifteenminute
series topographic map, to the point where the body of water
becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland within a
shoreland zone.[Amended 11-5-1991; 5-4-1992; 5-6-1996;
6-13-2006119]
WATER CROSSING — Any project extending from one bank to the opposite
bank of a river, stream, tributary stream, or wetland, whether under,
119. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:672
through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include but may not
be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and
cables, as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition
includes crossings for timber-harvesting equipment and related
activities.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 11-4-2008; 11-3-2009]
WATER-DEPENDENT USE — See "use, water-dependent."[Added
11-5-1991]
WETLAND — A coastal or freshwater wetland.[Amended 11-5-1991;
6-13-2006120]
WETLAND, COASTAL — All tidal and subtidal lands, all lands with
vegetation present that is tolerant of saltwater and occurs primarily in a
saltwater or estuarine habitat, and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat or
other contiguous lowland that is subject to tidal action during the highest
tide level for the year in which an activity is proposed, as identified in tide
tables published by the National Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands include
coastal portions of sand dunes.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 6-13-2006;
11-4-2008; 11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
WETLAND, FORESTED — A freshwater wetland dominated by woody
vegetation that is six meters (approximately 19.7 feet) tall or taller.[Added
5-4-1992; amended 6-13-2006121]
WETLAND, FRESHWATER — Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas, which are of 80,000 contiguous square feet or more or are
wetlands adjacent to any surface water body; and inundated or saturated
by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to
support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Freshwater
wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do
not conform to the criteria of this definition.[Added 11-5-1991; amended
5-4-1992; 6-13-2006122]
WETLAND, UPLAND EDGE — The boundary between upland and wetland.
For purposes of a coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the
landward limits of the salt-tolerant vegetation and/or the highest annual
tide, including all areas affected by tidal action. For purposes of a
freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not
saturated for a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or where
the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation but such vegetation
is dominated by woody stems that are six meters (approximately 20 feet)
120. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
121. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
122. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that it shall apply retroactively to all
proceedings, applications and/or petitions pending on or commenced after 9-6-2005,
notwithstanding the provisions of 1 M.R.S.A. § 302.
§ 125-109 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-109
109:673
tall or taller.[Added 11-5-1991; amended 6-13-2006; 11-4-2008;
6-8-2010]
WHARF — See "structure, water-related."
WHOLESALE BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any business, housed in a
permanent structure, engaged in the sale of goods in large amounts to
retailers or jobbers, rather than directly to consumers.
WILDLIFE — All vertebrate species (animals with backbones), except fish.
WILDLIFE HABITAT, SIGNIFICANT — Areas identified by a governmental
agency such as the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as
having significant value as habitat for animals and any areas identified in
the municipality's Comprehensive Plan.[Added 5-3-1999]
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT PRACTICES — Activities engaged in for the
exclusive purpose of management of wildlife populations by manipulation
of their environment for the benefit of one or more species. Such practices
may include, but not be limited to, harvesting or removal of vegetation,
controlled burning, planting, impounding water, controlled hunting and
trapping, relocation of wildlife, predator and disease control, and
installation of artificial nesting sites, provided that such activities are
specifically controlled and designed for the purpose of managing such
species.
WINDOW — An opening in the wall of a building for the admission of light
or air that is usually closed by casements or sashes containing transparent
or translucent material.[Added 11-5-1991]
WIND TURBINE — The blades, rotor, and associated mechanical and
electrical conversion components mounted on top of the supporting
tower.[Added 11-3-2009]
WOODY VEGETATION — Live trees or woody, nonherbaceous
shrubs.[Added 11-4-2008]
YARD — The area of land on a lot not occupied by buildings.
YARD, FRONT — The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building between the front lot line and the nearest part of any
building on the lot and extending the entire width of the lot.
YARD, REAR — The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building between the rear lot line and the nearest part of any
building on the lot and extending the entire width of the lot.
YARD, SIDE — The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
principal building between a side lot line and the nearest part of any
building on the lot, extending from the front yard to the rear line or a front
line shall be deemed a side line.
§ 125-109 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-109
109:674
ARTICLE XIII
Design Review
[Added 11-2-1999]
§ 125-110. Purpose of design review.
The purpose of design review is to provide for the regulation of building
and site design within designated areas of the Town of Bar Harbor as
proposed in the Town's adopted Comprehensive Plan in order to promote
the following goals:
§ 125-111. Design Review Board.
The education, economics, and the general welfare of the Town, its
residents, and guests;
A.
The protection and preservation of buildings, places, and things of
aesthetic, historic, cultural, or architectural value;
B.
The continued maintenance and improvement of existing structures in
a timely and responsible manner;
C.
The fostering of a positive and identifiable image to encourage
continued private and public interest, investment, and development
within the designated area;
D.
The construction and maintenance of aesthetically pleasing structures
using materials compatible with those materials and buildings that exist
in their immediate area; and
E.
The ability of the Design Review Board to carry out its task in a timely
and fair manner with the best interests of the Town, its residents,
property owners, and consumers in mind using the regulations,
definitions, and standards of this article.
F.
Creation and composition. There is hereby created a Design Review
Board which shall consist of seven members appointed by the Town
Council, who shall be residents of the Town of Bar Harbor, interested in
the preservation and development of the Community.
A.
Transition. Upon adoption of this article, the former Board of Review
shall become the Design Review Board, the members of the Board of
Review shall become the members of the Design Review Board with
the same terms of service, the Design Review Board shall assume all of
the functions previously performed by the Board of Review, and the two
additional members shall be appointed by the Town Council. The Design
Review Board may be referred to as the "Review Board" or "Board."
B.
Jurisdiction. The Review Board's jurisdiction shall be limited to the
Design Review Overlay District identified in § 125-112A. The Review
Board shall be concerned with those elements of development,
redevelopment, rehabilitation and/or preservation that affect the visual
C.
§ 125-110 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-111
109:675
§ 125-112. Applicability of design review.
quality of the district. In Downtown Village Districts, this review
includes views from public streets and parking lots, as well as the view
from the waterfront. In the Town Hill Business District, all sides of the
building and the overall property development are subject to review.
The Board shall not consider the interior floor plan layout of buildings
as part of its review. [Amended 11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
D. Term of office. The term of office shall be for three years.
Members serve without pay. Members of the Board shall serve without
pay but shall be reimbursed for any and all authorized expenses
incurred personally in carrying out the purposes of this article.
E.
Organization. The Board shall elect from its membership a Chair and
a Vice Chair who shall serve for terms of one year and who shall be
eligible for re-election. The Chair shall preside over the Board and have
the right to vote. In an absence or disability of the Chair, the Vice Chair
shall perform the duties of the Chair.
F.
Staff assistance. The Code Enforcement Officer and Town Planner shall
provide such technical, administrative, and clerical assistance as
required by the Board subject to the approval of the Town Manager.
G.
Professional assistance. The Board, subject to the Town Council's
consent, shall have the right to retain and pay for the services and
expenses of professional help needed in carrying out the purpose of
this article. If the review of an application requires outside professional
assistance, the Board may require the payment of a technical assistance
fee in accordance with § 125-65D to defray the Town's costs in
obtaining such assistance.
H.
Meetings. The Board shall hold regular meetings, at least monthly, to
review applications for certificates of appropriateness. All meetings of
the Board shall be recorded.
I.
Design Review Overlay Districts. [Amended 11-4-2003; 11-2-2004;
6-9-2009; 11-3-2009]
The provisions of this article shall apply only within the geographic
limits of the following Design Review Overlay District, hereinafter
called the "district.”
(1)
Boundaries of the Design Review Overlay District. The district
shall include the following neighborhood districts as shown on the
Official Neighborhood Districts Map of Bar Harbor: the Downtown
Village I District; Downtown Village II District; the Shoreland
General Development I District; Shoreland General Development II
District; the Village Historic District; and the Town Hill Business
District. The district is depicted on the map titled "Design Review
Overlay District of the Town of Bar Harbor, Maine." The district
(2)
A.
§ 125-111 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-112
109:676
also includes all bed-and-breakfast uses and individual properties
with the following uses, regardless of their district location: TA-1,
TA-3, TA-4, and TA-6. The district also includes properties listed
in Appendix A and/or Appendix B of this chapter.123 [Amended
6-8-2010; 6-14-2016]
The district also includes the districts and area included in the Sign
Ordinance, § 125-67BB.
(3)
Activities subject to design review. Any of the following activities shall
be undertaken within the designated district only after a certificate of
appropriateness has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer of
the Town of Bar Harbor after review and approval by the Review Board:
[Amended 11-4-2003; 5-3-2004; 11-2-2004]
The demolition, in whole or in part, of a building or structure
classified as historic as denoted in Appendix A and/or B or is a bedand-
breakfast I, II or IV TA-1, -3, -4 or -6, respectively. [Amended
6-8-2010]
(1)
The moving or relocation of a building, sign or structure classified
as historic as denoted in Appendix A and/or B or is a bed-andbreakfast
I, II or IV TA-1, -3, -4 or -6, respectively. [Amended
6-8-2010]
(2)
Any material change, other than routine maintenance and repair
and minor renovations as outlined in Subsection C, in the exterior
appearance of an existing building, sign, fence, or structure
classified as historic as denoted in Appendix A and/or B or is a bedand-
breakfast, TA-1, -3, -4 or -6, respectively, including additions,
reconstruction, alterations, or maintenance involving a change in
the exterior color or materials. [Amended 6-8-2010]
(3)
Any new construction of a principal or accessory building or
structure, except for lots with the principal use of a single- or twofamily
dwelling;
(4)
Any material change, other than routine maintenance and repair
and minor renovations as outlined in Subsection C, in the exterior
appearance of an existing nonhistoric building or structure, except
for lots with the principal use of a single- or two-family dwelling,
such as additions, reconstruction, alterations, or maintenance
involving a change in the exterior color, if the change is subject to
view from a public street;
(5)
Any change in existing fences and/or retaining, ornamental or
other freestanding walls or the construction of new fences and/or
freestanding walls on a parcel, except for lots with the principal
use of a single or two-family dwelling, if the wall or fence is located
along a public street right-of-way;
(6)
B.
123. Editor's Note: Said appendixes are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 125-112 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-112
109:677
The erection of a new sign, the relocation of an existing sign,
approval of a signage plan and its specific content as per §
125-67BB(3)(c), or the modification of an existing sign which
changes the size, color, lighting, or graphic design of the sign,
except for lots with the principal use of a single or two-family
dwelling.
(7)
The seasonal closure of a business involving the placement of
window coverings or other activities which alter the exterior
appearance of the property and can be seen from a public street.
(Note: The certificate of appropriateness obtained initially shall
remain in effect as long as the closure treatment remains
unchanged.)
(8)
Activities not subject to design review. The following activities are not
subject to design review:
The construction of a new principal or accessory building or
structure or the modification of an existing nonhistoric building
or structure used entirely for single- or two-family dwelling
occupancy. [Amended 5-3-2004]
(1)
The erection or modification of signs, freestanding walls, fences,
landscaping or similar activities at a property used entirely for
single- or two-family dwelling occupancy. [Amended 5-3-2004]
(2)
Temporary or emergency activities intended to protect a property
from damage as a result of a natural event, such as a storm, or
to secure a property from further damage following a storm, fire,
or similar event. All permanent improvements or repairs shall be
subject to design review.
(3)
Routine maintenance or repair where no change is made to the
exterior appearance of the structure or grounds. The following list
illustrates the types of work that a property owner may undertake
without a certificate of appropriateness:
(a) Repainting using the existing colors.
(b) Replacement of window glass.
(c) Caulking and weatherstripping.
(d) Installation or removal of window air conditioners.
Installation or changes of mechanical equipment, such as
heating and air-conditioning units, television antennas/satellite
dishes, and garbage containers, as long as it is completely
screened from view by landscaping or fencing.
(e)
Repair of roofing materials as long as the material is of a
similar color, texture and general appearance.
(f)
(4)
C.
§ 125-112 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-112
109:678
Replacement of missing or deteriorated siding, gutters, trim,
porch flooring, steps, etc., using replacement materials that
match the original and that do not damage or eliminate
architectural features.
(g)
Repair or replacement of masonry foundations where the
original foundation material is retained or where any new
material matches the original in color, material, and
appearance [including the installation of metal foundation
vents (side and rear only) and the replacement of access doors
which cannot be seen from the street].
(h)
Repointing and other masonry repairs where the color and
composition of the mortar, brick or stone match the original.
(i)
Replacement of storm windows or doors provided that the trim
color is white or compliments the building's trim color.
(j)
(k) Installing house numbers and mailboxes.
Minor renovations that do not include any changes in the exterior
appearance of the building, such as:
Replacing old windows with new windows of the same size and
material.
(a)
Replacing old siding with new siding of the same material and
color.
(b)
Replacing old roofing with new roofing with the same color and
style.
(c)
(5)
Renovation or new construction which is limited to the following
types of improvements: [Added 11-8-2011]
Exterior building facade paint color selected from the Design
Review Board approved color chart(s). The color chart(s) can
be obtained from the Planning Department and may be
updated from time to time pursuant to Design Review Board
approval. Colors not listed on the color chart(s) require a
certificate of appropriateness from the Design Review Board.
(a)
(b) (Reserved)124
(c) (Reserved)125
(d) (Reserved)126
(6)
124. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(6)(b), regarding replacement of certain signs, was
repealed 6-14-2016. See now § 125-67BB(6)(o).
125. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(6)(c), regarding tenant signage, was repealed
6-14-2016. See now § 125-67BB(6)(o).
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(6)(d), regarding sandwich board signs, was repealed
6-14-2016. See now § 125-67BB(6)(o).
§ 125-112 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-112
109:679
Installation of roof-mounted solar collection panels and
appurtenant equipment. [Amended 6-14-2016]
(e)
Retractable awnings made of fabric material. Fabric may be
striped or solid in color, and must be listed on the approved
color chart for awnings in order to be eligible for an exemption.
Lettering or wording shall not be printed on the awning unless
otherwise approved through the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness.
(f)
Installation of lighting for signage, provided such lighting
complies with § 125-67Z.
(g)
Classification of buildings, signs, and structures. Within the district, all
buildings and structures shall be divided into two classes, historic and
nonhistoric. [Amended 11-4-2003]
Historic buildings and structures. For the purposes of this article,
buildings and structures possessing identified historic or
architectural merit of a degree warranting their preservation shall
be classified as historic.
Those buildings or structures which meet one or more of the
following criteria shall be considered as historic, noting that
they may not all meet state or federal criteria for official
designation as historic properties:
Buildings or structures at which events occur or have
occurred that contribute to, are identified with, or
significantly represent or exemplify the broad cultural,
political, economic, military, social, or sociological history
of Bar Harbor and/or the nation. These include sites and
buildings at which the public may gain insight or see
examples of particular items or patterns relevant to North
American heritage.
[1]
Buildings or structures importantly associated with
historical personages.
[2]
Buildings or structures importantly associated with
historic examples of a great idea or ideal.
[3]
Buildings or structures or structural remains embodying
examples of architectural types of specimens valuable for
study of a period, style, or method of building
construction, of community organization and living, or a
single site representing the work of a master builder,
designer, architect, or landscape architect.
[4]
Buildings or structures contributing to the visual
continuity and aesthetic value of the district.
[5]
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 125-112 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-112
109:680
§ 125-113. Application and review procedures.
Buildings or structures currently on, or eligible for, the
National Register of Historic Places or listing as a National
Historic Landmark.
[6]
A list of the properties meeting one or more of these criteria is
contained in Appendixes A and B.127 The Board shall annually
review both the criteria and the properties included on the
list and shall make recommendations to the Town Meeting for
modifications to the criteria and additions to, or deletions from,
the list as it deems necessary to accomplish the objectives of
these design review provisions.
(b)
The owner of any property within the district may submit a
written request to the Board asking for a review of the historic
or architectural merit of his/her property and consideration
of its inclusion on or deletion from the list. In such cases,
the Board shall review the property for conformance with the
criteria and recommend adding or deleting the property as
appropriate to the Town Meeting.
(c)
Nonhistoric buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
not classified as historic based upon the criteria of Subsection D(1)
and included on the list of historic properties shall be classified as
nonhistoric.
(2)
Preapplication procedures.
Prior to making application for a certificate of appropriateness,
an applicant shall familiarize herself/himself with the requirements
and procedures of this section and obtain a copy of the procedures,
standards, Design Review Handbook, and application form from
the Planning Department. Applicants are welcome to observe a
meeting of the Design Review Board to familiarize themselves with
the Board's procedures.
(1)
Applicants are encouraged to meet informally with the Town
Planner or Code Enforcement Officer to discuss their project prior
to preparing and submitting an application or making any binding
arrangements for the proposed improvements.
(2)
All preapplication activities shall be informational in nature, and
any discussions during these activities shall in no way be construed
to be a decision or to bind future actions of the Board. No
preapplication discussions shall cause an application to be
considered to be a pending application or proceeding under 1
M.R.S.A. § 302.
(3)
A.
127. Editor's Note: Appendixes A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-112 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-113
109:681
Application submission and review procedures. The applicant shall
prepare and submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness
together with supporting documentation that meets the requirements
set forth below, provided that all time limits provided in this section
may be extended by the mutual agreement of the applicant and the
Board. The submission shall be processed as follows:
The application shall be submitted to the Planning Department at
least seven days prior to the meeting of the Review Board at which
the application will be considered.
(1)
Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Department shall
give the applicant a dated receipt and review the submission for
completeness within three days.
(2)
If the Planning Department finds that the application is complete,
that all required information has been submitted, the Planning
Department shall place the application on the agenda for the next
scheduled meeting of the Board.
(3)
If the Planning Department finds the application to be incomplete,
it shall return it to the applicant with a written indication of the
additional information and/or revisions needed and shall inform
the applicant that the application will not be processed until a
complete application is submitted. If an application is returned to
the applicant on the basis that it is incomplete, the applicant may
appeal this decision, in writing, to the Design Review Board and the
Board shall consider the completeness of the application at its next
meeting. If the Board finds that the application is complete, it shall
continue with the review of the application.
(4)
The Board shall consider an application at its next scheduled
meeting after it is determined to be complete. The applicant and/or
his/her representative(s) shall attend the meeting and shall explain
the proposed activities to the Board and answer any questions
about the application. The burden is on the applicant to
demonstrate that the application meets the requirements of
§ 125-114. The applicant and/or his/her representative(s) may
present any information to the Board that he/she feels will
demonstrate compliance with the standards.
(5)
The Board shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
an application within 30 days of its initial consideration. The Board
may extend this period to 45 days for projects involving the
construction of a new building or an addition to an existing
building. If the Board fails to act within the period provided the
application shall be deemed to have been denied.
(6)
The Board may impose conditions on the approval but only those
that are necessary to assure compliance with the standards of
approval. In making its decision, the Board shall make written
findings of fact establishing that the proposal does or does not
(7)
B.
§ 125-113 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-113
109:682
meet the standards. Following its action, the Board shall notify the
Code Enforcement Officer of its decision and instruct the Code
Enforcement Officer as to whether a certificate of appropriateness
shall be issued.
Coordination with site plan review.
The design review and site plan review requirements deal with
different aspects of a project. Some of the activities subject to
design review may also require that the applicant obtain site plan
approval from the Planning Board. These include the construction
of a new building, projects involving the expansion or renovation of
an existing building, and situations in which the use of the building
is being changed.
(1)
Prior to preparing an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the applicant should review this chapter and/or
meet with the Town Planner to determine if site plan approval is
required in addition to design review. If site plan review is also
required, the applicant may submit concurrent applications to the
two Boards and may request that the two applications be reviewed
concurrently.
(2)
The application for design review must be consistent with the
activities and design submitted as part of the site plan review
application. If either Board's review and approval of the plan
results in revisions or conditions which affect aspects of the project
subject to the other Board's review, both the applications must
be modified accordingly. Projects subject to both design review
and site plan review must comply with both approvals and any
conditions imposed as part of the approvals.
(3)
C.
Process for the demolition of a historic building. This Subsection D
establishes two processes for the demolition of a building or structure
classified as historic. The first allows for immediate demolition with the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, while the second allows for
delayed demolition if a certificate of appropriateness is not issued.
Immediate demolition.
If the owner of a building or structure classified as historic
seeks to demolish the building or structure in whole or in part,
the Review Board may approve the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness for the demolition if the property owner shows
that the application meets the standards of § 125-114F(2).
(a)
If a certificate of appropriateness is approved, the applicant
may immediately apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a
demolition permit. If the Board fails to approve the issuance
of a certificate of appropriateness permitting the demolition,
the applicant may proceed under the delayed demolition
procedures.
(b)
(1)
D.
§ 125-113 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-113
109:683
Delayed demolition.
If the Board fails to issue a certificate of appropriateness, the
owner of a building or structure classified as historic may
apply for a permit to demolish the building in accordance with
the following procedures. The building may be demolished;
provided, however, that before a demolition permit is issued,
four months' notice of the proposed demolition shall be given.
(a)
The objective of this provision is to further the purposes of this
article by preserving historic buildings which are important to
the education, culture, traditions, and the economic values of
the Town and to afford the Town, interested persons, historic
societies or organizations the opportunity to acquire or to
arrange for the preservation of such buildings.
(b)
The Board may at any time during such stay approve a
certificate of appropriateness in accordance with
§ 125-114F(2) in which event a demolition permit shall be
issued without further delay.
(c)
Public notice of the pending demolition shall be provided as
follows:
Notice of the proposed demolition shall be posted on the
premises of the building or structure proposed for
demolition in a location clearly visible from the street,
shall be mailed to the Maine State Historic Preservation
Office, and shall be delivered to the Bar Harbor Historical
Society.
[1]
Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general local
circulation at least three times prior to demolition, the
final notice of which shall be not less than 15 days prior to
the date of the permit, and the first notice of which shall
be published no more than 15 days after the application
for a permit to demolish is filed.
[2]
(d)
(2)
Submission requirements.
The activities covered by design review vary widely in their scope
and complexity and, hence, in the type and amount of information
needed by the Review Board to determine if the proposed activities
are consistent with the standards of this section.
(1)
In all cases, the burden is on the applicant to provide the Board
with adequate information to determine the appropriateness of the
project.
(2)
To aid the applicant in preparing his/her application, the minimum
submission requirements shown in the following table have been
established. Applicants should submit additional information if they
(3)
E.
§ 125-113 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-113
109:684
§ 125-114. Design review standards.
feel that is necessary or helpful in demonstrating that the proposed
activities are consistent with the standards.
The following exhibits128 shall be submitted as part of an
application for a certificate of appropriateness. Projects involving
more than one activity must submit the exhibits required for each
of the proposed activities. For example, a project involving the
painting of an existing building and the installation of a new sign
is required to submit the exhibits required for both aspects of the
project.
(4)
In reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Design Review Board shall approve the issuance of a certificate if
it finds the application and proposed activities are consistent with
the following standards, or that they will be consistent as a result of
conditions of approval imposed on the application.
The standards are broken down into five categories:
(a) Standards relating to visual compatibility;
Standards for materials and design details for structural
projects;
(b)
Standards for materials and design details for accessory
projects;
(c)
(d) Standards for signs; and
(e) Standards for historic buildings.
(1)
In reviewing applications, the Board shall consider the appropriate
sections of each of these categories and shall find the project
in conformance with all relevant provisions before approving the
issuance of a certificate of appropriateness.
(2)
Appendix B contains a list of locally significant buildings within
the district that reflect the type of design that these standards
are intended to foster. These buildings should be viewed as the
standard of design against which proposed projects are judged.
The intention of providing this list is not that new proposals should
seek to replicate the specific design of one of these buildings but
rather to provide examples of the overall level of design that is
deemed to be appropriate within the district. In addition, pictorial
examples of acceptable treatments of various features are provided
for many of the standards in the Design Review Handbook.
(3)
A.
Standards relating to visual compatibility. The following standards for
visual compatibility shall apply to all activities subject to a certificate
B.
128. Editor's Note: See Table 2 included at the end of this chapter.
§ 125-113 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:685
of appropriateness within the Design Review Overlay District. These
standards are intended to guide the design, construction, and
maintenance of buildings, improvements, signs, and other visual
features within the district to assure that they complement the visual
character of the district and to serve as a foundation for the review
of an application for a certificate of appropriateness. These standards
are intended to be general statements of design principles to which
activities within the district are required to conform.
Building height. The height of new buildings and additions or
modifications to existing buildings shall be visually compatible with
adjacent buildings as seen from public streets. Where an
established pattern of building heights exists, the height or
apparent height of new, expanded, or modified buildings as seen
from the public street shall maintain a complementary pattern.
(1)
Building scale and design.
The size of a building and the building mass in relationship
to the site and surrounding features shall visually complement
the buildings, squares, and places to which it is visually
related.
(a)
Where there is an established pattern of building size or scale
as viewed from a public street, new buildings or modifications
to existing buildings shall be designed to maintain the existing
(b)
(2)
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:686
pattern. If there is an established pattern of buildings with
narrow facades on the street, a new building shall maintain
this visual pattern by limiting the size of the street facade or by
designing the facade to appear as a number of narrow facades
or through other approaches.
The design of buildings shall visually complement the district.
The design of buildings shall also conform to the following
standards:
The facade facing the street shall be treated as a front
facade. The facade shall incorporate pedestrian-scale
design features such as doors and windows to create a
character that complements the district. Windows or
architectural treatments designed to simulate windows
shall comprise no less than 20% of the exterior wall
surface. The facade shall be designed to avoid large areas
of blank wall space.
[1]
Ground floor facades facing a public street must
incorporate arcades, display windows, awnings, or other
features to add visual interest to the building.
[2]
Buildings used for retail or other public uses shall be
designed to have clearly defined entrances that are
visually compatible with the visual character of the
district.
[3]
Roofs shall be designed to complement visually the overall
visual character of the district. A new building shall have
a roofline that is similar to adjacent buildings if there
is an established pattern of rooflines. If there is not an
established pattern, new buildings shall have pitched or
gabled roofs to the extent practical. If a pitched roof is
not practical, false fronts or other design elements shall be
used to create the appearance of a pitched roof. Accessory
buildings, canopies, and other structures shall have
rooflines that are visually compatible with the roofline of
the principal building.
[4]
The treatment of accessory buildings and structures shall
be compatible with the principal building and shall use
similar materials, details, and level of trim.
[5]
New buildings with more than 5,000 square feet of first
floor area shall be designed so that the building scale
is visually compatible with the character of the district.
The overall mass of the building shall be visually broken
into smaller elements through the physical layout of the
building and/or the design of the facades.
[6]
(c)
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:687
Proportionality of the front or street facade.
The ratio of the width of the front or street facade to the
building height shall complement the visual character of the
district.
(a)
Where an established pattern of facade proportion exists, new
or modified buildings shall maintain the established pattern.
If there is a pattern of tall, narrow buildings, a new building
that is wider than it is tall is inappropriate unless the facade
is broken into segments that maintain the established
proportions.
(b)
(3)
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:688
Proportionality of windows.
The ratio of the width of windows to the height of the windows
shall complement the visual character of the district.
(a)
Modifications to existing buildings shall maintain the existing
proportionality. The modification of the facade of existing
buildings to change or eliminate windows shall be done in a
manner that maintains the established relationship of windows
to wall. The "bricking up" of windows is discouraged unless the
relationship can be maintained in other ways.
(b)
Where an established pattern of window proportions exists
among a group of buildings or along a block face, new or
modified buildings shall maintain the established pattern.
(c)
(4)
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:689
Building spacing. In the Downtown Village Districts, where an
established pattern exists with respect to the placement of
buildings on the lot vis-a-vis the lot lines, new or modified buildings
shall reflect the established pattern to the extent allowed by the
setback provisions of the district in which they are located. In an
area where the existing buildings all extend the full width of the lot,
constructing a new building so that it is set back from the lot line
is not consistent with this guideline unless the setback is required
to meet zoning requirements. [Amended 11-3-2009; 6-8-2010]
(5)
Relationship of the building to the street.
The relationship of a new or modified building or structure
with the street shall visually complement neighboring
buildings, the overall character of the district, and other
buildings to which it is visually related to the extent permitted
by the setback requirements of the district in which it is
located.
(a)
Where there is an established front setback pattern, new
buildings or structures shall be located to maintain the
established pattern if permitted by the zoning requirements.
If an established pattern does not exist, new buildings shall
be located in a manner that is compatible with the overall
(b)
(6)
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:690
character of the district. New or reconstructed buildings shall
be located on the lot so that the building is set back from the
street no more than the average of the setbacks for buildings
in similar locations in the district.
For buildings on corner lots, the setback relationship on both
streets shall be maintained through the placement of buildings
and other site features.
(c)
Pedestrian relationships and facilities.
Where sidewalks exist in front of the parcel, the site shall be
designed to provide for pedestrian access to the front entrance
of the building without the need to cross parking areas or
access drives.
(a)
The walkway to the front entrance shall be constructed with
materials which contrast with the paving of the vehicular
areas, that provide a safe and inviting access to the building,
and that are visually compatible with other pedestrian facilities
in the neighborhood.
(b)
If a sidewalk along the street is interrupted or crossed by a
proposed driveway, access road, or other vehicular facility, the
sidewalk material must be maintained across the driveway or
another visually compatible method used to clearly delineate
the sidewalk from the drive.
(c)
(7)
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:691
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:692
Motor vehicle facilities and services. The location and design of
facilities for motor vehicles, including parking lots, driveways,
access roads, drive-through facilities, and service and fueling
areas, shall visually complement the overall character of the
district. The design of the site shall also conform to the following
standards:
Vehicular facilities shall not be located between the front of the
building and the street.
(a)
Access drives, driveways, and entrances or exits to drivethrough
services shall not pass between the building and the
sidewalk where a sidewalk exists.
(b)
(c) Parking lots shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
Overhead doors and service areas shall be located on the side
or rear of the building and must be screened from view from a
public street.
(d)
Drive-through services shall be designed to keep vehicular
activity to the side and/or rear of the building and shall prevent
the queuing of vehicles between the front of the building and
the street or in other areas where it is visually incompatible.
(e)
(8)
Multiple buildings on a lot in the Town Hill Business District. In
the Town Hill Business District, the layout of buildings on a lot
shall reflect the layout of other lots in the district with multiple
buildings. The arrangement of the buildings should be visually
compatible with the street and with the buildings on the lot.
[Added 11-3-2009]
(9)
Viewshed in Town Hill Business District. Building height and
placement are subject to further review in the Town Hill Business
District to determine any visual impacts to retain the vista along
Route 102 from the Crooked Road intersection to the Pine Heath
Road intersection. [Added 11-3-2009]
(10)
Standards for materials and design details for structural projects. The
following standards are intended to assure that proposals conform to
the quality of design that has historically been associated with buildings
within the district. The structural standards have been designed to
promote compatibility with Bar Harbor's historic character and its
scenic location. Certain types of design are inappropriate within the
designated Design Review Overlay Districts since they will not meet
these standards and thus do not enhance the existing visual character
or preserve Bar Harbor's uniqueness. [Amended 11-3-2009]
Construction standards. With the advent of many new exterior
materials, the standards are not intended to prohibit the use of
all new materials. Therefore, any quality material that simulates
traditional features will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. The
(1)
C.
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:693
following standards apply to the construction of new buildings,
additions to existing buildings, reconstruction, and major
renovations:
Siding material.
Siding is applied as the exposed surface on the outside
walls of buildings to provide a barrier against the
penetration and infiltration of weather and at the same
time enhance the visual and architectural quality of the
structure in keeping with other buildings in the district.
The selected siding should be visually compatible with
other exterior finishes on the building and with those
buildings to which it is visually related.
[1]
The siding used on the building should be a material that
is in common use within the overlay district. The following
are appropriate siding materials:
[a] Clapboards/shiplap.
[b] Shingles/shakes.
Stucco/concrete. Stucco with wood trim interruption
(English Tudor) is acceptable. Concrete block and
poured or precast concrete are acceptable for
foundation and fire walls but are generally not
appropriate for wall surfaces that can be seen from a
public street. Masonry products designed to replicate
other appropriate materials are acceptable siding.
[c]
[d] Brick.
[e] Stone.
Vinyl/metal siding. Vinyl or metal siding designed to
replicate traditional siding material is appropriate but
flat or corrugated metal or plastic panels are
inappropriate as siding within the district.
[f]
In the Town Hill Business District, barn board, and
board and batten.
[g]
[2]
Unfinished plywood or composite flat sheet products such
as T-111 are not appropriate siding materials, except for
areas that cannot be seen from a public street.
[3]
(a)
Exterior finishes. The exterior finish of a structure represents
the final completion stage. Although this stage is one of the
simplest to alter, it is one of the most visible aspects of a
building, therefore great care must be taken in the selection of
the exterior finish for any structure. The following standards
shall be used for determining acceptable finish choices:
(b)
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:694
The colors shall be based upon the architectural style of
the structure as well as the period in which it was built;
[1]
The selected colors shall reflect hues and shades which
were available in the era and style depicted;
[2]
The paint colors shall be harmonious to and blend in with
the immediately adjacent structures in the area.
[3]
Windows.
Windows are glassed openings in the exterior walls of
buildings to admit light and air, allow for viewing, permit
merchandise display, and to enhance the architectural
beauty of the structure. The windows in a building shall
be visually compatible. Almost any style is appropriate
as long as the size is proportional to the building and
maintains the architectural continuity of the building.
[1]
Materials are appropriate if they simulate traditional
materials or are visually compatible with other
components of the building.
[2]
(c)
Doors and doorways (in the Downtown Village Districts only).
[Amended 6-8-2010]
Doors are a means of safe and orderly entrance to and
egress from buildings. As the entrance to the building, the
front or main door is often the focal point of the principal
facade. Therefore, care must be taken in designing the
doorway and selecting a door that is visually compatible
with the structure.
[1]
Doors and doorways shall conform to the following
standards:
Major store entrance doors shall be recessed from the
property line so as not to interfere with pedestrian
traffic when they are opened.
[a]
Front doors shall have transoms above to the full
height of store windows if this is consistent with the
established pattern of other entrance doors.
[b]
[2]
(d)
Roofing.
Roofing is intended to protect the horizontal portions of a
building from the penetration and infiltration of weather
while maintaining the architectural integrity of the
structure. The roofing material and color, if visible from a
public street, shall be selected to be visually compatible
with the style of the building and the other exterior
finishes and colors.
[1]
(e)
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:695
In the Downtown Village Districts, brightly colored metal,
plastic or fiberglass roofing is visually incompatible with
the character of the district and therefore inappropriate.
[Amended 6-8-2010]
[2]
Other materials are appropriate if it is demonstrated that
they are visually compatible with the overall building and
its environs.
[3]
In the Downtown Village Districts, appropriate roof colors
include neutral shades such as earth tones, greys, and
black. Bright or primary colors are not appropriate.
[Amended 6-8-2010]
[4]
Trim.
Trim is the molded and projecting woodwork or stonework
which frames a building and its changes in direction in an
aesthetically pleasing or bold fashion. The trim shall be
visually compatible with the style of the building and the
other exterior finishes.
[1]
The following materials are appropriate for use as trim:
wood, stone, brick, vinyl, and metal.
[2]
Other materials are appropriate if it is demonstrated that
they are visually compatible with the overall building.
[3]
Trim materials may be mixed and matched as long as
the style and color of the trim are consistent and visually
compatible with the other elements of the building.
[4]
(f)
Entrances.
In the Downtown Village Districts, an entrance is much
more than a doorway. It is a means of getting from the
street to the front door and may include changes in grade,
protection from the elements, and/or a degree of
landscaping and lighting. The entrance to the building
shall be visually compatible with the overall building
treatment and should be the focal point of the facade.
The entrance shall be designed and placed to have both
a visual and functional relationship to the street and
sidewalk. [Amended 6-8-2010]
[1]
The following are appropriate design treatments for
entrances: porticos, porches, decks, steps/ramps, and
canopies/awnings. Awnings and canopies must be
attached to the structure and shall function as an
extension of the building. Freestanding accessory
structures such as tents or canopies at the front of the
building are incompatible with the existing visual
[2]
(g)
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:696
character of the district and shall not be allowed.
Standards for awnings and canopies are in a later
section.129
The following are appropriate materials for use in
entrances: wood, vinyl, tile, stucco, stone, brick, concrete,
canvas, fiberglass, and metal.
[3]
Other materials are appropriate if it is demonstrated that
they are visually compatible with the overall building.
[4]
Relocation/demolition standards. The demolition or relocation of
the building should occur in a timely manner. After the relocation
or demolition has occurred, the lot must be cleared, graded, and
replanted within 30 days of the completion of the work and
maintained until the lot is reused.
(2)
Standards for seasonal closures.
The Town of Bar Harbor discourages the seasonal boarding up
of businesses. No matter how much effort is put into making
these closures look attractive, they give the Town the
appearance of being shut down, which is detrimental not only
to those businesses that remain open and to potential
customers, but also to local citizens and guests who view them
during the off-season. The Board strongly discourages the
placement of closure treatments involving the covering of
display windows before January 1.
(a)
Provisions for the seasonal closure of a business shall:
[1] Be visually compatible with the building.
Be architecturally similar to the building materials, design,
and color.
[2]
[3] Fit appropriately in the space being enclosed.
[4] Be safely and securely attached.
[5] Have a neat and clean appearance.
(b)
The most appropriate approach to the seasonal closure of a
business is for signs and window displays to remain in place.
Where this is not possible or desirable, other appropriate
approaches include leaving display spaces and windows empty,
installing storm doors and windows, and installing wood panels
or shutters over openings.
(c)
(3)
129. Editor's Note: See Subsection D(1) of this section.
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:697
Closure provisions that cover windows or display spaces with
materials such as bed sheets, paper, tarps, cardboard, or
bubble wrap or soaped or painted glass are inappropriate.
(d)
Signs shall be left in place or removed. The covering or
wrapping of signs with tarp or other plastic materials is not
appropriate. The use of a canvas cloth covering the sign, and
bearing the name of the business, is encouraged.
(e)
Standards for materials and design details for accessory projects. The
following standards apply to projects that do not involve the actual
structure of the building but significantly impact upon the visual
environment and the compatibility of the building with the character
of district. Separate standards are provided for awnings, canopies, and
umbrellas, outdoor displays, lighting, and landscaping. The accessory
standards have been designed to promote compatibility with the
district's historic character and its scenic location.
Standards for awnings, canopies, and umbrellas. The objective of
the Town is to encourage property owners and businesses to make
permanent improvements to the property in the district. Therefore,
the use of temporary structures is discouraged. At the same time,
the Board recognizes that awnings, canopies, and umbrellas can
provide cover, add color, provide shade, and serve as a transition
between the storefront and the upper facade in the case of awnings
and canopies.
General standards.
Rigid or fixed awnings, sunscreens, umbrellas, or
permanent canopies are not appropriate on any portion
of the premises or building unless the proposed awning,
sunscreen, umbrella, or permanent canopy is visually
compatible with the building and its surrounding area
considering the following:
[a] Its compatibility with the topography of the area.
That it is customary and incidental to the activity
being housed in the building or appropriate for that
location due to unique circumstances.
[b]
Its compatibility with similar elements of adjacent
properties.
[c]
That it is designed so that it will not cover unique or
architecturally significant building features.130
[d]
[1]
(a)
(b) Location and size of awnings and canopies.
(1)
D.
130. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(1)(a)[2], concerning standards applicable to any
awning or canopy, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 11-3-2009.
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:698
Awnings shall extend at least the full width of existing
window and door frames on the first floor.
[1]
Awnings on upper-floor windows shall be installed over
individual windows and shall complement the window
design, building architecture, and color.
[2]
Canopies or awnings shall be attached to the building and
not extend more than 12 feet from the wall (toward the
street) to which they are attached. In the case where an
awning follows another existing wall of the building at
right angles (such as an L or a U), it may extend out to the
point where it is parallel with the portion of the building
closest to the street.
[3]
Freestanding canopies or tents are inappropriate for
ongoing use. Tents are appropriate for use for periods of
not more than 72 hours with prior approval of the Code
Enforcement Officer and shall only be used for appropriate
outdoor functions, such as art shows, festivals, fairs,
weddings, and similar events.
[4]
A street level awning shall be at least 18 inches behind the
curb.
[5]
Awning design.
Awning construction and materials offer different patterns
and shapes. There are three basic shapes: 1/4 barrel, shed,
and domes.
[1]
The design review standards are not intended to restrict
the shape of awnings; however, the design shall be visually
compatible with and maintain the character of the
building. Side panels on awnings are discouraged but are
permitted if they are graphically treated so as to make the
panel compatible with the overall design of the building.
[2]
(c)
Awning color. The color of the material, and any graphics,
stripping, or pattern, shall be compatible with the building
architecture, materials, and color.
(d)
Awning materials.
The most common awning materials are canvas, vinyl,
vinyl-coated canvas, and canvas-like synthetic materials.
Glossy finish vinyl is not appropriate. Synthetic canvas is
available in acrylics, polyesters, nylons, and other manmade
materials. Any of these materials are appropriate.
[1]
Metal awnings and glass canopies detract from the
historic character of the community and are not
appropriate.
[2]
(e)
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:699
Awning lighting. Lighting shall conform to the requirements in
§ 125-67Z, Lighting Ordinance. [Amended 6-9-2009]
(f)
(2) (Reserved)131
Landscaping standards. The landscaping standards are intended
to maintain and enrich the character and beauty of the Town
through the regulation of landscaping which provides aesthetically
pleasing scenery, shelter and food for wildlife, natural boundaries
and buffers for people, and the control of erosion. The landscaping
in conjunction with the construction of a new building or an
addition to existing buildings, or major landscaping projects that
significantly alter the exterior appearance of a building that is
used in whole or in part for nonresidential purposes, is subject to
approval by the Design Review Board.
Materials.
Materials and types of vegetation for landscaping are too
numerous to list and most are acceptable; however, the
material chosen shall be visually compatible with the
building.
[1]
The use of invasive species as listed by the University
of Maine Cooperative Extension is discouraged. [Added
11-3-2009]
[2]
(a)
Design. The design of the landscape should enhance the
appearance of the building as well as the grounds.
Landscaping shall not block unique architectural features of
the building or appear disproportional to the lot and building
size.
(b)
Town Hill Business District plantings shall include street tree
plantings. Parking areas shall be screened from Route 102.
Shrubs and other materials shall enhance the buildings. All
other requirements in § 125-67H shall be followed. [Added
11-3-2009]
(c)
(3)
132Standards for historic buildings. The standards, as applicable in the
opinion of the Design Review Board, outlined in the United States
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic
Properties, as most recently updated, shall apply to all preservation
measures, demolition, relocation and renovations of buildings and
structures classified as historic in accordance with § 125-112D(1).
Additionally, the following standards apply: [Amended 11-2-2004]
E.
131. Editor'r Note: Former Subsection D(2), Standards for outdoor lighting, was repealed
11-4-2008.
132. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, Standards for signs, as amended 11-4-2003, was
repealed 6-9-2009. Said ordinance also redesignated former Subsection F as Subsection E.
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:700
Preservation of an historic building. A building or structure
classified as historic, or any part or appurtenance, including but
not limited to stone walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, and
signs, shall only be moved, reconstructed, altered, or maintained
in a manner which will preserve the historic and architectural
character of the building, structure or appurtenance. Provisions
for handicapped access as required by state and federal law shall
be provided in a manner which preserves the historic and
architectural character of the building or structure.
(1)
Demolition of an historic building. The Design Review Board shall
approve the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for the
demolition of an historic building only if the property owner shows
that the preservation of the building is not consistent with the
purposes of this article, that the building cannot be preserved
because of the structural condition of the building, or the cost of
renovations makes its retention infeasible.
(2)
Relocation of an historic building. The Design Review Board shall
approve the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for the
relocation of an historic building to another site only if it is shown
that the preservation on its existing site is not consistent with
the purposes of this article, that the building cannot be preserved
because of the structural condition of the building, or the cost of
renovations makes the retention infeasible.
(3)
Renovation or expansion of an historic building.
The design review requirements are intended to preserve and
protect, improve, and enhance the historic or architecturally
worthy buildings, structures, sites, monuments, streetscapes,
squares and neighborhoods of the district. Those buildings
classified as historic possess identified historic or architectural
merit of a degree warranting their preservation. Any building
designated as historic shall retain all of its original features to
the maximum extent feasible. Modifications or additions shall
maintain the architectural style and treatment of the original
building.
(a)
The following standards shall apply to the renovation or
expansion of an historic building:
All materials shall match the original materials in texture,
dimension, color, location, and design.
[1]
Existing features such as porches, steps, handrails,
balusters, cornices, columns, lintels, windows, fixtures,
hardware, doors, and roofs shall be retained.
[2]
The design of any modification of or addition to the
existing building shall maintain the architectural style of
[3]
(b)
(4)
§ 125-114 HEALTH AND SANITATION § 125-114
109:701
the existing building and shall conform to the existing
treatment with respect to trim and exterior finishes.
Handicapped access shall be located and constructed so
as not to obscure character-defining features of the
entranceway or porch.
[4]
Porches and steps shall not be enclosed in a manner that
destroys their intended appearance.
[5]
The selected paint colors shall be consistent with
Subsection C(1)(b).
[6]
Other standards. [Added 11-3-2009]
Town Hill Business District.
A visual impact assessment shall be submitted to the Board
to review the impacts from the development on the viewshed
from Route 102 in a southwesterly direction.
(a)
Building placement.
Multiple buildings on a lot shall be arranged such that the
smallest portion of a building, or the smallest building as
proposed, shall be along the street.
[1]
A principal building on a lot shall be arranged such that
the narrowest width of the building faces the street.
[2]
(b)
(1)
F.
§ 125-114 BAR HARBOR CODE § 125-114
109:702
Chapter 139
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. II.
Amusements — See Ch. 14.
Animals — See Ch. 18.
Disorderly houses — See Ch. 64.
Food and merchandise sales — See Ch. 94.
Land use — See Ch. 125.
Parks and public places — See Ch. 147.
§ 139-1. Findings and purpose.
§ 139-2. Certain noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others within the limits of the Town.
§ 139-3. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises enumerated.
The following noises and noise-producing acts, among others, are declared
to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter,
but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
It is found and declared that:
The making and creation of loud, unnecessary or unusual noises
within the limits of the Town of Bar Harbor are conditions which
have existed for some time, and the extent and volume of such
noises are increasing; and
(1)
The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary,
unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and
unnatural in their time, place and use affects and is a detriment
to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the residents of the Town of Bar Harbor.
(2)
A.
The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the
peace and quiet of the Town of Bar Harbor and its inhabitants.
B.
A. Horns, signaling devices, etc.:
§ 125-114 NOISE § 139-3
139:703
The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, or other vehicle anywhere within the limits of the
Town, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and
the sounding of any device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time.
(1)
The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or
electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated
by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when
traffic is for any reason held up.
(2)
Radios, phonographs, musical instruments, etc.
The use of, operation of or allowing the use or operation of any
radio, receiving set, musical instrument, amplifier, juke box,
phonograph, or other machine or device for producing,
reproducing or amplifying sound in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants.
(1)
It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section if such
sound is produced within a building, structure or vehicle between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner that, at a
distance of 25 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which
it is located, the volume, frequency, intensity, quality or duration of
the sound unreasonably annoys or disturbs a reasonable person's
normal sensibilities, endangers or injures the safety or health of
humans, or endangers or injures personal or real property.
(2)
B.
Sound-producing devices used for advertising: the use of, operation of
or allowing the use or operation of any radio, receiving set, musical
instrument, amplifier, juke box, phonograph, bell, horn or other
machine or device for producing, reproducing or amplifying sound
in such a manner as to cast upon the public street for the purpose
of commercial advertising or attracting the public to any building or
structure.
C.
Yelling, shouting, etc.: yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing
on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort, or repose of any person in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel,
motel, rooming house or other type of residence, or of any person in the
vicinity.
D.
Animals, birds, etc.: the keeping of any animal or bird which by causing
frequent or long-continued noise without provocation shall disturb the
comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity.
E.
Blowers, fans and engines: the operation of any noise-creating blower,
compressor, power fan, engine, motor boat, motor vehicle or other
machine, unless such equipment is equipped with a muffler device
F.
§ 139-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 139-3
139:704
§ 139-4. Quiet-hours construction permits.
§ 139-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
QUIET HOURS — The hours between and including 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
local time.
STRUCTURE — Shall be defined as provided by Town Code § 125-109.
sufficient to reduce such noise so that it does not unreasonably annoy
or disturb a reasonable person's normal sensibilities.
Loading or unloading; opening boxes: the creation of loud and excessive
noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
G.
Construction or repair of structures: the starting, idling, backing or
other operation of construction equipment and the excavation for or
erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any structure which causes
loud and unreasonable noise between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., except with a quiet-hours construction permit as provided below.
H.
Schools, courts, churches and hospitals: the creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same is in use or adjacent to any hospital
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution,
or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed in such street indicating that the same
is a school, hospital or court street.
I.
The Code Enforcement Officer may issue or renew a quiet-hours
construction permit only upon finding that:
The public health and safety will not be impaired by said
construction between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(1)
An urgent necessity exists. Completion of work below the high tide
mark shall be considered an urgent necessity.
(2)
A.
All quiet-hours construction permits shall meet the following
provisions:
The permit shall expire when the urgent necessity ceases to exist,
regardless of the term of the permit.
(1)
(2) The length of any one permit may not exceed three days.
(3) Permits may be renewed in additional three-day increments.
B.
The Town Council may set permit fees from time to time. No permit
shall be issued except upon payment of the applicable fee, if any.
C.
§ 139-3 NOISE § 139-6
139:705
§ 139-6. Certain noises permitted.
It being necessary to secure and promote the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the Town of Bar Harbor and
its inhabitants, maintenance construction and public safety activities of the
Town of Bar Harbor are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
§ 139-7. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter or any provision thereof shall be deemed a
public nuisance and may be subject to abatement by a restraining order
or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, in addition to the
general penalty set forth in § 1-18 of this Code.
Chapter 144
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, Committees and Commissions — See
Ch. 31, Art. V.
Food and merchandise sales — See Ch. 94.
Public places — See Ch. 147.
§ 144-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the conduct of persons using or
occupying the public parks and recreation areas of the Town in order to
preserve these areas from misuse or destruction and to enhance their use
for the members of the public who use the parks in a reasonable manner.
§ 144-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ATHLETIC EVENT — A competitive or noncompetitive recreational program
or activity in which people participate in exercises, sports, or games
requiring physical strength, agility, or stamina.[Added 6-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-01]
FOR-PROFIT RETAIL SALES — Any retail sale from which 100% of the
profit goes to the vendor.
MAJOR EVENT — Any special event having a duration of more than four
hours to 48 hours, including time required for setup and
breakdown[Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
§ 139-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 144-2
139:706
MINOR EVENT — Any special event having a duration of four hours or less,
including time for setup and breakdown. [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-01]
NONPROFIT — A corporation designated as a not-for-profit corporation by
the United States Internal Revenue Service.
NONPROFIT RETAIL SALES — Any retail sale from which 100% of the
profits goes to a nonprofit organization.
PARK — Any Town-owned or "leased land or facility" listed in
§ 144-4.[Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
SPECIAL EVENT — Any event proposed to be held within Town parks at
which it could reasonably be assumed that 25 or more persons might gather
or participate.
VEHICLE — Any conveyance including, but not limited to, an automobile,
truck, motorcycle, trail bike, trailer, wagon, snowmobile, bicycle, or
watercraft.
§ 144-3. Applicability; exception.
The following order of construction applies to this chapter:
§ 144-4. Description of parks. [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-01]
Scope of chapter. This chapter applies to all activities in, on, or over
Town parks.
A.
Exception. This chapter does not apply to the activities of Town
employees or independent contractors engaged in construction,
maintenance or repair of a park, while under the supervision or control
of the Town.
B.
The parks referred to in this chapter include the areas within the
boundaries of the following properties as described in the records of
the Tax Assessor's office as follows:
Park Map-Block-Lot
Agamont Park That portion of 002-005-015 southerly of West
Street and the Shorepath, excepting Newport
Drive and the parking lot
Athletic Field 004-001-001 and 004-001-013 and
004-001-014
Barker Park 003-004-034
Glen Mary Park 004-012-001
Grant Park 002-005-006A
Hadley Point Landing That portion of 202-002-000 lying above the
mean high-water mark
A.
§ 144-2 NOISE § 144-4
139:707
§ 144-5. Park closure.
§ 144-6. Use and enjoyment protected.
No person shall interfere with the use and enjoyment of the parks by other
members of the general public.
§ 144-7. Neighbors protected.
No person shall unreasonably disturb the peace of homeowners or
businesses located adjacent to or in the neighborhood of the parks.
§ 144-8. Littering prohibited.
No person shall deposit rubbish, refuse, garbage or other waste material
in a park, except in the receptacles so provided. Where receptacles are not
Park Map-Block-Lot
Harborview Park That portion of 003-005-009 lying north of
West Street and west of Main Street
Millbrook Preserve 11C-000-075B and 11C-000-075D
Park Street Playground 004-008-008
Town Hill Playground That portion of 227-018-004 leased by the
Town for park purposes
Village Green 003-01-004
The following properties are not considered Town parks for the purpose
of this chapter.
Location Map-Block-Lot
Blue Star Highway Monument 13A-000-036
Town Beach That portion of 002-005-015 lying
north of the Shorepath
B.
Hours. All Town parks shall be closed to the public between the hours
of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. every day.
A.
Presence prohibited. No person shall be present in a park during said
periods of time without the permission of the permitting authority.
B.
Hours may vary. The permitting authority may vary the closure hours
for special events. [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
C.
Special closures. Any section of any park may be declared closed to
the public by the Public Works Director, Fire Chief or Chief of Police at
any time and duration, for any either temporarily or at regular stated
intervals, by posting suitable signs or other markings. No person shall
remain in such a closed area. [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-01]
D.
§ 144-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 144-8
139:708
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the parks by
the person responsible for its presence.
§ 144-9. Leash required.
No person shall allow a domestic animal to roam in a Town park unless
restrained by a leash.
§ 144-10. Camping prohibited.
No person shall use any public park in the Town of Bar Harbor for the
purpose of overnight accommodation or a temporary or permanent abode or
habitation, except with the written permission of the permitting authority.
§ 144-11. Throwing prohibited.
Except at the Athletic Field and Grant's Park, no person shall throw, toss,
pass or kick any object, including but not limited to footballs, baseballs,
flying discs, lawn darts, boomerangs, sacks, sticks or the like.
§ 144-12. Prohibited devices.
No person shall use or ride a skateboard, in-line skates, roller skates,
bicycles, or the like in a park, except in areas determined by the Public
Works Director and so designated by appropriate Town signs.
§ 144-13. Damage to property.
No person shall damage, move, or remove any building, structure,
appurtenance, or personal property whatsoever.
§ 144-14. Erection of structures.
A person shall not construct or erect a building or structure of any kind,
except in conformance with a special event permit.
§ 144-15. Damage to plants.
§ 144-16. Improper use.
No person shall climb, walk, stand, or sit on a monument, vase, fountain,
railing, fence, or any other structure not designed for that purpose.
No person shall climb, damage, remove, or pick the flowers or seeds of
a tree or other plant.
A.
No person shall dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other
way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
B.
§ 144-8 NOISE § 144-17
139:709
§ 144-17. Obey signs.
All persons must obey all signs posted in any park for the protection of
property, or the promotion of the health, safety, or general welfare of the
occupants of a park or the residents of the Town.
§ 144-18. Vehicle operation.
§ 144-19. Horses.
Horses are prohibited from all parks, except as authorized by the permitting
authority.
§ 144-20. Bathing and swimming.
No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in any body of water in a park, except
in those areas which are specifically designated for swimming or bathing
purposes, and in compliance with posted regulations.
§ 144-21. Fountains.
§ 144-22. Hunting and firearms.
State law applies. All provisions of state law relating to the operation of
motor vehicles shall apply within parks.
A.
Stay on the road. No person shall operate any vehicle in a park on
any areas except a public way, park road, or parking area, or in those
areas specifically designated by the Town, except as authorized by the
permitting authority.
B.
Designated areas. A person shall park a vehicle only in a designated
parking area and in accordance with any pavement markings, posted
directions or the instructions of any parking attendant.
C.
Night parking prohibited. A person shall not leave a vehicle,
construction equipment or construction materials standing or parked at
night in a park after closing hours. Any vehicle, equipment or materials
found in a park after closing hours shall be removed and stored at the
expense of the owner.
D.
Donations. No person shall remove money deposited in a public
fountain without the permission of the Public Works Director. All funds
collected shall be delivered to the Bar Harbor Village Improvement
Association in recognition of its renovation of the fountains.
A.
Climbing prohibited. No person shall climb, walk, stand, or sit upon or
swim, bathe, or wade in a public fountain.
B.
Disturbing wildlife prohibited. No person shall hunt, trap, or disturb
wildlife in a park.
A.
§ 144-17 BAR HARBOR CODE § 144-22
139:710
§ 144-23. Intoxicating beverages.
No person shall consume or possess alcoholic beverages in a park.
§ 144-24. Fires.
No person shall build a fire in a park, except as authorized by the permitting
authority as part of a special event.
§ 144-25. Special events.
Town parks will be made available, on a limited basis, for special events
subject to the following restrictions:
Discharge prohibited. No person shall discharge a firearm, blank gun,
air rifle, spring gun, bow and arrow, slingshot, sling, or any other
type of weapon which is potentially dangerous to human beings or to
wildlife, except as authorized by the permitting authority as part of a
special event.
B.
Permit required. Athletic events, the Bar Harbor Town Band and events
sponsored or conducted by the Town shall be exempt from special event
permitting requirements; however, any other person or organization
which desires to conduct or sponsor a special event at a Town park
must first apply for and obtain a permit from the permitting authority.
A.
Permitting authority. The Parks and Recreation Committee shall be the
permitting authority for all special events, although the Committee may,
at its discretion, defer permitting authority for any special event to the
Town Council.
B.
Application fee. An application fee for a special event will be required
of all applicants to cover administrative costs incurred by the Town in
permitting the special event, said fee to be set from time to time by the
Town Council.
C.
Application form. Organizations and persons requesting a permit to
use any portion of a Town park for a special event must complete an
application form created and provided by the Public Works Department.
Partially complete applications will not be considered. Said forms shall
include the following information:
The name and contact information of the sponsoring person or
organization and its officers.
(1)
The signature of the president, or if the organization has no
president, the chief executive officer of the organization.
(2)
(3) The tax status of the organization.
(4) Whether amplified sound will be used.
D.
§ 144-22 NOISE § 144-25
139:711
Such additional information as the Parks and Recreation
Committee or Public Works Director feels necessary for
determination of compliance with this chapter and efficient
operation of the parks.
(5)
Application review. The permitting authority shall review and make a
determination on all applications requesting a permit to use any portion
of Town parks for a special event.
Application deadlines. An application for a permit shall be accepted
by the Public Works Director no earlier than 12 months prior to the
proposed special event.
Minor events. Application for a permit for a minor event shall
be filed with the Public Works Director no later than 30 days
prior to the date of the event.
(a)
Major events. Application for a permit for a major event shall
be filed with the Public Works Director no later than February
1 of the calendar year in which the special event is to take
place if the event is to occur during the months of June, July,
August or September, and a minimum of 90 days prior to the
date of the event in all other cases. [Amended 6-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-01]
(b)
(1)
Eligible applicants. Sponsoring organizations may include but are
not necessarily limited to church organizations, charitable
organizations, educational organizations and governmental groups.
The sponsoring person or organization shall:
(a) Be clearly and correctly identified on the application form,
Be a person or nonprofit entity whose proposed event will
not be for financial profit, except that for-profit sales may be
permitted at certain major events as provided below.
(b)
(2)
Standards for approval. The following standards shall be utilized
by the permitting authority in reviewing applications for special
events.
The permitting authority shall issue a permit if it finds:
[1] The application form has been properly completed;
[2] The application fee has been paid;
The event will not endanger the health and safety of
persons who visit the park;
[3]
Adequate sanitary facilities are available or will be
provided in the park to accommodate the proposed special
event;
[4]
(a)
(3)
E.
§ 144-25 BAR HARBOR CODE § 144-25
139:712
The special event or activity will not cause damage from
destruction or overuse of the grounds, equipment,
vegetation, buildings, fences or other amenities of the
park;
[5]
The special event will not unreasonably disturb persons
who occupy land which is adjacent to such park; and
[6]
The portion of the park requested has not been reserved
for other use at the time requested in the application.
[7]
For minor events: [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-01]
No for-profit retail sales will occur, and any nonprofit
retail sales will be engaged in only by Bar Harborbased
entities.133
[a]
[8]
For major events: [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-01]
The event will not bring the total of major events
in that calendar year to more than six. [Amended
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
[a]
[b] The event will not exceed 48 hours' duration.
Major events will not be allowed in July or August
unless the event is an Independence Day celebration
or takes place on the Saturday and/or Sunday
immediately prior to Labor Day.
[c]
For-profit sales may occur at major events, provided
that::
The sponsoring organization shall be a Bar
Harbor-based entity;
[i]
The sponsoring organization has not sponsored a
major event involving retail sales in the previous
90 days.
[ii]
No events involving for-profit retail sales will
occur in July or August, unless the event is an
Independence Day celebration or takes place on
the Saturday and/or Sunday immediately prior to
Labor Day.
[iii]
[d]
[9]
133. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(3)(a)[8][b], which immediately followed, which
required that a sponsoring person or organization has not sponsored a minor event
involving retail sales in the previous 90 days, was repealed 12-18-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-09.
§ 144-25 NOISE § 144-25
139:713
Conditional approval. When approving the permit, the
permitting authority may approve the permit with suitable
conditions for the purpose of assuring compliance with this
chapter. Said conditions may include, but are not limited to:
Location: designating the park or the specific area within
a park where the special event shall be allowed to take
place, even if this is a location different from that
requested by the applicant. [Amended 6-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-01]
[1]
Restrooms: requiring a minimum number of portable
restrooms based on the expected attendance and duration
of the special event.
[2]
(b)
Denial.
The permitting authority shall deny any special event permit
application if the permitting authority determines that:
The special event will not be held in compliance with this
chapter.
(a)
The applicant has violated this chapter within 12 months prior
to the date of the application.
(b)
(1)
Any denial must be in writing and clearly explain the reasons for
which the application was denied.
(2)
F.
Appeal. Any person who is aggrieved by the Parks and Recreation
Committee's issuance of a special event permit or the Parks and
Recreation Committee's failure or refusal to issue a special event
permit may appeal the Committee's decision to the Town Council by
written request filed with the Town Clerk within 30 days of the decision.
The Town Council shall:
Hear the case in not less than 10 days, nor more than 30 days of
receipt of the application;
(1)
Advertise the hearing at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town;
(2)
Provide the applicant, the public and Committee members with an
opportunity to be heard; and
(3)
Make findings of fact and issue a written decision within 30 days of
the close of the hearing.
(4)
G.
Noise. Amplified sound may be allowed by special event permit in Town
parks. However:
The need for amplification must be identified on the permit
application.
(1)
H.
§ 144-25 BAR HARBOR CODE § 144-25
139:714
Chapter 147
PUBLIC PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and Recreation Committee — See Ch.
31, Art. V.
Beaches — See Ch. 25.
Food and merchandise sales — See Ch. 94.
Noise — See Ch. 139.
§ 147-1. Use of public places.
The sound shall not unreasonably disturb the peace of homeowners
and businesses located adjacent to or in the neighborhood of the
parks.
(2)
The applicant must comply with any Bar Harbor police officer's
request to reduce the noise to a level acceptable to the police
officer, in his or her sole judgment. [Amended 6-11-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-01]
(3)
Weather cancellation. If a special event held during inclement weather
will likely cause injury or damage to Town parks, the Public Works
Director may cancel the event due to inclement weather or forecasted
inclement weather.
I.
Cleanup. The sponsoring person or organization shall return the park to
the condition it was in prior to the special event. The sponsoring person
or organization will be billed by the Town for any damages incurred
beyond normal wear and tear, as determined by the Public Works
Director in his or her sole judgment, and shall pay the full amount of
the invoice within 30 days of the billing date. Any invoice remaining
unpaid after 30 days may be collected in a court of law. In addition,
no future special event may be scheduled by the sponsoring person
or organization until the account is cleared. [Amended 6-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-01]
J.
Compliance. The sponsoring person or organization shall comply with
all conditions of any permit granted.
K.
No persons shall use or permit to be used any public thoroughfare,
public street, beach, cemetery, public land or any other public place in
the Town of Bar Harbor for the purpose of overnight accommodation or
a temporary or permanent abode or habitation, except with the written
permission of the Town Council of the Town of Bar Harbor.
A.
Town Beach, which is the sand beach adjacent to the Town pier, shall
be closed to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00
a.m. every day, and the public area known as the Town pier shall be
B.
§ 144-25 PUBLIC PLACES § 147-1
147:715
§ 147-2. Obstruction of traffic.
No person or persons shall congregate or remain in any public street,
public thoroughfare, public sidewalk, public park, or any other public place
in the Town of Bar Harbor in such a manner as to obstruct the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, except that parades may be held with the
written permission of the Town Council.
§ 147-3. Storage of fishing gear.
No person shall leave a boat, lobster trap, car, fishing gear or any fishing
equipment standing or remaining on any public parking lots in the Town of
Bar Harbor except the Newport Drive parking lot or Town Pier parking lot
and only on said parking lots during the period from November 1 to May 1.
Any person leaving such gear or equipment shall pay to the harbormaster a
fee as set from time to time by the Town Council.
Chapter 153
PORT AND HARBOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches — See Ch. 25.
Harbor Committee — See Ch. 31, Art. IV.
Parks — See Ch. 144.
Public places — See Ch. 147.
Shellfish conservation — See Ch. 170.
closed to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 4:00 a.m.
every day, and no person or persons shall be present on the Town pier
or Town Beach during said periods of time except authorized police
officers, employees and/or agents of the Town of Bar Harbor.
§ 147-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 147-3
147:716
ARTICLE I
Channel Boundaries and Anchorage Areas; Definitions
§ 153-1. Authority; establishment of boundaries.
§ 153-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INNER HARBOR — Includes all waters eastward of the bar to a line running
northerly from Balance Rock to the harbor channel entrance buoy, thence
northerly to the easternmost point of Bar Island, bounded on the north by
Bar Island and bounded on the south by the shoreline of Mount Desert
Island.
WATERCRAFT — Any type of vessel, boat or craft used or capable of being
used as a means of transportation on water.
Pursuant to the authority granted by 38 M.R.S.A § 2, 1964, as amended,
the Town Council of the Town of Bar Harbor hereby establishes the
following boundaries wherein these regulations shall apply to activities
occurring within or directly affecting the area to the fullest extent
permitted by law:
Beginning at the northwestern point of Bar Island and running along
the low water mark of Bar Island southeasterly and easterly to the
southeasterly point of Bar Island; thence from the southeasterly point
of Bar Island easterly to the southern tip of Sheep Porcupine Island;
thence from the southern tip of Sheep Porcupine Island southeasterly
to the western tip of Bald Porcupine Island; thence running along the
low water mark of Bald Porcupine Island; thence southeasterly to the
high water line at Dorr Point on Mount Desert Island; thence westerly
and northerly to Israel Point in Mount Desert Narrows; thence
following the high water line on Mount Desert Island from Old House
Cove southerly and westerly to Crystal Cove in Western Bay on Mount
Desert Island; thence northwesterly seaward to the Bar Harbor Town
lines or 2,000 yards, whichever is lesser; thence easterly and southerly
to the point of beginning. The area includes Compass Cove, Cromwell
Harbor, Bar Harbor, Canoe Point, Hulls Cove, Lookout Point, Sand
Point, Salisbury Cove, Emery Cove, Leland Point, Hadley Point,
Thomas Island, Clark Cove, Northeast Cove, Indian Point, Long Cove,
Green Island, Black Island, Crystal Cove, and all the waters within
these boundaries.
A.
All that part of the waters of the Town of Bar Harbor encompassed by
the above-described boundary lines is hereby assigned for anchorage
except designated channels.
B.
§ 153-1 PUBLIC PLACES § 153-2
147:717

ARTICLE II
Harbor Rules and Regulations
§ 153-3. Statutory authority.
The rules and regulations established by the Bar Harbor Town Council in
this chapter are enacted pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. § 2, as amended.
§ 153-4. Harbor Master.
The Harbor Master may appoint deputies who, under his/her direction, shall
be authorized to enforce and carry out the rules and regulations of this
chapter.
§ 153-5. Condition of docks, piers and wharfs.
Compensation. The compensation to be paid to the Harbor Master
and deputies shall be determined by the Town Council and the
compensation of deputies set as provided by the personnel rules.
A.
Duties. It shall be the duty of the Harbor Master to:
Enforce the provisions of all rules, regulations, ordinances and
other laws which are lawfully promulgated and which are within
his/her jurisdiction pursuant to law.
(1)
Provide copies of all rules, regulations, ordinances and other laws
which pertain to the harbor, waterfront and watercraft within the
Town of Bar Harbor and to make said copies available to those
persons using said harbor.
(2)
Promote order in the harbor and ensure safety and use of the
harbor for the general public.
(3)
B.
The Harbor Master is hereby authorized and it shall be his/her duty
to remove or cause to be removed any watercraft from any wharf or
dock in Bar Harbor when so requested by the owner of said wharf or
dock. Whenever he/she shall deem it necessary, he/she shall remove
or cause to be removed any watercraft lying in tier or rafted from any
dock, wharf or mooring within his/her jurisdiction. If any vessel, boat,
or raft or any watercraft shall anchor or lie contrary to any ordinance,
rule or regulation of the Town of Bar Harbor, said Harbor Master shall
forthwith serve notice to the owner or master or the person in care of
said watercraft to remove the same and, if the person given a notice
does not comply with said notice of the Harbor Master without delay,
the Harbor Master shall cause the removal of said watercraft at the
expense of said owner, and the Harbor Master may recover the cost of
any such removal from the watercraft owner upon complaint filed in the
Maine District Court.
C.
Any dock, pier, wharf or other such structure which is within the harbor
of the Town of Bar Harbor and which has fallen into a state of disrepair
A.
§ 153-3 PUBLIC PLACES § 153-5
147:719
§ 153-6. Use of watercraft as residences.
No person shall moor or permit to be moored any watercraft owned or
occupied by him/her and which is being used primarily for residence
purposes within the harbor boundaries without the permission of the
Harbor Master and the owner of the shore rights in front of which said
watercraft is moored.
§ 153-7. Unlawful use or destruction of channel markers.
No person shall moor any watercraft to any buoy, beacon or other marker
placed by the Town of Bar Harbor to define the harbor channels or in any
manner make said watercraft fast thereto or willfully destroy or injure any
such beacon, buoy or other marker.
§ 153-8. Interference with passage of vessels.
No person shall use any watercraft or any other device or structure within
the harbor of the Town of Bar Harbor so as to interfere with or impede in
any manner the keeping open of convenient channels for the passage of
vessels in said harbor. This includes excessive and unnecessary prop wash
from vessels alongside floats within the inner harbor except under weather
conditions where such vessels properly made fast are unable to remain
safely alongside while loading passengers or gear.
§ 153-9. Compliance with Harbor Master's order required.
No person shall refuse to obey any lawful order of the Harbor Master with
reference to the operation, navigation or disposal of any watercraft owned
or occupied by said person within the harbor channels.
or which remains in a dangerous condition so as to interfere with
the keeping open of convenient channels for the passage of vessels
in said harbor and/or suitable portions of said harbor for anchorage
shall be deemed a nuisance. The Harbor Master shall give the owner
of said dock, pier, wharf or other such structure written notice of said
condition. Said notice shall also order said owner to abate said nuisance
within a reasonable period of time which shall also be specified in the
notice. In the event that the Harbor Master cannot give notice to said
owner for any reason whatever, he/she shall give said notice to the
occupant of said pier, dock, wharf or other such structure.
If said owner or occupant refuses to comply with the terms of said
order, he/she shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $20 nor more than
$200 or by imprisonment for not less than 10 days nor more than 60
days, or by both, and in addition thereto or in lieu of said punishment or
any part thereof, the court may order the nuisance abated or removed
at the expense of said owner or occupant.
B.
§ 153-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 153-10
147:720
§ 153-10. Interference with Harbor Master.
No person shall assault, intimidate or in any manner willfully obstruct,
intimidate or hinder the Harbor Master while said Harbor Master is in the
lawful performance of his/her duties.
§ 153-11. Authority of Harbor Master.
The Harbor Master shall have the authority and power to enforce the
provisions of these rules and regulations and all other laws and ordinances
which are applicable to the harbor, waterfront and watercraft, including the
authority and power to make arrests pursuant to law.
§ 153-12. Moorings within harbor channels.
No person shall place, anchor or moor any watercraft within the harbor
channels or within any part of the harbor without the permission of the
Harbor Master.
§ 153-13. Fisherman's Float.
The Harbor Master shall designate, with suitable signs or markers, that
float adjacent to the Municipal Pier which is to be used for the loading and
unloading of fish, supplies and such other related uses as may be permitted
by the Harbor Master and which is to be designated as the "Fisherman's
Float."
Time limitations. No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up to the
northern end of this float any watercraft for a period longer than 15
minutes. No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up to any other part
of this float any watercraft in such a manner as to permit any part of
said watercraft to extend beyond the ends of the northern side of this
float. No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up to any other part of
this float any watercraft for a period longer than one hour without the
permission of the Harbor Master.
A.
Property. No person shall leave any property on or attached to this float
for any period of time except during the actual period of loading or
unloading of fish and fishing supplies or during the period of such other
related use as may be permitted by the Harbor Master. If any person
refuses or neglects to remove his/her property as directed by the
Harbor Master, or if the property owner cannot be located or identified,
the Harbor Master shall remove or have the property removed at the
owner's risk and collect from the master or owner of that vessel $100
for this service plus the necessary expense.
B.
Fishing and swimming. No persons shall engage in swimming from this
float or from any watercraft moored in any manner to this float. Fishing,
with hand line only, may be permitted with the permission of the Harbor
Master.
C.
§ 153-10 PUBLIC PLACES § 153-13
147:721
§ 153-14. Public floats.
The Harbor Master shall designate, with suitable signs or markers, the
floats on the eastern side of the Municipal Pier which are to be used for
the loading and unloading of passengers and supplies from visiting ships
(watercraft), vessel dockage and other activities authorized by the Harbor
Master and which are to be designated as the "public floats."
§ 153-15. Finger floats.
The Harbor Master shall designate, with suitable signs or markers, those
floats adjacent to the Municipal Pier which are to be designated as "finger
floats."
Other activities. No person shall use or permit this float to be used
for any purpose or activity other than that which is permitted by this
section.
D.
Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section shall first
receive a warning, written or verbal, which may be followed with a
summons for subsequent violations of the same provision.
E.
Fishing and swimming. No persons shall engage in swimming from
these floats or from any watercraft moored in any manner to these
floats. No person shall engage in fishing from the public floats
whenever any watercraft is docked, in any manner, at the public floats.
A.
Time limitations. No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up to the
eastern end of these floats any watercraft for a period longer than 15
minutes. No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up to any other
part of these floats any watercraft without the permission of the Harbor
Master.
B.
Other activities. No person shall use or permit these floats to be used
for any purpose or activity other than that which is permitted by this
section, except the Harbor Master may give permission to any person
to use these floats to moor fishing or lobster boats.
C.
Violation. Any person violating any provision of this section shall first
receive a written or verbal warning which may be followed with a
summons for subsequent violations of the same provision.
D.
Time limitation. No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up any
watercraft on the western side of these floats for a period longer than
one hour except with the permission of the Harbor Master.
A.
Watercraft size limitation. No persons shall tie up or permit to be tied
up any watercraft on the eastern side of these floats, except watercraft
which are of the tender type and are less than 14 feet in length and
which are not propelled by machinery of 15 or more horsepower.
B.
§ 153-13 BAR HARBOR CODE § 153-16
147:722
§ 153-16. Unsafe watercraft.
No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up to the fisherman's float, public
floats, finger floats or to any part of the Municipal Pier any watercraft which
is not in a safe condition or which is in a state of disrepair.
§ 153-17. Moorings.
No person shall moor or permit to be moored any watercraft to any mooring
placed within the harbor by the Town of Bar Harbor without the permission
of the Harbor Master, who shall designate which mooring is to be used and
the conditions of such use, and no person having permission of the Harbor
Master shall use said moorings in any manner which is inconsistent with the
conditions prescribed by the Harbor Master.
No person shall place a mooring within the harbor without first making
application to the Harbor Master, who shall designate the location in
which said mooring shall be placed with terms and conditions that
ensure the safety of said mooring and the best use of available space
within the harbor.
A.
The mooring shall be registered annually with the Harbor Master and
provide the following information:
(1) Name of owner, vessel, name/number/length, and intended use.
(2) Location of mooring (charted position).
(3) Size and type of the mooring stone and chain.
(4) Last inspection and condition found.
B.
All moorings shall be registered annually prior to May 1, and the
approximate location of the mooring shall be noted on a harbor chart
provided to the owner. An annual registration fee for each mooring shall
be determined by the Town Council and paid by the owner to the Town
of Bar Harbor.
C.
All moorings not registered by June 1 each year shall be removed by
the owner, and the mooring privilege shall be revoked. When the owner
of an unregistered or unsafe mooring cannot be located or identified
or refuses to remove his/her mooring or replace it with one of different
character, when so directed by the Harbor Master, the Harbor Master
shall cause the entire mooring to be removed or the buoy removed
and the chain dropped to the bottom, or shall make such change in
the character of the mooring as required, and collect from the master
or owner of that vessel the sum of $100 for either of these services
rendered plus the necessary expense.
D.
Before removing a mooring or a buoy, the Harbor Master shall notify
the master or owner, if the owner can be determined, by mail at his/
her last known address of the action desired of him/her, the fact that
the mooring will be removed and the fine to be assessed. If the matter
E.
§ 153-16 PUBLIC PLACES § 153-17
147:723
is not settled to the Harbor Master's satisfaction within two weeks, the
Harbor Master may take the action provided for in this section.
All moorings shall be assigned a number within a series that indicates
the maximum size vessel that may use the mooring. The number shall
be prominently displayed on the mooring in contrasting shade, at one
inch minimum height. The Harbor Master shall assign the number and
it shall be the owner's responsibility to apply and maintain the number.
F.
Specifications.
All moorings shall meet the minimum specifications shown in Table
1.
Table 1
Mooring Specifications
Chain
Size
(inches)
Series
Boat
Length
(feet)
Stone
Weight
(pounds)* Low High
100 To 20 500 3/8 1/2
200 20 to 30 1,000 1/2 1/2
300 30 to 40 1,500 1/2 1 5/8
400 40 to 60 2,000 1/2 1 3/4
500 Over 60 ** ** **
NOTES:
*Only granite or concrete stones with minimum one-inch staples
are permitted, except that the Harbor Master may permit different
specifications for moorings that are established only during the
summer season. Seasonal mooring numbers shall be preceded by
the letter "S."
**As approved by the Harbor Master.
(1)
The Harbor Master may require different specifications exceeding
those listed if the vessel is of large tonnage or unusual
configuration.
(2)
The minimum scope of chain shall be 1 1/2 times the depth at mean
high water, and the maximum shall not exceed twice the depth at
mean high water within the high density portion of the harbor as
determined by the Harbor Master.
(3)
G.
§ 153-17 BAR HARBOR CODE § 153-17
147:724
§ 153-18. Municipal Pier.
§ 153-19. Use of Municipal Pier to solicit business.
No person shall use, or permit to be used in any manner, the Municipal
Pier or any part thereof or any float attached or adjacent thereto or any
part thereof for the purpose of conducting business or soliciting potential
customers, nor shall any person use or permit to be used any watercraft
moored to said pier or floats for the purpose of displaying any signs which
solicit business or potential customers. The term "watercraft" as used in this
section means any type of vessel, boat or craft used or capable of being used
as a means of transportation on water.
Mooring poles shall float a minimum of two feet above the water
surface. Mooring buoys shall be a minimum of 12 inches in
diameter; 1/3 shall float above the surface of the water.
(4)
Tie up time limit. No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up at the
Municipal Pier any watercraft for a period longer than one hour without
the permission of the Harbor Master. No person shall tie up or permit
to be tied up to the Municipal Pier any watercraft for any commercial
purpose except with the permission of the Town Council and the Harbor
Master.
A.
Swimming or diving. No person shall engage in swimming and/or diving
from the Municipal Pier or from any watercraft moored in any manner
from said pier except for the purposes of maintaining and/or repairing
watercraft, and said diving shall be conducted with the proper safety
signals and flags.
B.
Loading and unloading. Loading and unloading of vessels shall be
permitted only during the hours from 4:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. except
in the marked loading zone. The designated zones shall be used during
actual loading and unloading of vessels. The time limit for loading and
unloading shall be 30 minutes.
C.
Repairs. No repairs to machinery, nets or gear shall be permitted on the
pier or floats, except the Harbor Master may authorize emergency work
between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. Any work authorized
shall be totally done and kept within a space of six feet from the end of
the pier, floats, parking spaces or any other obstructions. Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) approved safety lines,
barriers or nets shall be placed around such work or loading area when
work or loading is in progress to provide for public safety. The Harbor
Master may require the removal of any machinery, gear or nets without
delay when, in his/her opinion, it is necessary for the public safety.
D.
Fishing prohibited. No person shall engage in fishing from the east
side of the Municipal Pier whenever any watercraft is docked, in any
manner, at the public floats without the permission of the Harbor
Master.
E.
§ 153-17 PUBLIC PLACES § 153-20
147:725
§ 153-20. Gear to be inboard.
No watercraft shall be permitted to tie to the Municipal Pier or any float
unless all nonfixed and retractable gear is inboard of the railings.
§ 153-21. Launching ramp.
The Harbor Master shall designate, with suitable signs or markers, that part
of the Municipal Pier which is to be used for the launching of watercraft and
which is to be designated as the "launching ramp."
§ 153-22. Fees.
§ 153-23. Watercraft carrying passengers for hire.
Passenger for hire operations not fitting the description of "cruise ship" as
defined in § 153-22 are prohibited from operating from the Municipal Pier
or any float attached thereto. This includes excursion vessels, sightseeing
vessels, ferries and any other vessels carrying passengers for hire on a
continual basis regardless of where the voyage originates. The owner and/
or operator of any watercraft operating within any waters of the Town of Bar
Harbor and carrying passengers for hire must file with the Harbor Master
the following documents before commencing such operations:
Time limitation. No person shall use the launching ramp for a period of
time in excess of 1/2 hour without the permission of the Harbor Master.
A.
Other uses prohibited. No person shall ground out, tie up or moor
or permit to be ground out, tied up or moored any watercraft on the
launching ramp.
B.
Fishing prohibited. No person shall engage in fishing from the
launching ramp whenever any watercraft is docked, in any manner, at
the public floats.
C.
No person shall tie up any watercraft to any municipal float, mooring
or pier or utilize the boat launching ramp without registering with the
Harbor Master and paying such fee as may be required in accordance
with such schedule as may be in effect at that time, said schedule of
fees to be fixed by the Town Council from time to time.
A.
Port fees. No person shall berth or anchor any cruise ship within
the boundaries established by § 153-1 of this chapter or anchor any
cruise ship outside such boundaries and transport its passengers by
watercraft for disembarkation in the Town of Bar Harbor without
registering with the Harbor Master and paying such fee as may be
required in accordance with such schedule as may be in effect at that
time said schedule of fees to be fixed by the Town Council from time to
time by order. For the purposes of this subsection, "cruise ship" means
a watercraft carrying passengers for hire which is capable of providing
overnight accommodations for 49 or more passengers.
B.
§ 153-20 BAR HARBOR CODE § 153-23
147:726
§ 153-24. Operating under sail.
No person shall operate any watercraft under sail, which watercraft is
equipped with an auxiliary engine in operable condition, within the inner
harbor of the Town of Bar Harbor.
§ 153-25. Speed limit.
Watercraft shall be operated at such rate of speed and in such manner as
not to endanger other craft or persons. In special anchorage areas, narrow
channels, and congested mooring areas the speed of all vessels shall be
reduced to headway speed. For the purpose of these rules, "headway" is the
slowest speed that a power boat may be operated to maintain steerage way.
§ 153-26. Cleaning of marine life.
No persons shall clean or dispose of any fish, lobsters, scallops, shrimp,
clams, bait, other marine life, or parts thereof at any float, pier, mooring or
anchorage within the inner harbor.
§ 153-27. Dragging.
No person shall operate any watercraft when towing a drag or trawl within
300 feet of any dock, pier or wharf, or within 100 feet of any mooring within
the Town of Bar Harbor, or within the area described in § 153-1 of this
chapter.
§ 153-28. Revocation of mooring and berthing privileges.
The current certificate of inspection issued by the United States Coast
Guard for watercraft carrying more than six passengers for hire.
A.
A current operator's license issued by the United States Coast Guard
for each operator of said watercraft.
B.
Proof of an agreement with the owner/operator of the intended Bar
Harbor base of operation where the passenger for hire operation will
normally originate and/or terminate voyages.
C.
In addition to the penalties provided for elsewhere in this chapter, the
Harbor Master may revoke the privilege of the master and/or owner
of any vessel to moor or berth at the Municipal Pier, floats and launch
ramps for any of the following reasons:
Failure to comply with the instructions of the Harbor Master
without delay in the movement of a vessel or gear from public
facilities.
(1)
(2) Actions that demonstrate a disregard for the public safety.
(3) Repeated conduct by crew or guests that creates a public nuisance.
A.
§ 153-23 PUBLIC PLACES § 153-28
147:727
§ 153-29. Appeals.
Any person adversely affected by a decision of the Harbor Master may
appeal the decision to the Harbor Committee. Persons filing appeals must
make written application to the Town Clerk within 30 days of a written
decision of the Harbor Master and pay such fee as determined and set by
the Town Council from time to time.
(4) Failure to pay any mooring fees within 30 days of receipt.
Failure of the owner of any vessel to pay any and all taxes or liens
due.
(5)
Actions that violate any federal, state or local laws, ordinances or
lawful regulations.
(6)
A vessel denied privileges by the Harbor Master under this section
may be reinstated by demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Town
Council, or a representative authorized by it, that further infraction of
this section will not occur.
B.
§ 153-28 BAR HARBOR CODE § 153-29
147:728
Chapter 165
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 36.
Health and sanitation — See Ch. 109.
Land use — See Ch. 125.
Water — See Ch. 201.
§ 153-29 PUBLIC PLACES § 153-29
147:729

ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 165-1. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days of 20º C., expressed in parts
per million by weight.
BUILDING SEWER — That part of the lowest horizontal piping which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other sewage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the service connection.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface drainage and
sewage.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the processing, preparation, cooking,
dispensing, handling, storage and sale of food products.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Town of Bar Harbor or
his authorized representative.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial processes,
as distinct from sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.
pH — A number indicating the degree of acidity or basicity of a solution.
Numerically a pH of seven indicates a neutral solution. Numbers below
seven indicate an acid condition, the smaller the number the stronger
the acid, and numbers above seven indicate a basic condition, the
larger the number the stronger the basic.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — A master plumber who has been licensed by
the State of Maine and appointed by the Town Council to act as such.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is owned and/or controlled by the Town of
Bar Harbor.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm drainage and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. In this
chapter the word "sewer" means "sanitary sewer."
SERVICE CONNECTION — The branch sewer line from the public
sewer to the public right-of-way line of a dwelling or other
establishment.[Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
A.
§ 165-1 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-1
147:731
SEWAGE — The combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, except
industrial wastes.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the processing, preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
STORM DRAIN — A pipe which carries storm and surface waters as
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works, Town of
Bar Harbor, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids.
TOWN — The Town of Bar Harbor, Hancock County, Maine, a
municipality of the State of Maine, acting by and through its Town
Council.
TOWN COUNCIL — The Town Council of the Town of Bar Harbor.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs naturally,
either continuously or intermittently.
B. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
§ 165-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-1
147:732
ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 165-2. Unlawful discharges.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Bar Harbor or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town any sewage,
industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 165-3. Unlawful sewage disposal facilities.
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic
tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage
where a public sewer is available, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 165-4. Connection to public sewer required.
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human habitation
or occupancy situated within the Town and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is a public sewer of the Town is hereby required
at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so, provided
that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the building.
§ 165-2 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-4
147:733

ARTICLE III
Sewer Budget and Rates134
[Added 1-2-1996; amended 6-3-1997; 11-18-1997; 7-6-1999]
§ 165-5. Statutory authority.
The authority for this article is 30-A M.R.S.A. § 5405(1) which authorizes the
Town Council to "fix the schedule of rates, fees and other charges for the
use of, and for the services furnished...by any revenue-producing facility,"
including any sewage disposal system.
§ 165-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANNUAL CAPITAL BUDGET — The amount contained in the capital
improvement budget for the municipal sewer system for a given fiscal
year.135
DINING AREA — That area commonly known as the "dining room," being
the gross area used for the consumption of food within a restaurant,
including aisles and walkways used by the diners and wait staff for
circulation to, from and around dining tables and chairs but excluding food
preparation areas, kitchens, dishwashing areas, wait staff stations, storage
rooms, staff break rooms, retail space, cloakrooms, rest rooms, offices and
checkout counters.
FISCAL YEAR — The financial year of the Town of Bar Harbor as determined
by its Charter.
MOUSE PRODUCTION AREA — That area commonly known as the "mouse
room" at the Jackson Laboratory, being the gross area used for the
production of laboratory mice, excluding changing rooms, washrooms,
ventilation rooms, entry areas and the like.
MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities owned by the Town of Bar
Harbor for collecting, pumping, treating, composting and disposing of
sewage, including but not limited to pump stations, collection systems,
treatment plants and related clerical and administrative services.
NONRESIDENTIAL — Property not meeting the definition of “residential”
as provided below.[Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
OPERATING BUDGET — The budget adopted by the Town Council for the
operation of the municipal sewer system during a given fiscal year, but not
including the servicing of debt, depreciation or the capital improvement
budget.136[Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
134. Editor's Note: The title of this article was amended 9-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-05.
135. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "capital rate" and "debt repayment," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03 and
6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01, respectively.
§ 165-5 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-6
147:735
RESIDENTIAL — Property that is used primarily as a single-family home
or dwelling and is so classified in the Town of Bar Harbor assessing
records[Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04; 12-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-08]
SEWER RATES — The rate to be charged to users of the municipal sewer
system. The calculated rate shall be the total revenues to be raised by sewer
rates divided by the estimated annual budgeted consumption.[Amended
8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
SUPERINTENDENT — The Wastewater Treatment Superintendent, his/her
designee or, in their absence, the Director of Public Works.
USAGE — The amount of input into the municipal sewer system as
measured or estimated by the cubic foot.
USER — The owner of a property that is connected to the municipal sewer
system.
§ 165-7. Procedure for establishing rates.
Town Council action. The Town Council shall establish sewer rates by
ordinance as required by Charter § C-30-A. [Amended 9-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-05]
A.
137Billing.
Classification. All users shall be classified as either residential or
nonresidential for purposes of minimum billing and application of
summer residential discount.
(1)
Determination of usage. [Amended 4-4-2000; 10-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-04]
Metered properties. The amount of usage in a given quarter
by a user whose property is serviced by the Bar Harbor Water
Division shall be the cubic feet of water used at that property
for that quarter as determined by water meter readings
performed by the Bar Harbor Water Division or the Town of Bar
Harbor.
(a)
Unmetered properties. The amount of usage in a given quarter
by a user whose property is not serviced by the Bar Harbor
Water Division shall be deemed to be 1,300 cubic feet per
quarter. [Amended 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
(b)
(c) Reduction of usage.
(2)
B.
136. Editor’s Note: The former definitions of "operations rate" and "quarter," which
immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03.
137. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, regarding the operations rate, as amended, and
former Subsection C, regarding the capital rate, as amended, were repealed 8-4-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-03. This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection
D as Subsection B.
§ 165-6 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-7
147:736
Unmetered residential users. Any residential user whose
property is not serviced by the Bar Harbor Water Division
who, in advance of any quarter, certifies in writing to the
Town Treasurer, on a form prepared and made available
by the Town Treasurer, that there will be no usage by that
user's property for 52 or more days in that quarter shall be
deemed to have a usage of 600 cubic feet for that quarter.
[Amended 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
[1]
Summer residential discount. Certain residential users,
as described below, whose property is serviced by the
Bar Harbor Water Division shall be eligible for a summer
discount in recognition of the fact that during the summer
much water passes through a water meter that does not
then enter the municipal sewer system. To receive this
discount, such user must apply in writing, before
September 30 immediately following the quarter for which
the discount is sought, to the Finance Department on a
form prepared and made available by the Finance
Department. The summer residential discount will be
applied by billing the user for the summer quarter based
on his or her average usage for the immediately preceding
winter and spring quarters or two quarters that can, at the
discretion of the Finance Department, more reasonably
estimate the basic usage of the residence rather than
based on usage as indicated by a meter reading for the
summer quarter. The discount shall not be available to:
Properties with a sewer service accepting waste from
more than one residential unit;
[a]
Residences used in whole or in part for a home
occupation, commercial rental, vacation rental, or
other commercial use; or
[b]
[c] Properties classified as a seasonal water customer.
[2]
Other reductions. Upon the receipt of sufficient evidence
indicating that a user's total water consumption as
indicated by a meter reading has not all entered into the
municipal sewer system, the Town Treasurer may adjust a
user's usage to reflect more accurately actual usage.
[3]
Calculation and payment of bill. [Amended 8-4-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-03]
Generally. Each user shall be billed quarterly. Bills shall be due
and payable within 30 days after the date of the bill. Interest in
the maximum amount allowed by state law will be charged on
the unpaid balances of any bills not paid in full within 30 days
after the date of the bill.
(a)
(3)
§ 165-7 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-7
147:737
§ 165-7.1. Sewer budget, fees and charges. [Added 9-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-05; amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05;
12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08; 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01;
10-20-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-06; 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03;
7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02; 8-15-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-03]
Minimum bill. Notwithstanding actual usage or any discounts
or reductions in usage, residential users shall be billed based
on a minimum usage of 600 cubic feet per quarter and
nonresidential users shall be billed based on a minimum usage
of 1,700 cubic feet per quarter.
(b)
Budget introduced. The fiscal year 2019 Sewer Budget, dated July
9, 2018, is hereby introduced as published and summarized below.
[Amended 8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-03]
Fund balance. Designated fund balances are estimated as follows:
Estimated starting designated fund balances.
[1] Working capital: $438,263.
[2] CIP projects: $1,426,686.
(a)
Ending designated fund balance.
[1] Working capital: $461,348.
[2] CIP projects: $1,373,647.
(b)
(1)
Revenues.
Total revenues and other sources are estimated to be:
$2,048,400.
(a)
Revenue for the sewer rates shall be calculated from the total
operating and capital appropriations minus any non-rate
revenues:
[1] Total revenue derived from sewer rate: $2,015,000.
(b)
(2)
Expenses. Total appropriations shall be:
(a) Operating Fund: $1,469,844.
(b) Capital Fund: $705,850.
(3)
Rates.
(a) Rate of $7.80 per 100 cubic feet of water used.
Minimum bills.
Residential customers: $46.80 for up to 600 cubic feet of
water used per quarter.
[1]
(b)
(4)
A.
§ 165-7 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-7.1
147:738
Nonresidential customers: $132.60 for up to 1,700 cubic
feet of water used per quarter.
[2]
Unmetered customers: $101.40 per quarter (based on
1,300 cubic feet of water used).
[3]
(c) Septic tank pumpage: $11.22 per 100 gallons.
(d) Sludge disposal: $6.72 per 100 gallons.
Connection fee rate (per inch): $100 per inch diameter of the
service connection.
(e)
Connection fee rate (per gallon): $10.60 per gallon of sewage
per day.
(f)
(g) Late payment penalty: 7.0% per annum.
§ 165-7.1 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-7.1
147:739

ARTICLE IV
Sewer Connection Permits and Fees
[Added 1-2-1996; amended 6-3-1997; 12-2-1997]
§ 165-8. Permit required.
No person shall connect a building sewer to the public sewer, increase the
flow of his existing sewer connection or change the use of any property
connected to the sewer without first receiving a connection permit from the
Superintendent and paying the appropriate connection fee, if any.
§ 165-9. Sewer connection fee rate. [Amended 9-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-05]
The Town Council shall establish sewer connection fee rates by ordinance
as required by Charter § C-30-A.
§ 165-10. Application for permit. [Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-01]
All persons required by this chapter to obtain a connection permit shall
apply to the Superintendent on forms provided by the Superintendent. Said
application shall state the name and service address of the owner, the
proposed use of the property, and the estimated volume of the waste, a
copy of any required building permit, the diameter of the proposed sewer
service connection and such other information as the Superintendent may
reasonably deem necessary to administer this chapter. The Superintendent
shall either approve or deny the application within 30 days of the receipt of
a complete application. The permit shall not be issued until the connection
fee, if any, has been paid.
§ 165-11. Calculation of design flow. [Amended 6-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-01]
The daily design flow of the proposed facility shall be determined by the
Superintendent with reference to the following:
New facility. For any new facility, the Superintendent shall determine
the daily design flow by referring to the following table and assuming
the maximum estimated population. In cases where the proposed use
is not listed, the Superintendent shall make his/her determination of a
reasonable design flow after consultation with the Maine Department
of Human Services and any other appropriate authorities or references.
The design flows for facilities shall be based on the resultant daily flows
of wastewater as determined from the following table:
A.
§ 165-8 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-11
147:741
Design Flows for Facilities
Type of Facility1 Gallons Per Day Design Flow
Single-Family Residential
Each one- or two-bedroom unit 180 per unit
Each additional bedroom 90 per bedroom
Multiple Residential
Boardinghouses (includes meals) 50 per bedroom
Rooming houses (without meals) 40 per bedroom
Transient accommodations with
Shared bathrooms 60 per bedroom
Private bathrooms 100 per bedroom
Mobile home parks 225 per site
Multifamily homes (except retirement homes)
One-bedroom unit 120 per unit
Two-bedroom unit 180 per unit
Three-bedroom unit 270 per unit
Multifamily homes (retirement homes limited to persons older than 50
years)
Each one- or two-bedroom unit 120 per unit
Commercial Establishments
Airports5 5 per passenger
Beauty salon5 10 per customer
Bottle club2 10 per 15 square feet
Bowling alley 75 per lane
Bus service areas5 5 per person
Factories and plants5
Without showers 15 per person
With showers 25 per person
Laundry, self-service 400 per washer
Offices or research laboratories5 15 per person
Restaurants
Eat in with conventional utensils2 30 per 15 square feet
Eat in with disposable utensils2 15 per 15 square feet
Twenty-four-hour operation2 50 per 15 square feet
Takeout only3 8 per 15 square feet
§ 165-11 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-11
147:742
Design Flows for Facilities
Type of Facility1 Gallons Per Day Design Flow
Retail4 6 per 100 square feet
Service station6 125 per vehicle
Taverns2 20 per 15 square feet
Tennis or racquetball courts 300 per court
Theaters 5 per seat
Visitor center5 6 per visitor per day
Work or construction camps (semipermanent)
With flush toilets 50 per bed
Gray water only 35 per bed
Institutional
Assembly halls or public buildings 5 per seat
Churches 5 per seat
Hospitals 150 per bed
Institutions (other than hospitals) 100 per bed
Mouse production area 1.76 per square foot
Nursing homes 100 per bed
Schools (boarding) 75 per bed
Schools (day)5
Elementary 7 per student plus 15 per
employee
Junior high 9 per student plus 15 per
employee
High school 12 per student plus 15 per
employee
Seasonal Commercial
Camps5
Day (no meal served) 10 per person
Day (only lunch served) 15 per person
Resort (limited plumbing) 50 per bed
Fairgrounds, parks and picnic
areas
10 per person
(with bath, showers and toilets)5
Swimming pools and bathhouses5 10 per person
Campgrounds
§ 165-11 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-11
147:743
§ 165-12. Inspections.
The Superintendent or Code Enforcement Officer may inspect any system
for which a permit is granted pursuant to this chapter to ensure continued
compliance with the same. Upon the finding of a violation, such official shall
take all necessary enforcement action.
§ 165-13. Enforcement.
This chapter may be enforced under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452 and Chapter 125,
Article X of the Bar Harbor Code.
Design Flows for Facilities
Type of Facility1 Gallons Per Day Design Flow
No sewer hookups 50 per site
With sewer hookups 75 per site
NOTES:
1For facilities that constitute a composite of one or more of the
following types of facilities, the design flow shall be calculated by
adding the design flow for each type of facility that comprises the
entire facility.
2Square feet refers to the square feet of dining area as defined by this
chapter.
3Square feet refers to square feet of serving area.
4Square feet refers to square feet of gross leasable area as defined by
Chapter 125, Land Use.
5Estimated maximum occupancy per day, as shown on land use
ordinance permit, application or site plan.
6Per vehicle that can be fueled simultaneously.
Increase of volume or change of use of existing facility. For the
expansion of a facility or use, increase of sewage discharge or the
change of use of a property, the Superintendent shall determine
whether the proposed design flow will increase over the current flow,
the current flow being the highest design flow based on the actual
use of the property in the past two years. The Superintendent shall
first calculate the proposed design flow, using the method outlined
in this section, and then subtract therefrom the current design flow
which shall be calculated using the same method used to calculate the
proposed design flow. The resulting number shall be the design flow
on which a determination of sewer capacity shall be based. [Amended
6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-01]
B.
§ 165-11 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-14
147:744
§ 165-14. Appeals. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
The Town Council may, upon written application of an aggrieved party
received by the Planning Department within 30 days of the
Superintendent's decision on a connection permit, hear appeals from said
decision. All appeal procedures shall be as provided by Chapter 125, Land
Use, § 125-103, Administrative appeals, except that "Superintendent" shall
be substituted for "Code Enforcement Officer," "Chapter 165, Article IV, of
the Bar Harbor Code" shall be substituted for "this chapter,” and “Town
Council” shall be substituted for “Board of Appeals.”
§ 165-15. Term of permit.
A connection permit shall expire and all fees shall be forfeited 18 months
from the date the permit was issued if within such time the new building
sewer is not connected to the public sewer, the flow of the existing sewer
connection is not increased, or the use of the property has not changed, as
provided in the connection permit application.
§ 165-16. Refunds.
Within 18 months from the date of issuance the Finance Director may
refund to the permittee the connection fee paid, less an administrative fee
of $100, upon the return of the unused connection permit. A permit shall
be considered unused if, within 18 months from the date the permit was
issued, the new building sewer is not connected to the public sewer, the flow
of the existing sewer connection is not increased, or the use of the property
has not changed, as provided in the connection permit application. Upon
payment of the refund, the sewer connection permit shall become null and
void.
§ 165-17. Denial of permit.
The Superintendent shall deny a sewer connection permit if the sewer lines
or any pump stations serving the subject property have insufficient capacity
to carry the proposed flow or if the proposed project will provide sewage
which would cause the wastewater treatment plant to receive influent in
excess of its design capacity for flow, biochemical oxygen demand or other
design parameter.
§ 165-14 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-17
147:745

ARTICLE V
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 165-18. Private system required when public sewer is unavailable.
Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of § 165-4, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system
complying with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable statutes
and/or regulations of the State of Maine.
§ 165-19. Inspection of system.
A private sewage disposal system shall not be made operable until the
installation is completed and approved by the Plumbing Inspector. He shall
be allowed to inspect the work at any state of construction, and, in any
event, the owner shall notify the Plumbing Inspector when the work is ready
for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 165-20. Abandonment of private system.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system as provided in § 165-4, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned, drained and filled with suitable material.
§ 165-21. Maintenance required.
The owner shall operate and maintain a private sewage disposal facility in a
sanitary manner at all times.
§ 165-18 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-21
147:747

ARTICLE VI
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 165-22. Permit required.
No person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written permit from the Town and paying to the Town any fee
imposed.
§ 165-23. Classes of permits; application.
§ 165-24. Costs of installation.
All costs and expense incident to the installation, repair and maintenance
or reconstruction of a building sewer to the service connection shall be
borne by the owner. The initial installation of the service connection from
the public right-of-way to the public sewer shall be installed by the owner,
with all costs and expenses incidental to the initial service connection
being borne by the owner. Upon inspection and acceptance by the Town,
the service connection will be maintained by the Town. The owner is
responsible for road opening permits and/or other utility permits or
notifications.
§ 165-25. Location of connection.
The building sewer shall be connected to a service connection at a place
designated by the Superintendent.
§ 165-26. Separate sewers required.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except as otherwise provided in this article. Grouping of more
than one building on one building sewer shall not be permitted, except
under special circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good
cause shown, but only after special permission of the Town Council, in
writing, shall have been secured and subject to such rules, regulations and
conditions as may be prescribed by the Town Council.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) For residential and commercial service; and
(2) For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
A.
In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be
supplemented by plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent.
B.
§ 165-22 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-27
147:749
§ 165-27. Use of existing building sewers.
Existing building sewers may be used in connection with any building only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 165-28. Construction materials.
The building sewer shall be cast-iron soil pipe ASTM Specification A74-66 or
equal; asbestos-concrete sewer pipe Class 1500 Type II ASTM Specification
C428-67 or equal; polyvinyl chloride (PVC) conforming to commercial
standard CS272-65 for PVC-DMV piping; and shall be Schedule 40 or other
suitable pipe approved by the Town Council.
§ 165-29. Joints and connections.
All joints and connections under this article shall be made permanently
gastight and watertight.
§ 165-30. Filled or unsettled ground.
The building sewer, when laid in unstable, filled or unsettled ground, shall
be laid in a manner approved by the Superintendent.
§ 165-31. Size and slope of building sewer.
The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval
of the Superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four
inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than 1/4 of an inch
per foot. If a slope of less than 1/4 of an inch per foot must be maintained,
The following type of joints shall be used:
All joints in vitrified clay pipes or between vitrified clay pipe and
metals shall be made by cementing with one part cement and
two parts sand, or by an approved hot poured asphaltic jointing
compound, or by an approved mechanical joint.
(1)
All PVC piping shall be of the socket type and assembly made with
solvent cement approved for PVC.
(2)
All joints in cement-asbestos sewer pipe shall be made with rubber
rings furnished by the manufacturer of the pipe and installed in
strict accordance with the recommendations of the manufacturer.
(3)
All joints in cast-iron piping shall be firmly packed with oakum or
hemp and secured with pure lead or other approved material, not
less than one inch deep.
(4)
A.
Adapters approved by the Superintendent shall be used when changing
from one kind of pipe to another. Any departure in type of joint from the
above shall be made only on the approval of the Superintendent.
B.
§ 165-27 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-31
147:750
the minimum diameter shall be six inches. In no case shall the slope be less
than 1/8 of an inch per foot.
§ 165-32. Grade.
The building sewer shall be laid at a uniform grade. Offsets or changes in
direction shall be made only with properly designed pipe fittings to permit
the use of a sewer rod or by the use of access manholes.
§ 165-33. Artificial lifting of sewage.
In any building for which the building sewer is too low to permit gravity
flow to the service connection, sewage carried by such pipe shall be lifted
by artificial means and discharged to the service connection.
§ 165-34. Cleanouts.
A suitable cleanout connection shall be installed inside the building to
permit cleaning the building sewer with a sewer rod.
§ 165-35. Excavations.
All excavations required for the building sewer and/or service connection
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
Superintendent. Pipe laying and backfilling shall be done in accordance
with the standard practice to provide proper support, drainage and freedom
from damage in backfilling. No excavations will be left open overnight,
except under unusual circumstances and with prior approval of the
Superintendent. No backfill shall be placed until the pipe has been
inspected. After inspection, no additional connections shall be made to the
building sewer.
§ 165-36. Inspection prior to connection.
The permittee shall notify the Superintendent when the building sewer and/
or service connection is ready for inspection. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent or his agent. Inspection must
be made within 48 hours of notice.
§ 165-37. Excavations to be guarded; repair of sidewalks.
All excavations for the service connection from the public right-of-way to
the public sewer shall be adequately guarded with barricades, signs, lights,
and other means of traffic control so as to protect the public from hazard.
Sidewalks or other public property disturbed in the course of installation or
repair of a building sewer and/or service connection shall be restored at the
expense of the owner of the property being served in a manner satisfactory
to the Superintendent.
§ 165-31 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-38
147:751
§ 165-38. Additional rules and regulations.
The Town reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional rules
and regulations as it shall deem necessary relating to connections with
the sewerage system, which additional rules and regulations, to the extent
appropriate, shall become a part of this chapter.
§ 165-38 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-38
147:752
ARTICLE VII
Use of Public Sewers
§ 165-39. Discharges to sanitary sewer restricted.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm waste,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
§ 165-40. Discharge of stormwater and unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
drains as are specifically designated as storm drains or to a natural outlet
approved by the Superintendent.
§ 165-41. Certain discharges prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewer:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F.
Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
B.
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
C.
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers
or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system.
E.
Any water or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewerage system.
F.
Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the sewerage system.
G.
Any water or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials in the sewerage system.
H.
Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
I.
§ 165-39 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-41
147:753
§ 165-42. Interceptors. [Amended 3-4-1997]
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal
or other public agencies or jurisdictions for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
J.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
K.
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewerage
system.
L.
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewerage
system effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
M.
Grease interceptors required.
Grease interceptors shall be provided in the following
establishments where food is prepared or dispensed: restaurants,
cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, bars and clubs, hotels, bed-andbreakfasts,
hospitals, sanitariums, factories, school kitchens,
commercial kitchens and nursing homes.
(1)
The Wastewater Superintendent may authorize annual waivers in
those cases where one of the above commercial establishments is
determined not to be a grease generator. Any establishment that
generates wastewater, or other waste to enter the public sewer,
which contains less than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat,
oil or grease shall be considered not to be a grease generator. In
reaching his determination, the Wastewater Superintendent may
require a test. Testing fees, if necessary, shall be paid by the
applicant. If inspection of a sewer service indicates grease is
entering the system from a property that has previously obtained a
waiver, the Superintendent may revoke the waiver and require that
a grease interceptor be installed. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-04]
(2)
A grease interceptor is not required for individual dwelling units
or for any private living quarters. Establishments which are not on
the public sewer system are exempt from the requirements of this
chapter.
(3)
A.
Oil and sand interceptors required. Oil and sand interceptors shall
be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are
B.
§ 165-41 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-42
147:754
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing any
flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units.
Construction and design of interceptors. All grease interceptors shall
be of a design conforming to Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard
PDI-G101, December 1985 Edition.138 Sand and oil interceptors, when
in the opinion of the Superintendent they are necessary, shall conform
to the same standards as grease interceptors. Grease and oil
interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and
watertight. The Superintendent shall review and approve all sizing
requirements prior to application for the installation permit.
[Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
C.
Permit required for installation. A permit for installation of an
interceptor shall be obtained from the local plumbing inspector.
D.
Location. Each interceptor and grease trap cleaning record shall be
so located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection at all times. Grease trap cleaning records shall be displayed
proximal to the location of the grease interceptor. Grease interceptors
shall be of the internal type. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04]
E.
Installation and maintenance. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-04]
All establishments which are required to install grease interceptors
must have the same installed no later than August 1, 1997.
(1)
Installation and maintenance of any interceptor shall comply with
the Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI-G101,139 except
that accumulated grease shall be removed as needed and at the
minimum of one time every two weeks during July, August and
September and one time every four weeks at other times of the
year. If inspection indicates minimum cleaning requirements are
not adequate, additional cleanings may be required. Owners of
properties in which grease interceptors are installed must, on
grease trap cleaning records provided by the Town of Bar Harbor,
maintain a record of the dates that such interceptors are cleaned.
These records remain the property of the Town of Bar Harbor
and are the only recognized proof of cleaning. Seasonal businesses
are exempt from inspection and cleaning requirements during the
times of year when they are closed.
(2)
F.
138. Editor's Note: A copy of Standard PDI-G101 is on file at the Town Clerk's office.
139. Editor's Note: A copy of Standard PDI-G101 is on file at the Town Clerk's office.
§ 165-42 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-42
147:755
§ 165-43. Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities.
Where preliminary treatment facilities are installed they shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation
at all times and made available to the Superintendent for periodic
inspection.
§ 165-44. Wastes requiring Council approval.
Inspection and violations. In the application for the installation of an
interceptor, the owner or tenant of the premises shall grant to the Town
permission to conduct unannounced inspections of such interceptor
during normal business hours, which inspections shall not
unreasonably interfere with normal operations of the business. Should
an inspection show a violation of this § 165-42, the owner and/or tenant
of the premises will be advised as to the requirements of this section.
Should a second inspection reveal a violation of § 165-42, a written
warning shall be issued describing the requirements of this section. In
the event that a third violation occurs, the highest dollar value of the
following will be charged to the owner, tenant and/or occupant of the
premises for each violation: a minimum surcharge of $200 or a tenpercent
surcharge to the premises' sewer bill for the current quarter. If
further violations continue, these may result in the prosecution of the
owner, tenant and/or occupant of the premises pursuant to § 165-50 of
this chapter. [Amended 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
G.
The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million
by weight of suspended solids, or any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in § 165-41, or an average daily flow greater
than 2% of the total average daily sewage flow, shall be subject to
review and approval of the Town Council. Where necessary in the
opinion of the Town Council, the owner shall provide, at his expense,
such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:
Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million
and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight;
(1)
Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the
maximum limits provided for in § 165-41; or
(2)
Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or
wastes.
(3)
A.
Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Town Council, and no construction of such facilities
shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing.
B.
§ 165-42 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-45
147:756
§ 165-45. Control manholes.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property served by
a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole shall be accessible and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him.
§ 165-46. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in §§ 165-41 and 165-44 shall be
determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control manhole provided
for in § 165-45 or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In
the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole
shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public
sewer nearest the point at which the building sewer is connected.
§ 165-47. Special agreements.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the Town for treatment; provided, however, that such
industrial concern shall make formal application to the Town requesting
exemption from existing requirements and this request shall be publicly
advertised and a public hearing held. Any exemption granted shall be
subject to payment for such direct increased costs as well as amortizing any
anticipated long-term costs for damage to the sewer system as a result of
granting the exemption, billing for such costs to be made as an addition to
the regular periodic charges for use of the sewerage system.
§ 165-45 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-47
147:757

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement
§ 165-48. Penalty for damage to system.
Any person who shall willfully or maliciously injure any part of the sewerage
system shall be subject to the general penalty set forth in § 1-18 of this
Code.
§ 165-49. Right of entry.
Duly authorized employees of the Town bearing proper credentials and
identifications shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of
the sewer and any connections in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. If permission is denied by any person, then all sewerage system
service may be discontinued by order of the Town Council with respect to
the property of said person.
§ 165-50. Enforcement officer. [Amended 3-4-1997; 10-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-04]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Bar Harbor Public Works Director or
his/her designee.
§ 165-48 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-50
147:759

ARTICLE IX
Sewer Extensions
§ 165-51. Conditions for extension.
Public sewer extension may be made upon petition of prospective users,
provided such users are located on an already accepted road or roads
approved by the Planning Board of the Town of Bar Harbor, subject to the
following conditions:
The size of the sewer extension shall be determined by the
Superintendent, giving consideration to possible future expansion.
A.
The Town may refuse to make an extension if such extension does not
appear to be in the best interests of the Town.
B.
§ 165-51 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-51
147:761

ARTICLE X
Construction of Public Drain or Common Sewer
[Added 10-21-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04]
§ 165-52. Statutory authority.
The authority for this Article X is 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3441, which authorizes
the Bar Harbor Town Council to accept the applicability of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§§ 3441 to 3445, regarding assessments and fees for new sewer
construction, to the Town.
§ 165-53. Expense of construction.
Estimate and assessment of costs; notice. Once the Town has
constructed and completed a public drain or common sewer, the Town
Council shall determine what lots or parcels of land are benefited by the
drain or sewer and shall estimate and assess upon the lots and parcels
of land and against the owner of the land or person in possession, or
against whom the taxes on the land are assessed, whether the person to
whom the assessment is so made is the owner, tenant, lessee or agent
and whether the land is occupied or not, the sum not exceeding the
benefit it considers just and equitable towards defraying the expenses
of constructing and completing the drain or sewer, together with any
necessary sewage disposal units and appurtenances. The whole of the
assessments may not exceed 1/2 the cost of the drain or sewer and
sewage disposal units, unless 75% or more of the landowners that will
be benefited by the expansion petition the Town Council to construct
the drain or sewer and sewage disposal unit and agree to pay a higher
assessment that must be identified in the petition. The Town, through
its employees and assigns, shall maintain and keep the drain or sewer
in repair.
Farmland, as defined by 36 M.R.S.A. §1102, Subdivision 4, is
exempt from assessment under this subsection when no benefits
are derived from the common sewer or drain. The owner of the
farmland must notify the Town Council that farmland property
may qualify for this exemption. The Town Council shall revise
the assessments against qualified farmland to exempt it from
assessment. Any revision of assessment provided by this subsection
must be in writing and recorded by the Clerk.
When the use of the land is changed from farmland, the owner
shall, within 60 days, notify the Town Council, in writing, of the
change. The Town Council shall assess this land in an amount
equal to the assessment which would have been due but for
this subsection. The Town Council shall notify the owner of the
assessment due, which the owner shall pay within 60 days of
notice or as provided by the Town Council under its authority
in § 165-55.
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 165-52 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-53
147:763
§ 165-54. Arbitration of assessment.
Any person who is dissatisfied with the amount assessed under § 165-53
may, within 10 days after hearing under § 165-53D, make a written request
to the Town Clerk to have the assessment upon the lot or parcel of land
determined by arbitration.
§ 165-55. Collection of assessments.
All assessments and charges made under this Article X shall be certified by
the Town Council and filed with the Tax Collector for collection. A facsimile
of the signatures of the Town Council imprinted at its direction upon any
Filing of assessments. The Town Council shall adopt an order detailing:
The location of the drain or sewer and sewage disposal unit, with a
plan and profile of the same;
(1)
A statement of the amount assessed upon each lot or parcel of land
assessed under this section; and
(2)
The name of the owners of the lots or parcels of land or persons
against whom the assessment is made.
(3)
B.
Notice of assessment. Within 10 days after filing occurs under
Subsection B, the Town Clerk shall send the notice specified in this
subsection by certified mail, return receipt requested, to each person
so assessed at the address listed in the Town’s tax assessment rolls.
The notice must contain an authentic copy of the assessment and an
order of notice signed by the Town Clerk stating the time and place for
a hearing upon the subject matter of the assessments. A return made
upon a copy of the notice by any Sheriff in Bar Harbor or the production
of the paper containing the notice is conclusive evidence that the notice
was given.
C.
Hearing; revision of assessments. When the hearing is held, the Town
Council may revise, increase or diminish any of these assessments. Any
revision, increase or diminution must be approved by a motion of the
Town Council and recorded in the minutes by the Town Clerk.
D.
Arbitrators selected. The Town Council shall nominate six persons who
are registered voters of the Town of Bar Harbor. The applicant shall
select two of those nominated, and these two persons shall select a
third person who is a registered voter of the Town of Bar Harbor and
who is not one of the six persons nominated by the Town Council.
A.
Arbitration procedure. The three persons selected under Subsection A
shall fix the amount to be paid by the applicant. Within 30 days from the
hearing before the Town Council under § 165-53, the arbitrators shall
report their findings to the Town Clerk, who shall record them. The
arbitrators’ report is final and binding on all parties.
B.
§ 165-53 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-55
147:764
certification of an assessment or charge under this chapter has the same
validity as their signatures.
§ 165-56. Lien for payment on lot and building; enforcement.
When any assessment made under § 165-53 is paid by any person against
whom the assessment has been made, who is not the owner of the lot or
parcel of land, then the person paying the assessment has a lien upon the
lot or parcel of land with the buildings on the land for the amount of the
assessment paid by that person, and incidental charges. The lien may be
Installment payments. The Town Council may adopt an order generally
authorizing the Assessor and the Tax Collector to assess and collect
those assessments and charges over a period of time not exceeding 10
years.
The Assessor and Collector may exercise this authority only when
the person assessed has agreed to installment payments in writing
and notice of that fact has been recorded by the Town Clerk in the
appropriate Registry of Deeds.
(1)
The Town Council shall annually file with the Tax Collector a list of
installment payments due the Town, which must be collected with
interest at a rate determined by the Town Council. If, within 30
days after written notice of the total amount of the assessments and
charges, or annual installment payment and interest, the person
assessed fails, neglects or refuses to pay the Town the expense
incurred, the Assessor may assess a special tax, equal to the
amount of the total unpaid assessment and charges, upon each lot
or parcel of land so assessed and buildings upon the lot or parcel of
land. This assessment must be included in the next annual warrant
to the Tax Collector for collection and must be collected in the same
manner as county and municipal taxes are collected.
Interest at the same rate used for delinquent property taxes
as established by 36 M.R.S.A. §505, Subdivision 4, on the
unpaid portion of assessments and charges due the Town of
Bar Harbor accrues from the 30th day after written notice to
the person assessed and must be added to and becomes part of
the special tax when committed to the Tax Collector.
(a)
(2)
A.
Action to recover unpaid assessments. If assessments under this section
are not paid and the Town does not proceed to collect the assessments
by a sale of the lots or parcels of land upon which the assessments are
made or does not collect or is in any manner delayed or defeated in
collecting the assessments by a sale of the real estate so assessed, then
the Town may maintain a civil action in its name against the party so
assessed for the amount of the assessment in any court competent to
try the action. In this action, the Town may recover the amount of the
assessment with 12% interest on the assessment from the date of the
assessment and costs.
B.
§ 165-55 PUBLIC PLACES § 165-56
147:765
enforced in a civil action and by attachment in the way and manner provided
for the enforcement of liens upon buildings and lots under Title 10 of the
Maine Revised Statutes Annotated. The lien shall continue one year after
the assessment is paid.
§ 165-56 BAR HARBOR CODE § 165-56
147:766
Chapter 170
SHELLFISH CONSERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Port and harbor — See Ch. 153.
§ 170-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted in accordance with 12 M.R.S.A. § 6671.
§ 170-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a shellfish conservation program
for the Town of Bar Harbor that will ensure the protection and optimum
utilization of shellfish resources within its limits. These goals will be
achieved by means including:
§ 170-3. Marine Resources Committee.
A. Licensing;
B. Limiting the number of shellfish harvesters;
C. Restricting the time and area where digging is permitted;
D. Limiting the minimum size of clams taken; and
E. Limiting the amount of clams taken daily by a harvester.
The shellfish conservation program for the Town of Bar Harbor will be
administered by the Marine Resources Committee, consisting of seven
members to be appointed by the Town Council for staggered terms of
three years.
A.
Committee's responsibilities. The Committee's responsibilities include:
Establishing annually, in conjunction with the Maine Department of
Marine Resources, the number of shellfish digging licenses to be
issued.
(1)
Surveying each clam-producing area at least once each three years
to establish size distribution and density and annually to estimate
the status of the Town's shellfish resources.
(2)
Submitting to the Town Council proposals for the expenditure of
funds for the purpose of shellfish conservation.
(3)
Keeping this chapter under review and making recommendations
for its amendment.
(4)
B.
§ 165-56 PUBLIC PLACES § 170-3
147:767
§ 170-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONRESIDENT — Anyone not qualified as a resident under this chapter.
RESIDENT — A person who has been domiciled in this municipality for
at least three months immediately prior to the time his/her claim of such
residence is made.
SHELLFISH and CLAMS — Soft-shell clams, Mya arenaria.
§ 170-5. Licensing.
Securing and maintaining records of shellfish harvest from the
Town's managed shellfish areas and closed areas that are
conditionally opened by the Department of Marine Resources.
(5)
Recommending conservation closures and openings to the Town
Council in conjunction with the area biologists of the Department
of Marine Resources.
(6)
Submitting an annual report to the municipality and the
Department of Marine Resources covering the above topics and all
other Committee activities.
(7)
Submitting to the Town Council proposals for ordinances that affect
land use in areas where shellfish beds will be impacted.
(8)
Submitting to the Town Council proposals for ordinances that affect
water use in areas where shellfish beds will be impacted.
(9)
Supporting water quality monitoring efforts by local citizen and
school groups that are working with the Maine Department of
Marine Resources in areas where shellfish beds are located. This
includes but is not restricted to:
(a) Assisting with selection of monitoring sites;
(b) Attending training sessions;
(c) Participating in water sample collection;
(d) Assisting with watershed surveys;
Submitting to the Town Council proposals for the expenditure
of funds for the purpose of addressing water quality related
issues;
(e)
Working with the Conservation Commission to evaluate water
quality data; and
(f)
Making recommendations to the Town Council for changes in
land or water use practices that are impacting shellfish beds.
(g)
(10)
§ 170-3 BAR HARBOR CODE § 170-5
147:768
Generally.
License required. It is unlawful for any person to dig or take
shellfish from this municipality without having a current license
issued by this municipality as provided by this chapter.
(1)
License fees waived. Resident recreational shellfish license fees
will be waived for residents over 65 and under 16 years of age.
(2)
State commercial license. A commercial shellfish harvester must
have a valid commercial shellfish license issued by the Maine
Department of Marine Resources. This license does not need to be
purchased prior to purchase of the Town license.
(3)
A.
Designation, scope and qualifications.
Resident commercial shellfish license. The license is available to
residents of the Town of Bar Harbor. It entitles the holder to dig,
take or possess any amount of shellfish from the shores and flats of
this municipality, except where lower limits have been established
for certain areas.
(1)
Nonresident commercial shellfish license. The license is available
to nonresidents of this municipality. It entitles the holder to dig,
take or possess any amount of shellfish from the shores and flats of
this municipality, except where lower limits have been established
for certain areas.
(2)
Resident recreational shellfish license. The license is available to
residents and real estate taxpayers of this municipality and
reciprocating municipalities. It entitles the holder to dig, take or
possess no more than one peck of shellfish in any one day for
personal use. This license is not available, nor valid, to holders of a
Maine commercial shellfish license.
(3)
Nonresident recreational shellfish license. The license is available
to any person not a resident of this municipality. It entitles the
holder to dig, take or possess not more than one peck of shellfish
in any one day for personal use. This license is not available, nor
valid, to holders of a Maine commercial shellfish license.
(4)
All shellfish licenses. It shall be unlawful for an individual to
possess any Bar Harbor shellfish license if their state shellfish
harvesters license is under suspension or revocation for any reason
for the period of state suspension at a minimum.
(5)
License must be signed and consent to inspection. In order for a
Town shellfish license to be valid, it must be signed. Any person
who signs a Town shellfish license has a duty to submit to
inspection and search for violations related to the licensed activity
by the Town Shellfish Warden or other Law Enforcement Officer
under the following conditions:
(6)
B.
§ 170-5 PUBLIC PLACES § 170-5
147:769
Watercraft or vehicles and the equipment located on
watercraft or vehicles which are used primarily during
shellfish harvesting activity may be searched or inspected at
any time if the Shellfish Warden or other Law Enforcement
Officer has a reasonable suspicion of a violation of the Town
Shellfish Conservation Ordinance by the licensed individual.
(a)
Conservation time requirements for commercial shellfish license.
No resident or nonresident commercial license shall be issued until
the applicant has completed the minimum number of mandatory
conservation hours. Qualifying conservation time includes
attending Marine Resources Committee meetings, clam flat
population and recruitment surveys, reseeding and any other
approved activity. Any member of the Bar Harbor Marine
Resources Committee may verify hours for approved activities. The
minimum required conservation hours will be established by the
Marine Resources Committee at least six months prior to current
license expiration date. Conservation time must be accumulated
in the previous licensing year; however, if an individual obtains
the appropriate conservation time, but is unable to obtain a
commercial license, their conservation time will rollover to the next
year or until they are offered a license.
(7)
Commercial license eligibility. Individuals possessing Bar Harbor
commercial shellfish harvesting licenses for four of the previous
five years and who have accumulated the required conservation
time are eligible to obtain their licenses two weeks in advance
of the next license year. The Marine Resources Committee shall
determine the number of advance licenses available for the next
year no later than 12 months in advance. If the number of eligible
individuals exceeds the number of advance licenses available,
those licenses shall be assigned through a lottery. Any licenses not
issued before the first working day of the new license year will be
available to any eligible individual that has met the conservation
time requirement.
(8)
Application procedure. Any person may apply to the Town Clerk, on
a form provided by the municipality, for the licenses required by this
chapter.
Contents of the application. The application must be in the form
of an affidavit and must contain the applicant's name, current
address, birth date, height, weight, signature, number of
conservation hours and any other information the municipality may
require.
(1)
Misrepresentation. Any person who gives false information on a
license application will cause said license to become invalid.
(2)
C.
Fees. Fees for the various classifications of licenses shall be established
by the Town Council from time to time. License fees must accompany in
D.
§ 170-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 170-5
147:770
full an application for any license. The Town Clerk shall transfer all fees
received to the Town Treasurer. Fees received for shellfish licensing
shall be used by the Town for shellfish management, conservation and
enforcement. Fifty cents may be retained by the Town Clerk's office, or
a designated agent, at point of purchase.
Limitation of diggers. Because the shellfish resources are limited and
a commercial or recreational digger can be expected to harvest a
certain volume of clams per year, the number of diggers must be
controlled. This number will vary from year to year depending upon
estimates of the resource capabilities and management requirements
consistent with good resource utilization. The following procedures will
be followed to exercise the control:
Number of licenses established. Prior to May 1 the Town Marine
Resources Committee, with the approval of the Maine
Commissioner of Marine Resources, will establish the number of
commercial and recreational licenses to be permitted following the
requirements of 12 M.R.S.A. § 6671(3-A).
(1)
Notice to Town Clerk. Prior to June 1 the Town Marine Resources
Committee will notify the Town Clerk in writing of the number of
licenses to be issued.
(2)
Public notice. Not less than 10 days prior to the period of issuance
notice of the number of licenses to be issued and the procedure
for application shall be published in a trade or industry publication,
or in a newspaper or combination of newspapers with general
circulation, effective in reaching persons affected. Notice shall also
be posted in the municipal offices until the period of issuance
concludes.
(3)
Dates of issuance. The Town Clerk shall issue licenses to residents
and nonresidents as allocated from the first day of July until the
28th day of September, after which licenses shall be issued to
residents and nonresidents on a first come, first served basis.
(4)
E.
License expiration date. Each license issued under the authority of this
chapter expires at midnight on the 30th day of June following the date
of issue.
F.
Suspension. Any shellfish licensee convicted of a violation of this
chapter shall have his/her shellfish license automatically suspended for
a period of 30 days. Any subsequent conviction shall result in loss of
shellfish license for one year.
Reapplication. A licensee whose shellfish license has been
suspended pursuant to this chapter may reapply for a license only
after the suspension period has expired.
(1)
G.
§ 170-5 PUBLIC PLACES § 170-5
147:771
§ 170-6. Opening and closing of harvest areas. [Amended 8-4-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-02]
The Town Council, upon the approval of the Maine Commissioner of Marine
Resources, may open and close areas for shellfish harvest. Upon
recommendation of the Marine Resources Committee and concurrence by
the Maine Department of Marine Resources area biologist that the status
of the shellfish resource and other factors bearing on sound management
indicate that an area should be opened or closed, the Marine Resources
Committee presents the recommendation to Town Council. Town Council
may vote to approve or deny the change in status at that time, or call a
public hearing on 10 days' notice published in a newspaper having general
circulation in the Town, stating the time, place and subject matter of the
hearing, and shall send a copy of the notice to the Department of Marine
Resources. The decision of the Town Council shall be based on findings
of fact. Once Council has approved the recommended change in clam
flat status, application will be made to the Maine Department of Marine
Resources for state approval.
§ 170-7. Limitation on clams to be taken.
§ 170-8. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates this chapter shall be punished as provided by 12
M.R.S.A. § 6671(6-A) and (10).
Effective date of suspension. The suspension shall be effective from
the date of mailing of a notice of suspension by the Town Clerk to
the licensee.
(2)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LOT — The total number of soft-shell clams in any bulk pile. Where softshell
clams are in a box, barrel or other container, the contents of each
box, barrel or other container constitutes a separate lot.
NIGHT DIGGING — The taking of shellfish during the period from 30
minutes after sunset to 30 minutes before sunrise.
POSSESS — Dig, take, harvest, ship, transport, hold, buy and sell, retail
or wholesale, soft-shell clam shell stock.
A.
Tolerance. Any person may possess soft-shell clams that are less than
two inches if they comprise less than 10% of any lot. The tolerance shall
be determined by numerical count of not less than one peck nor more
than four pecks taken at random from various parts of the lot or by a
count of the entire lot if it contains less than one peck.
B.
Night digging. Shellfish harvesting in Bar Harbor is limited to the
period from 30 minutes before sunrise to 30 minutes after sunset, with
no night digging of soft-shell clams allowed except by special permit.
C.
§ 170-5 BAR HARBOR CODE § 170-9
147:772
§ 170-9. When effective.
This chapter has been approved by the Maine Commissioner of Marine
Resources. Section 170-5B(8) of this chapter, Commercial license eligibility,
shall become effective January 1, 2013, with the balance of this chapter
effective 30 days following its adoption by the Town Council, provided that a
certified copy of this chapter is filed with the Commissioner within 20 days
of its adoption.
Chapter 178
TAXATION
§ 170-9 PUBLIC PLACES § 170-9
147:773

ARTICLE I
Personal Property Tax Delinquencies
[Adopted 10-2-1990 as § 07.01 of the 1990 Code]
§ 178-1. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of P&S Laws 1961, c. 176,
§ 3-A.
§ 178-2. Licenses and permits not to be issued when taxes are
delinquent.
Neither the Town Council nor any other board, officer, employee or agent
of the Town of Bar Harbor shall issue a license or permit to any business or
business owner, whether a corporation, partnership or sole proprietorship,
when such business or business owner is delinquent in the payment of
personal property taxes relating to said business. The prohibition in this
section relates to all permits and licenses issued by the Town, including but
not limited to liquor licenses, special amusement permits, victualer licenses,
building permits, land use permits and sewer permits.
§ 178-3. Abatement or appeal.
The prohibition in the preceding section shall not be enforced during the
pendency of an applicant's request for abatement or an applicant's appeal
of the tax assessment that is claimed to be delinquent.
§ 178-1 PUBLIC PLACES § 178-3
147:775

ARTICLE II
Taxation of Time-Share Estate
[Adopted 5-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-3]
§ 178-4. Title; statutory authority; administration; severability.
§ 178-5. Tax bills.
§ 178-6. Collection and receipt of money for taxes.
§ 178-7. Escrow account.
This article shall be known and may be sited as the "Ordinance for the
Taxation of Time-Share Estate in the Town of Bar Harbor."
A.
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Maine Revised
Statutes Annotated, Title 33, Chapter 10-A, §§ 591 through 594, Time
Shares.
B.
This article shall be administered by the Tax Collector and Treasurer of
the Town of Bar Harbor.
C.
This article shall consider each time-share unit a separate entity of
real estate and the valuation of each time-share unit shall conform to
all appropriate sections of the Maine Constitution and Maine Revised
Statutes Annotated, Title 36, Chapter 105.
D.
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts
to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of the article.
E.
On or about the date of commitment of taxes for the Town of Bar
Harbor, the Tax Collector shall send the managing entity a tax bill and
information necessary to identify the assessed value of each time-share
unit.
A.
The total amount of the tax bill is due and payable on the same due
dates as all other municipal property taxes. Interest on the overdue
taxes shall be charged at the legally established municipal interest rate.
B.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the Town of Bar
Harbor from sending separate tax bills to each time-share owner or
limit the right of any individual unit owner to appeal the assessment of
the individual unit in accordance with 36 M.R.S.A. §§ 841 and 843.
C.
The managing entity shall collect and receive money from time-share
estate owners for the purpose of paying taxes assessed on time-share
estates.
A.
The managing entity shall maintain an escrow account and pay taxes as
provided in § 178-7 below.
B.
§ 178-4 PUBLIC PLACES § 178-7
147:777
§ 178-8. Definitions.
Within this article, the following terms have the following meanings unless
the context indicates otherwise:
MANAGER — Any person, other than all time-share owners of the
association, designated in or employed pursuant to the time-share
instrument or project instrument to manage the time-share units.
MANAGING ENTITY — The manager or, if there is no manager, the
association of unit owners.
The escrow account shall be maintained with a financial institution
licensed by the state.
A.
The managing entity shall deposit any money collected or received from
a time-share owner for the taxes within 10 days after collection or
receipt.
B.
The escrow account must be established in the names of both the
managing entity and the Town of Bar Harbor.
C.
No withdrawal may be made from the account without the written
agreement of the Town of Bar Harbor
D.
The managing entity shall pay to the Town of Bar Harbor Tax Collector
all money deposited in the escrow account for the purpose of tax
payment prior to the delinquency date as established by the Town of
Bar Harbor. If the amount paid from the account is not sufficient to
discharge all taxes and tax-related costs, due and owing, the managing
entity shall either:
Pay the difference and place a lien on the those time-share estates
whose owners have not contributed to the escrow account as
provided in 33 M.R.S.A. § 594.
(1)
Provide a list identifying those owners and their interest, including
the periods of ownership, to the Town of Bar Harbor Tax Collector
who may then proceed to collect the taxes on those interests as
allowed by law.
(2)
E.
If the Tax Collector and Treasurer use the lien procedure described in
36 M.R.S.A. § 942, 942-A or 943 to collect delinquent taxes on timeshare
estate, whenever a notice called for by this 36 M.R.S.A. § 942,
942-A or 943 is sent to a time-share estate owner, the Tax Collector
and Treasurer shall give the managing entity or leave at the managing
entity's last and usual place of abode or send to the managing entity
by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the notice sent to
the time-share estate owner or a notice that lists all time-share estate
owners to whom notices have been delivered. The Tax Collector or
Treasurer is entitled to receive $5 plus all certified mail, return receipt
requested fees, plus the cost of any photocopying for sending the notice
or notes to the managing entity.
F.
§ 178-7 BAR HARBOR CODE § 178-8
147:778
PROJECT — Real property subject to a project instrument containing more
than one unit. A project may include units that are not time-share units.
PROJECT INSTRUMENT — One or more recordable documents by whatever
name denomination, applying to the whole of a project and containing
restrictions or covenants regulating the use, occupancy, or disposition of
units in a project, including any amendments to the document, but
excluding any law, ordinance, or governmental regulation.
PURCHASER — Any person, other than a developer, who by means of a
voluntary transfer acquires a legal or equitable interest in a time-share
other than as security for an obligation.
TIME-SHARE — A time-share estate or a time-share license.
TIME-SHARE ESTATE — Any interest in a unit or any of several units
under which the exclusive right to use, possession or occupancy of the unit
circulates among the various time-share owners in the unit in accordance
with a fixed time schedule on a periodically recurring basis for periods of
time established by the schedule coupled with a freehold estate or an estate
for years in a time-share property or a specified portion thereof.
TIME-SHARE INSTRUMENT — One or more documents, by whatever name
denominated, creating or regulating time-shares.
TIME-SHARE OWNER — A person who is an owner or co-owner of a timeshare
other than as security for an obligation.
TIME-SHARE PROPERTY — One or more time-share units subject to the
same time-share instrument, together with any other real estate or rights
appurtenant to those units.
TIME-SHARE UNIT — A unit in which time-shares exist.
UNIT — A real property or a portion thereof designated for separate use.
§ 178-9. (Reserved)
§ 178-8 PUBLIC PLACES § 178-9
147:779

ARTICLE III
Excise Taxes
[Adopted 11-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-08]
§ 178-10. Authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A, which expressly
authorizes such ordinances.
§ 178-11. Definitions.
Within this article, the following terms have the following meanings unless
the context indicates otherwise.
DEPLOYED FOR MILITARY SERVICE — The same meaning as in 26
M.R.S.A. § 814(1)(A).
UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES — The National Guard and the Reserves
of the United States Armed Forces as well as the regular United States
Armed Forces.
VEHICLE — The same meaning as in 36 M.R.S.A. § 1481(5) and does not
include any snowmobiles as defined in 12 M.R.S.A. § 13001.
§ 178-12. Excise tax exemption; qualifications.
Vehicles owned by a resident of this municipality who is on active duty
serving in the United States Armed Forces and who is either permanently
stationed at a military or naval post, station or base outside this state
or deployed for military service for a period of more than 180 days and
who desires to register that resident's vehicle(s) in this state are hereby
exempted from the annual excise tax imposed pursuant to 36 M.R.S.A.
§ 1482.
§ 178-13. Application.
To apply for this exemption, the resident must present to the municipal
excise tax collector certification from the commander of the resident's
post, station or base, or from the commander's designated agent, that the
resident is permanently stationed at that post, station or base or is deployed
for military service for a period of more than 180 days.
§ 178-14. When effective; duration.
This article shall take effect at the expiration of 30 days after adoption and
shall remain in effect unless and until it or 36 M.R.S.A. § 1483-A is repealed.
§ 178-10 PUBLIC PLACES § 178-14
147:781
Chapter 185
TREES
§ 185-1. Authority to plant trees.
Any person, association, or corporation may, by permission of the Town
Council, plant ornamental or shade trees by the sides of the roads or streets
and shall have control of such trees with full authority to protect and
preserve them and to use all lawful means for that purpose.
§ 185-2. Complaints.
If any owner of land adjoining a road or street feels aggrieved at the location
of a tree in front of his land, he may complain to the Town Council, which
may, after notice to the person or association who or which planted the tree,
order it removed.
§ 185-3. Violations and penalties.
If any person shall willfully mutilate or destroy any ornamental tree planted
or that may hereafter be planted on any of the streets of the Town under
§ 185-1 such person shall be punished in accordance with the general
penalty set forth in § 1-18 of this Code.
Chapter 190
VACATION RENTALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 125. Taxation of time-share estates — See Ch. 178,
Art. II.
§ 190-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use in alignment with state
laws and regulations.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
VACATION RENTALS — As defined in Land Use Ordinance § 125-109.
§ 190-3. Registration; procedure. [Amended 10-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-03; 4-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
§ 178-14 BAR HARBOR CODE § 190-3
185:782
§ 190-4. Inspections; compliance with certain regulations.
[Amended 4-15-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01]
All vacation rentals shall be registered with the Town of Bar Harbor on
an annual basis, prior to rental. Previously registered vacation rentals
shall reregister on or before May 31 annually. Registration forms shall
be filed with the building permit files under the management of the
Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 2-19-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-05]
A.
Registration forms shall include the following information:
(1) Name and mailing address of the owner of the property;
(2) Physical address of the property to be rented;
(3) Local contact name and phone number;
(4) Determination of Land Use Ordinance compliance.140
B.
The property shall pass inspection prior to the issuance of the
registration card.
C.
A registration card shall be issued to the property owner upon
submission of the completed form and payment of any fees as may
be set from time to time by the Town Council. The card shall certify
that the applicant has met all requirements in this chapter and the
Land Use Ordinance141 as attested by both the Fire Chief and the Code
Enforcement Officer or his/her designee.
D.
An approved registration card shall be posted on the premises of the
vacation rental unit for convenient inspection by a vacation rental
occupant.
E.
Registration does not relieve the property owner from the obligation to
obtain any additional permits necessary for the use.
F.
All vacation rentals shall be inspected initially by the Fire Department
for life safety requirements.
A.
Compliance with certain regulations required.
For the purposes of this chapter, vacation rentals shall comply with
the following chapters of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, as most
recently amended and edited, and as applicable:
(a) Chapter 4, General.
Chapter 6, Classifications of Occupancy and Hazard of
Contents.
(b)
(1)
B.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Land Use.
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 125, Land Use.
§ 190-3 TREES § 190-4
185:783
§ 190-5. Enforcement; violations; appeals.
Chapter 194
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking and Traffic Committee — See Ch. 31,
Art. VI.
Vehicles on beaches — See Ch. 25.
Buses, limousines, taxicabs and
pedicabs — See Ch. 40.
Noise — See Ch. 139.
Parks and public places — See Ch. 147.
(c) Chapter 7, Means of Egress.
(d) Chapter 9, Building Service and Fire Protection Equipment.
(e) Chapter 24, One- and Two-Family Dwellings.
(f) Chapter 30/31, New and Existing Apartment Buildings.
Additionally, vacation rentals shall comply with Chapter 70,
Electrical Installations, of this Code, as it may be amended, edited
and as applicable.
(2)
Enforcement authority. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
A.
Violations. A violation of this chapter shall constitute a violation under
the Land Use Ordinance, Chapter 125, Article X, Enforcement.
B.
Appeals. An appeal from the action of code enforcement or the Fire
Department may be sought through the powers and responsibilities
in the Land Use Ordinance, Chapter 125, § 125-103, Administrative
appeals.142
C.
142. Editor's Note: Former § 190-6, Effective date, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 10-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-03.
§ 190-4 BAR HARBOR CODE § 190-5
185:784
ARTICLE I
Terminology
§ 194-1. Definitions and word usage.
Words and phrases defined. For the purposes of this chapter, the words
and phrases listed below shall have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them by this section. Words and phrases which are not defined herein
but are defined in the laws of Maine which regulate the operation of
motor vehicles shall have the meaning set forth in said state laws.
ALLEY — A narrow way between buildings or giving access to the rear
of buildings.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire
Department, police vehicles, public traffic emergency repair vehicles,
ambulances, and such emergency vehicles of municipal departments
or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the
Police Chief. A privately owned vehicle commandeered by the Fire or
Police Chief or owned or used by fire or police personnel shall have
the same status under this chapter as a publicly owned authorized
emergency vehicle while actually engaged in or responding to a call for
public emergency service.
CROSSWALK —
CURB — The outer edge of a defined sidewalk or either edge of the
wrought and usually traveled part of a street.
CURB LOADING ZONE — A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers
or materials.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
IDLE or IDLING — When the engine of a motor vehicle is running but
not engaged in a gear to power the drive train.[Added 6-17-1997]
INDIVIDUAL PARKING SPACE — A portion of the paved surface of
a street of sufficient length and depth from the sidewalk curb to
accommodate a vehicle to be parked as shall be specified and marked
off as directed by the Town Council.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curblines or, if none, the lateral boundary
That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs,
from the edges of the traversable roadway.
(1)
Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface.
(2)
A.
§ 194-1 TREES § 194-1
185:785
lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at or
approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles
traveling upon different highways joining at any other angles may come
in conflict.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any self-propelled vehicle, but not including
motorized wheelchairs or snowmobiles. "Motor vehicle" includes, but is
not limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, and buses.[Amended
6-17-1997]
PARK — When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot.
PERSON — Includes a human being, corporation, partnership,
association, trust, estate, joint venture, or any other legal or
commercial entity.[Amended 6-17-1997]
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer of the municipal Police Department
or any other authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests
for violations of traffic regulations.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private
ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having
express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway improved, designed,
or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for
the use of pedestrians.
STOP — When required means complete cessation of movement.
STOP, STOPPING or STANDING — When prohibited means any
stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines
of every publicly maintained way when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
THROUGH STREET — Every street or portion thereof at the entrance
to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is
required by law to stop before entering or crossing the same and when
stop signs are erected as provided by this chapter.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for
purposes of travel.
§ 194-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-1
185:786
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE — All signs, signals, markings, and
devices, whether immovable or whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, placed or erected by authority of the Town
Council or the Police Chief by which traffic is alternately directed
to stop and to proceed or for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
Holidays, public. Public holidays, as used in this chapter, are those
designated as holidays for financial institutions by 9-B M.R.S.A.
§ 141.143
B.
Time. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean
standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this
Town.
C.
143. Editor's Note: Section 141 of Title 9-B was repealed by Chapter 398 of the Laws of 1997.
See now 9-B M.R.S.A. § 145.
§ 194-1 TREES § 194-1
185:787

ARTICLE II
Required Obedience to Traffic Regulations
§ 194-2. Public employees.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this state, county
or Town, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or
by federal or state statute.
§ 194-3. Drivers of authorized emergency vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to drivers of authorized
emergency vehicles, except as provided by 29 M.R.S.A. §§ 946 and 946-A.144
§ 194-4. Persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals or driving
animal-drawn vehicles.
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding any animal upon a roadway
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
144. Editor's Note: Sections 946 and 946-A of Title 29 were repealed by Chapter 444 of the
Laws of 1991.
§ 194-2 TREES § 194-4
185:789

ARTICLE III
Traffic Control Devices
§ 194-5. Authority to install traffic control devices.
The Police Chief, with the approval of the Town Council, shall place and
maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, traffic control signs,
signals, and devices required or authorized under this chapter and may
place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as he or she may
deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state law
or to guide or warn traffic, including angle parking signs and markings,
turning markers, and signs prohibiting left, right or U-turns, the location of
which he or she is authorized to determine. All signs or signals required or
authorized hereunder shall, so far as practical, be uniform as to type and
location throughout the Town. All traffic control signs, signals and devices
so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this
chapter shall be official traffic control devices.
§ 194-6. Obedience to official traffic control devices.
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic
control device applicable to that vehicle and placed in accordance with
this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
chapter. No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to
be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even
though no signs are erected or in place.
§ 194-7. Obedience to no-turn signs and turning markers.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or
U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of
any such sign, and, when authorized marks or other indications are placed
within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles
turning, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such
indication.
§ 194-8. Designation of crosswalks and traffic lanes.
The Police Chief, with the approval of the Town Council, is hereby
authorized:
Crosswalks. To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks
or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections
where in his or her opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians
crossing the roadway and at such other places as he or she may deem
necessary.
A.
§ 194-5 TREES § 194-8
185:791
§ 194-9. Stop intersections.
Lanes. To mark lanes for parking and for traffic on street pavements
at such places as he or she may deem advisable consistent with this
chapter.
B.
Bikeways. To designate and maintain bikeways by appropriate signs,
devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway.
C.
Authority to erect.
The Police Chief shall place and maintain a stop sign at each
location designated by this section.
(1)
Every such sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than
six inches in height and shall be located as near as practicable to
the line of the crosswalk furthest from the intersection or, if no
crosswalk exists, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway.
(2)
A.
Stop required. When stop signs are erected as provided by this section,
every driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign, or at a
clearly marked stop line, before entering the intersection, except when
directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal.
B.
Enter through street. After the driver of a vehicle has stopped in
obedience to a stop sign at the entrance to a through street, such driver
shall then proceed cautiously, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles
which have entered the intersection from said through street or which
are approaching so closely on such through street as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
C.
Stop signs or flashing red light locations. Stop signs or flashing red
lights shall be erected and maintained on the entering street(s) at the
following intersections in accordance with the following schedule:
Through Way Entering Street
Atlantic Avenue Elbow Lane
Cottage Street Bridge Street
Federal Street
Greeley Avenue
High Street
Holland Avenue
Maple Avenue
Rodick Street
Cromwell Harbor Road Glen Mary Road
Harden Farm Road
Kebo Street
D.
§ 194-8 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-9
185:792
Through Way Entering Street
Rockwood Avenue
Spring Street
Crooked Road Knox Road
Old Norway Drive
Eagle Lake Road Cleftstone Road
Cromwell Harbor Road
Cross Street
Forest Street
Norway Drive
Prospect Avenue
Public School Driveways
Woodbury Road
Eden Street Bowles Avenue
Brewer Avenue
First Highbrook Road
Harbor Lane
Michigan Avenue
Prospect Avenue
Second Highbrook Road
First South Street Des Isle Avenue
Forest Street Pine Street
Glen Mary Road Park Street
Ledgelawn Avenue Cromwell Harbor Road
Park Street [Added 8-15-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-04]
Pleasant Street
Waldron Road
Main Street Albert Meadow
Atlantic Avenue
Center Street
Cottage Street
Cromwell Harbor Road
Derby Lane
Edgewood Street
Firefly Lane
First South Street
§ 194-9 TREES § 194-9
185:793
Through Way Entering Street
Hancock Street
Livingston Road
Mount Desert Street
Newport Drive
Newton Way
Oliver Street
Park Street
Rodick Place
Schooner Head Road
Second South Street
Stanwood Place
Stephens Lane
The Field
Wayman Lane
Mount Desert Street Holland Avenue
Kennebec Street
Ledgelawn Avenue
Roberts Avenue
School Street
Shannon Road
Spring Street
Park Street Ash Street
School Street
Route 3 Bayview Drive
Breakneck Road
Crooked Road
Hadley Point Road
Hamor Avenue
Knox Road
Ledgewood Road
Loring Street
Norway Drive (Old Route 3)
Sand Point Road
Routes 198 and 102 Indian Point Road
Knox Road
School Street Edgewood Street
§ 194-9 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-9
185:794
§ 194-10. Yield intersections.
Through Way Entering Street
Second South Street
Slant Road
Wescott Avenue
Waldron Road Glen Mary Road
Shannon Road
Spring Street
West Street Billings Avenue
Bridge Street
Holland Avenue
Main Street
Rodick Street
West Street Extension Cleftstone Road
Prospect Avenue
Woodbury Road
Three-way stop intersections. Stop signs shall be erected at the
following intersections on the enumerated entering streets:
School Street, Cedar Avenue, Newton Way
School Street, Pleasant Street, First South Street
Bloomfield Road (both sides), Champlain Road [Amended 8-15-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-6]
Cleftstone Road, Highbrook Road at Howe's Park [Added 8-15-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-6]
E.
Four-way stop intersections. Stop signs shall be erected at the following
intersections on the enumerated entering streets:
Ledgelawn Avenue, Lower Ledgelawn Avenue, Cromwell Harbor Road
Ledgelawn Avenue, Park Street [Added 8-15-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-04]
F.
Authority to erect.
The Police Chief shall place and maintain a yield sign at each
location designated by this section.
(1)
Every such sign shall bear the word "Yield" in letters not less than
six inches in height. Signs shall be located as near as practicable
to the line of the crosswalk furthest from the intersection or, if no
crosswalk exists, at the point nearest the intersecting roadway.
(2)
A.
§ 194-9 TREES § 194-10
185:795
§ 194-11. Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings.
Yield required. The driver of any vehicle approaching a yield sign shall
slow down to a speed reasonable for existing conditions and shall yield
the right-of-way to any vehicles in the intersection or approaching on
another roadway so closely as to constitute a hazard during the time
such driver is moving across or within the intersection.
B.
Yield sign locations. Yield signs shall be erected and maintained on the
entering streets at the following intersections in accordance with the
following schedule:
Through Way Entering Street
Crooked Road Norway Drive
Eden Street Mount Desert
West Street
C.
Signs, signals and markings. No person shall place, maintain, or display
upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking,
or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an
official traffic control device, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness
of any official traffic control device, and no person shall place on any
official traffic control device any commercial advertising, nor shall any
public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed
to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of
signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be
mistaken for official signs.
A.
Public nuisance. Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having
jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove or cause
to be removed each such sign, signal or marking without notice.
B.
§ 194-10 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-11
185:796
ARTICLE IV
Stopping, Standing and Parking
[Amended 2-5-1991; 5-12-1991; 8-13-1991; 7-6-1993; 9-7-1993;
8-2-1994; 11-15-1994; 10-1-1996; 6-3-1997; 6-1-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-3; 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-07; 4-5-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-03]
§ 194-12. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified
places.
§ 194-13. Handicapped parking.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the
following places or manners:
(1) On a sidewalk.
(2) In front of a public or private driveway or alley.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(5) On a crosswalk.
(6) Within 15 feet of the near corner of the curbs at an intersection.
Within 15 feet upon the approach to any stop sign located at the
side of a roadway.
(7)
Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
20 feet of said entrance (when properly sign posted).
(8)
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(9)
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
(10)
(11)Upon any bridge.
(12)At any place where official signs or curb painting so prohibit.
On Cottage Street, West Street, Ledgelawn Avenue and on Main
Street from Park Street to West Street in any manner other than
headed in the general direction of travel for the side of the street
on which the vehicle is parked.
(13)
A.
No person shall move a vehicle lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
B.
§ 194-12 TREES § 194-13
185:797
§ 194-14. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
Designation of spaces. The Police Chief, with the approval of the Town
Council, shall designate, or cause to be designated, public parking
spaces specifically reserved for handicapped persons.
Adjacent to and visible from each designated handicapped parking
space shall be posted:
A sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with an
occupant in white on a blue background with a printed
inscription. The inscription shall read "Handicapped Parking:
Special Plate Required. Unauthorized vehicles are subject to a
fine"; or
(a)
A sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with an
occupant in white on a blue background which may bear an
inscription.
(b)
(1)
Any new sign erected or any sign replaced after April 11, 1983,
must conform to the signs described in Subsection A(1)(a) and (b).
Any existing signs posted that do not comply with such sections
and which were erected before April 11, 1983, are valid for
enforcement purposes.
(2)
A.
Parking prohibited. No person shall park in any clearly marked parking
space designated under this section as a handicapped parking space
any vehicle that does not bear a special registration plate or placard
issued under 29-A M.R.S.A. §§ 521 and 523 or a similar plate issued by
another state.
B.
Private parking. Owners of off-street parking shall arrange for private
enforcement or shall enter into written agreements with the Police
Department to police any spaces clearly marked parking spaces
dedicated for handicapped persons' vehicles. Under such agreements,
Town police may exercise their vested authority to ensure that parking
spaces designated for the handicapped are utilized appropriately by
handicapped persons, irrespective of whether the designated
handicapped parking spaces are located on public or private lots open
to the public, and the prohibition set forth in the preceding subsection
shall apply to all parking spaces so designated.
C.
Clearly marked. For purposes of this section, "clearly marked" includes
signs painted on pavement, vertical standing signs, or barriers, any of
which are visible under existing weather conditions.
D.
Parking prohibited. When signs are erected, curbs are painted or
pavement is marked giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
herein. [Amended 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
A.
§ 194-13 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-14
185:798
Designated areas. Parking shall be prohibited at all times upon the
following streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Location
Agamont Lane [Added
11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-07]
Both sides, for the entire length
Albert Meadow North side
Albert Meadow South side, except from a point 30 feet
from Main Street to a point 200 feet from
Main Street
Ash Street East side
Atlantic Avenue North side
Billings Avenue From the southeasterly corner of Lot
3-4-12, 40 feet northerly and 40 feet
westerly, always following the sideline of
said lot, and from the southwesterly
corner of Lot 3-4-14, 45 feet northerly
and 45 feet easterly, always following the
sideline of said lot
Brewer Avenue North side
Bridge Street East side
Bridge Street West side from Cottage Street to Summer
Street
Center Street South side
Cottage Street From the intersection of Bridge Street
easterly for 30 feet
Cottage Street From the west end of Federal Street
easterly for 40 feet
Cottage Street North side from Main Street to a point 30
feet from Main Street
Cromwell Harbor Road Both sides from Eagle Lake Road to
1,150 feet southwest
Derby Lane [Amended
6-16-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-03]
North side from Main Street to a point
150 feet easterly thereof
Derby Lane [Amended
6-16-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-03]
North side from a point 318 feet easterly
of Main Street to a point 40 feet easterly
thereof
Derby Lane South side
Des Isle Avenue East side
Des Isle Avenue West side 30 feet from each end
B.
§ 194-14 TREES § 194-14
185:799
Name of Street Location
Eagle Lake Road/233 North and south side except from a point
100 feet easterly from the Eagle Lake
north side parking lot entrance to a point
654 feet east, except from a point 100
feet from the south side parking entrance
to a point 181 feet east also known as
"boat landing"
Eden Street East side for a distance of 85 feet from
Cottage Street
Edgewood Street South side
Federal Street [Amended
5-15-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
Left side from eastern intersection with
Cottage Street to the westerly leg of said
street
First South Street South side
Glen Mary Road West side
Greeley Avenue East side from Cottage Street southerly
to the northerly leg of Greeley Square
Greeley Avenue West side southerly from the northerly
leg of Greeley Square
Greeley Square Left side from southern intersection with
Greeley Avenue
High Street West side
Holland Avenue Both sides between Mount Desert Street
and West Street
Kavanaugh Place West, south and east sides and within the
extreme westerly 10 feet of the north
side
Kennebec Street
[Amended 5-15-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-02]
East side and no parking for 33 feet
beginning 81 feet from the intersection
with Cottage Street
Livingston Road South side
Maine State Route 3 North and south sides between Bangor
Hydroelectric Pole No. 2-139 and Pole
No. 2-134
Main Street East side to a point 50 feet southerly of a
private way known as "Cottage Way" to a
point 120 feet northerly of said Cottage
Way; and from Stephens Lane to a point
120 feet southerly thereof; and from a
point 60 feet northerly of Albert Meadow
to a point 80 feet southerly of Albert
Meadow
§ 194-14 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-14
185:800
Name of Street Location
Main Street West side from a point 90 feet northerly
of Cottage Street to point 60 feet
southerly of Cottage Street; and from a
point 240 feet southerly of Cottage Street
to Rodick Place
Maple Avenue West side
Michigan Avenue South side
Mount Desert Street South side from School Street, except
from a point 350 feet from Main Street to
a point 60 feet from Main Street
Myrtle Avenue North side
Newport Drive North side
Newton Way North side from a point 138 feet from
School Street to a point 168 feet from
School Street
Newton Way South side
Park Street North side from Main Street to
Ledgelawn Avenue
Pleasant Street South side
Roberts Avenue Both sides for a distance of 95 feet from
Cottage Street
Roberts Square Both sides
Rodick Place Both sides, except in officially marked
parking spaces
Rodick Place North side from Main Street to a point
118 feet from Main Street
Rodick Street East side 40 feet northerly from Cottage
Street
Rodick Street West and east sides from Cottage Street
to Kennebec Street
School Street East side 37 feet from Mount Desert
Street
School Street West side
Second South Street South side
Shannon Road West side 500 feet southerly from Mount
Desert Street
Snow Street West side
Spring Street West side
Stanwood Place South side
Summer Street Both sides
§ 194-14 TREES § 194-14
185:801
§ 194-15. Parking time limited on certain streets and in public
parking lots.
Name of Street Location
Wayman Lane South side
Wescott Avenue Both sides
York Street [Amended
3-1-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-01]
Both sides
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a
vehicle except in conformity with the following provisions:
Two-hour parking. Parking time at the following locations is limited
to two hours, between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., from Memorial
Day to and including Columbus Day, except during the
Independence Day celebration:
Name of Street Location
Cottage Street Both sides
Main Street Both sides from Wayman Lane to West
Street
Mount Desert Street South side from Main Street to School
Street and north side from Main
Street to Kennebec Street
Fire Fly Lane South side
West Street From Main Street to the west end of
Billings Avenue
(1)
Three-hour parking. Parking time at the following locations is
limited to three hours, from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., from Memorial
Day to and including Columbus Day, except during the
Independence Day celebration:
Central Parking Lot (those public parking lots neighboring the
police and fire stations);
(a)
Newport Drive Parking Lot (the public parking lot adjacent
to Newport Drive), except for the parking spaces abutting
the easterly boundary; [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-07; 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
(b)
Harborview Parking Lot (the public parking lot adjacent to
Harborview Park);
(c)
Backyard Parking Lot (the public parking lot bounded by York
Street, Lenox Place and Laurel Court);
(d)
(e) Municipal Pier Parking Lot;
(2)
A.
§ 194-14 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-15
185:802
Grant's Park Parking Lot (the public parking lot adjacent to
Grant's Park), the easterly row of parking.
(f)
(g) West Street, from the Municipal Pier to Main Street.
(3) (Reserved)145
Long-term parking. No parking shall be permitted in any municipal
parking lot for more than 72 continuous hours unless otherwise
designated as long-term parking. No long-term parking shall be
permitted from the day after Columbus Day to the day before
Memorial Day.
(4)
Municipal office parking lot. There shall be no parking between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily in the parking lot to the east
side of the Municipal Office Building.
(5)
Resident recreational boater permits. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Harbor Master or Dispatch Division shall, upon
request, on a daily basis, issue to resident recreational boaters
permits which allow all-day parking in the Newport Drive Parking
Lot, subject to the following conditions: [Amended 11-21-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-07; 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
(a) Only 10 permits may be issued per day.
(b) Permits shall be issued on a first-come, first-served basis.
A permit shall serve merely to exempt the vehicle(s) for which
it is issued from the time limitations set forth in this section,
shall only be valid on the day on which it is issued and shall not
be construed so as to guarantee the holder thereof an available
parking space in the Newport Drive Parking Lot.
(c)
A permit shall not be issued until the Harbor Master or
Dispatch Division has been satisfied that the person who is
requesting it actually intends to engage in recreational boating
on the date of issuance. Any person to whom a permit is issued
who does not engage in recreational boating on the date of
issuance shall not be eligible to receive a permit for a period of
six months thereafter.
(d)
(e) Permits may only be requested in writing.
Only one vehicle per boat trailer shall be issued a permit at any
one time.
(f)
For purposes of this subsection, a resident shall be defined as a
person holding a Maine driver’s license, a Maine motor vehicle
registration and a Maine boat registration, all of which shall
(g)
(6)
145. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), Ten-hour parking, added 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-07, was repealed 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03.
§ 194-15 TREES § 194-15
185:803
be current and show a physical address within the Town of Bar
Harbor.
Parking for commercial fishermen. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this chapter to the contrary, the Harbor Master shall,
upon request, on an annual basis, issue no more than 30 permits
to individual resident commercial fishing vessel owners which shall
allow permitees to exceed the posted parking time limit on the
Municipal Pier, and in the public parking lot adjacent to Newport
Drive, subject to the following conditions: [Amended 9-17-2013
by Ord. No. 2013-04]
A permit shall be valid for any of the lots named above and
shall not designate a particular lot.
(a)
A permit shall serve merely to exempt the vehicle for which it
was issued from the time limitations set forth in this section
and shall not be construed as to guarantee the holder thereof
an available parking space in any lot.
(b)
With respect to the Municipal Pier, a permit shall only be valid
when used for parking in the center, northern and western
aisle parking spaces.
(c)
Permits shall be issued on a first-come, first-served basis
beginning May 15 of each year and shall expire on May 14 of
the following year.
(d)
(e) Permits may only be requested in person.
The Town Council shall, from time to time, establish the
number of permits to be issued, the conditions under which
permits may be issued, any limitations of issuance and the fee
to be charged therefor, if any.
(f)
Only one vehicle per boat used for commercial fishing shall be
issued a permit at any one time.
(g)
No permit shall be issued until the Harbor Master has been
satisfied that the person requesting the same is actually a
resident commercial fishing vessel owner.
(h)
No permit shall be issued to any person who is not current
in his or her payment of mooring fees, any license or permit
required to be paid to the Town by commercial fishermen, or
any personal property taxes related to his or her boat or fishing
equipment.
(i)
No vehicle displaying a permit issued under this section may
be parked in any of the above-mentioned lots for more than 18
continuous hours in any twenty-four-hour period.
(j)
(7)
§ 194-15 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-15
185:804
§ 194-16. Hazardous or congested places.
§ 194-17. Parking not to obstruct traffic.
No person shall stop, stand, park or leave a vehicle on any street or bikeway
in such a manner or under such conditions so as to obstruct the free passage
of other vehicles in either direction, unless specifically permitted by a police
officer, or so as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the
roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
§ 194-18. Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under
such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the
driveway entrance to an abutting property.
No holder of a permit issued under this section shall park a
permitted vehicle with its tailgate in an open position or in
such a manner as to otherwise impede the orderly and efficient
flow of traffic.
(k)
Fifteen-minute parking. Parking shall be limited to 15 minutes upon
the following streets or parts thereof:
A total of four spaces, two on the north side of Cottage Street
and two on the south side of Cottage Street, at the curb cuts to
Graves' Shop and Save and the Municipal Building.
(a)
A total of five spaces in front of the Bar Harbor Post Office
on the north side of Cottage Street between the east and west
ends of Federal Street.
(b)
(8)
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary,
parking shall not be permitted on any public street or in any municipal
parking lot between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. from
November 15 to April 15.
B.
Authority to designate. The Police Chief, with the approval of the Town
Council, is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper
signs areas, not exceeding 100 feet in length, in which the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited as it would create an
especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
A.
Stopping, standing and parking prohibited. When official signs are
erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
B.
§ 194-15 TREES § 194-19
185:805
§ 194-19. Standing or parking close to curb.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle on Eden Street, Main Street or
Mount Desert Street other than parallel to the edge of the roadway, headed
in the direction of lawful traffic movement, and with the right-hand wheels
of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as
follows:
§ 194-20. Places of assemblage.
The Police Chief is authorized to place temporary or permanent traffic
control signs in front of entrances to places of assemblage or any other
buildings in which entertainments, plays, shows, exhibitions and the like
are given, either regularly or otherwise, for such periods as the Police Chief
may deem wise under the circumstances.
§ 194-21. Large vehicles. [Amended 12-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-08]
No owner, driver, or person in charge of any vehicle which has a carrying
capacity of more than 3,000 pounds or which, including load, is more than
20 feet five inches in length or which, including load, is more than eight feet
in width or which, including load, is more than 12 feet six inches in height
shall permit the same to stand upon any public street or public parking
lot in the Town except in those areas where such parking is permitted as
designated by signs which are erected and give notice thereof or unless
specifically permitted by the Chief of Police.
§ 194-22. Owner's liability.
The parking of any motor vehicle in violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such vehicle by the
person in whose name such vehicle is registered.
§ 194-23. Parking adjacent to school areas.
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to cause temporary or permanent
signs to be erected indicating no parking adjacent to any school property
when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation. When official signs are erected indicating no
parking adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in
any such designated place.
Backing to curb. When specifically authorized by a police officer, any
person may back a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or
unloading merchandise or materials for a period not in excess of 30
minutes. No person shall so back a vehicle to a curb unless specifically
so authorized by a police officer, and no person shall, in any event, back
a vehicle onto any curb or sidewalk in this municipality.
A.
Angle parking. Angle parking shall be permitted only in those areas
designated by signs.
B.
§ 194-19 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-24
185:806
§ 194-24. Snow removal.
§ 194-25. Unlawful parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of advertising, displaying such vehicle for sale, or washing, greasing or
repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.
§ 194-26. Public utility vehicles.
Vehicles operated by the Town of Bar Harbor or by public utility companies,
used for installation, repair and maintenance purposes, may be exempted
by the Police Chief, upon notice to the Town Clerk, in each case temporarily
for the period while actually at work at a definite location, from any of
the requirements of this chapter, provided that during such exemption
period, work will be conducted with all reasonable dispatch and that such
precautions as the Police Chief may require in the interest of public safety
shall be taken. The Police Chief is authorized to place temporary signs
prohibiting parking in such places at the scene of work as he or she deems
necessary to facilitate traffic and the work in progress. Subject to the
necessary exceptions provided by this section, Article IV of this chapter
shall nevertheless be observed insofar as practicable. Upon receipt of such
notice, the Town Clerk shall notify the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, and the
Director of Public Works of such operations.
§ 194-27. Time limit for on-street parking.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, no
person shall park a vehicle on any street for a period of more than 72
continuous hours.
§ 194-28. Permit parking only.
No vehicle shall be parked at any time on any public street or way so as
to interfere with or hinder the removal of snow from said street or way
by the Town plowing or loading or hauling.
A.
For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow, the Director of
Public Works or Chief of Police may cause to be placed properly marked
signs along any street or streets as either shall, from time to time, deem
necessary. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to enter
upon, stop or park within the spaces indicated by such signs.
B.
Parking prohibited except by permit. From Memorial Day through
Columbus Day, it shall be unlawful and in violation of this article for
any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle, other than a vehicle
displaying a valid permit issued by the Police Chief or their designee
under regulations to be prescribed by Council order, on those streets or
portions of parking areas duly posted and which are described below:
A.
§ 194-24 TREES § 194-28
185:807
Service and delivery vehicles excepted. Non-permitted vehicles
stopped, standing or parked within 200 feet of a building for the
purpose of making deliveries or providing services to a building located
on a street or portion of a street described or specified in this section
shall not be required to display the permit otherwise required herein.
B.
Permit requirements:
The Town Council may set permit fees from time to time. No permit
shall be issued except upon payment of the applicable fee, if any.
(1)
(2) Permits shall be valid only for the current calendar year.
(3) There shall be two classes of permits: resident and employee.
Applicants desiring to receive a resident permit shall submit the
following:
Current Maine motor vehicle registration form showing a
physical address within the Town of Bar Harbor.
(a)
A completed application form showing:
[1] Name of registrant of motor vehicle.
Physical address of their current residence in the Town of
Bar Harbor.
[2]
[3] Mailing address, if different from physical address.
Vehicle description, including make, model, color, year of
manufacture and plate number, all of which shall match
the submitted vehicle registration form.
[4]
(b)
(4)
Applicants desiring to receive an employee permit shall be a
current employee of a business located in the Town of Bar Harbor,
hold a position with that business which requires their physical
presence in the downtown Bar Harbor area and submit the
following:
Two valid paycheck stubs issued during the current year by
an employer having a physical address within the Town of Bar
Harbor.
(a)
A completed application form showing:
[1] Name of registrant of motor vehicle.
[2] Physical address of their current residence.
[3] Mailing address, if different from physical address.
Vehicle description, including make, model, color, year of
manufacture and plate number.
[4]
(b)
(5)
C.
§ 194-28 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-28
185:808
§ 194-29. Recreational boater and boat trailer parking. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-07; 6-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-03]
There shall be no parking of any vehicles in the parking spaces abutting
the easterly boundary of the Newport Drive Parking Lot, except as provided
below:
Upon submittal of the required application materials as provided
above and payment of the fee as set by the Town Council, the Police
Chief or their designee shall issue the appropriate class of permit.
(6)
The Police Department shall provide parking permits in the form of
a sticker, which shall be consecutively numbered and show the year
of issue.
(7)
Permits shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle's front
windshield on the passenger-side lower corner and shall be clearly
visible through the windshield. Permits not properly displayed shall
be invalid.
(8)
A permit shall not guarantee a parking space. Spaces shall be
available on a first-come, first-served basis.
(9)
No permit shall be issued for any vehicle having outstanding Town
of Bar Harbor parking fines.
(10)
No person shall furnish false information to the Town in connection
with obtaining a permit authorized hereunder. Any permit issued
upon false information shall be null and void and subject the
applicant to additional penalties as provided by law.
(11)
No person shall transfer any permit and any permit attempted to
be transferred shall be null and void and subject to confiscation by
the Bar Harbor Police Department. Upon the disposal of a vehicle
already permitted, a resident may apply for a new permit for the
new vehicle. Residents surrendering the old permit shall receive
the new permit at no charge.
(12)
Whenever the conditions which qualified an applicant for a permit
no longer exist, the owner of the vehicle so permitted shall
immediately remove the permit sticker.
(13)
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$100, each day of violation being considered a separate offense.
D.
Boat trailers, with or without motor vehicle or boat attached, but not to
exceed 10 hours.
A.
Vehicles of resident recreational boaters displaying permits as provided
by § 194-15.
B.
§ 194-28 TREES § 194-29
185:809

ARTICLE V
Operation of Vehicles
§ 194-30. Backing limitation.
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 194-31. Bicycles.
§ 194-32. Entering traffic from curb.
The driver of a vehicle starting from a curb or roadway edge shall yield
the right-of-way to all moving traffic on the roadway and shall not enter or
attempt to enter such moving traffic until able to do so safely.
§ 194-33. Following fire apparatus.
The driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet
or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
§ 194-34. One-way streets.
Parking. No person shall park a bicycle on any street except in a
standing position against a curb or edge of roadway or sidewalk.
A.
Sidewalks. No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk or within any
sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway or upon
the following sidewalks which have been designated bikeways:
Name of Street Location
Eden Street East side, from West Street to College of the
Atlantic
Main Street East side, from Park Street to Schooner Head
Road
B.
Traffic laws apply. Every person propelling or riding a bicycle upon
any public street in this Town shall be subject to the provisions of this
chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions
of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
C.
Obedience to traffic control devices. Any person operating a bicycle
shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signs, signals, and
other control devices, including signs indicating that no left, right or Uturn
is permitted, applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.
D.
Traffic movement restricted. Upon those streets and parts of streets
designated in this section, vehicular traffic shall move only in the
A.
§ 194-30 TREES § 194-34
185:811
§ 194-35. Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalk or bikeway.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive or ride within any sidewalk area
or within any designated bikeway except at a permanent or temporary
driveway.
§ 194-36. Truck traffic routes.
Truck traffic routes, to be identified by signs and markings erected and
maintained by the Police Department, as directed by the Town Manager,
may be established within Town limits; when established and posted, all
persons driving motor vehicles into the Town limits for the transportation
of property through the Town shall drive such vehicle or vehicles over and
along such established truck traffic routes.
§ 194-37. Curb loading zones.
The Police Chief, with the approval of the Town Council, may designate
spaces as curb loading zones on such public streets in such places and in
such number as he or she shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
direction indicated by directional signs erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
[Amended 11-30-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-07]
Designation of one-way streets. Upon the following streets or parts
thereof, traffic shall move only in the following specified direction:
[Amended 11-6-1990; 2-5-1991; 9-7-1993]
Name of Street Direction
Everard Court South
Federal Street Counterclockwise from eastern
intersection with Cottage Street
High Street North
Kennebec Street [Amended
5-15-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-02]
South
Lenox Place (between York
Street and West Street)
[Added 11-30-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-07]
South
Myrtle Avenue East
Roberts Avenue South
Rodick Street (between
Cottage Street and York
Street)
North
School Street South
B.
§ 194-34 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-37
185:812
convenience to the public. The Police Chief shall cause such spaces to be
designated by appropriate signs or curb markings or both. No person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such space between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, except Sundays and holidays, unless actually
engaged in loading or unloading passengers for a period not to exceed three
minutes, or in loading or unloading materials for a period not to exceed 30
minutes.
§ 194-38. Idling of motor vehicles. [Added 6-17-1997]
Five-minute limitation. No person may cause or allow a motor vehicle to
idle for more than five consecutive minutes while that vehicle is parked
in any of the downtown areas during the time from May 1 to Columbus
Day.
A.
Exceptions. The limitation set forth in the preceding subsection shall
not apply to:
Fire trucks, police cars, ambulances and other emergency vehicles
while responding to an emergency call.
(1)
Utility vehicles, including contractor's equipment, while engaged in
the construction, maintenance or repair of utility facilities.
(2)
Motor vehicles idling while in a traffic lane, as the result of
congested traffic conditions beyond the driver's control (traffic
jams).
(3)
(4) Refrigeration units of delivery vehicles.
B.
Prima facie evidence. The fact that a parked motor vehicle is idling in
violation of this section shall be prima facie evidence that the unlawful
idling was caused or allowed by the person in whose name that vehicle
is registered.
C.
§ 194-37 TREES § 194-38
185:813

ARTICLE VI
Pedestrian Rights and Duties
§ 194-39. Pedestrians subject to traffic control signals.
Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as heretofore declared
in § 194-8 of this chapter, but in all other places pedestrians shall be granted
those rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
§ 194-40. Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks.
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
§ 194-41. Crossing at right angles.
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place in the business district
other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to
the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk.
§ 194-39 TREES § 194-41
185:815

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 194-42. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be a traffic infraction which shall be adjudicated in the manner
provided under state law and which shall be punished by a fine of not less
than $50 and not more than $500.
§ 194-43. Bicycle violations.
Any person of the age of 17 years or older who violates any provision of
§ 194-31 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
more than $10.
§ 194-44. Parking in handicapped spaces.
Any person who violates any provision of § 194-13 of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250.
§ 194-45. Waiver of court action and payment of fees. [Amended
5-21-1991; 6-17-1997; 2-20-2001; 6-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, any
person who commits any of the following violations may waive all court
action by payment to the Town of Bar Harbor of the appropriate fee as
set forth below within seven days of the violation:
(1) Blocking hydrant, parking within 10 feet of a fire hydrant: $50.
Handicapped space, unauthorized parking in a handicapped space:
$100.
(2)
Other parking violations, parking at any other location at which
parking is prohibited by this chapter: $10.
(3)
A.
Persons failing to pay within seven days the fee shown in Subsection
A, may waive all court action by payment to the Town of Bar Harbor of
twice the fee set forth above.
B.
Permit revocation. In addition to the penalty provided above, the Police
Chief, or his designee, may revoke the parking permit of any person
who violated any regulation prescribed by Town Council order pursuant
to § 194-28.
C.
§ 194-42 TREES § 194-45
185:817
Chapter 201
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 36. Sewers — See Ch. 165.
§ 194-45 BAR HARBOR CODE § 194-45
185:818
ARTICLE I
Public Utilities Commission
§ 201-1. Authority of Commission.
As required by state statute, the Maine Public Utilities Commission (PUC)
establishes all Bar Harbor Water Division rates, rules, regulations, terms
and conditions. The Town Council shall establish water rates by ordinance
as required by Charter § C-30-A. Any change in rates shall not be
implemented until approved by the PUC. In the event of a conflict between
this chapter and PUC governed matters, the PUC provisions shall prevail.
§ 201-1 TREES § 201-1
185:819

ARTICLE II
Rules, Regulations and Standards
§ 201-2. through § 201-10. (Reserved)
§ 201-2 TREES § 201-2
185:821

ARTICLE III
Water Budget, Rates, Fees and Charges
§ 201-11. Water budget. [Amended 10-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-03;
10-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05; 6-18-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02;
8-19-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05; 6-16-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01;
7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03; 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-02;
8-7-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-04]
§ 201-12. Water rates.
Budget introduced. The fiscal year 2019 Water Budget, dated July 9,
2018, is hereby introduced as published and summarized below.
(1) Cash. Net cash generated is estimated to be $68,015.
Revenues.
(a) PUC regulated revenues are estimated to be $2,091,302.
(b) Total water revenues are estimated to be $2,106,302.
(2)
Expenses. The following appropriations are hereby approved:
(a) Nonoperating expenses: $3,600.
(b) Salaries and wages: $294,962.
(c) Payroll benefits: $149,000.
(d) Contractual services: $270,372.
(e) Materials and supplies: $118,300.
(f) Utilities and commodities: $60,400.
(g) Repairs and maintenance: $153,600.
(h) Equipment purchases: $17,300.
Other: insurance, travel, advertising and miscellaneous:
$46,400.
(i)
(j) Interest: $157,00.
(k) Depreciation and amortization: $304,883.
(l) Capital spending: $206,000.
(3)
A.
Rates adopted. Effective with the approval of the Maine Public Utilities
Commission (PUC), the following rates are hereby established, unless
otherwise approved by the PUC:
A.
Quarterly and monthly rates for water to metered annual consumers:
[Amended 7-19-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-03]
B.
§ 201-11 TREES § 201-12
185:823
Quarterly rate:
(a) For the first 1,200 cubic feet per quarter: $76.17 per quarter.
For the next 10,800 cubic feet per quarter: $4.42 per 100 cubic
feet.
(b)
For the next 78,000 cubic feet per quarter: $2.07 per 100 cubic
feet.
(c)
For all in excess of 90,000 cubic feet per quarter: $1.35 per
100 cubic feet.
(d)
(1)
Monthly rate:
(a) For the first 400 cubic feet per month: $25.39 per month.
For the next 3,600 cubic feet per month: $4.42 per 100 cubic
feet.
(b)
For the next 26,000 cubic feet per month: $2.07 per 100 cubic
feet.
(c)
For all in excess of 30,000 cubic feet per month: $1.35 per 100
cubic feet.
(d)
(2)
Minimum charges:
Water Allowance
(cubic feet) Minimum Charge
Meter Size
(inches) Quarterly Monthly Quarterly Monthly
5/8 1,200 400 $76.17 $25.39
3/4 1,800 600 $102.69 $34.23
1 3,000 1,000 $155.73 $51.91
1 1/2 6,000 2,000 $288.33 $96.11
2 9,600 3,200 $447.45 $149.15
3 18,000 6,000 $677.72 $225.91
4 30,000 10,000 $926.13 $308.71
6 60,000 20,000 $1,547.13 $515.71
(3)
Seasonal rates for metered seasonal consumers:
Seasonal rate:
For the first 1,600 cubic feet per season: $201.63 per
season.
[1]
(a)
(4)
§ 201-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 201-12
185:824
For the next 10,400 cubic feet per season: $8.87 per 100
cubic feet.
[2]
For the next 78,000 cubic feet per season: $4.13 per 100
cubic feet.
[3]
For the next 300,000 cubic feet per season: $2.07 per 100
cubic feet.
[4]
For all in excess of 390,000 cubic feet per season: $1.58
per 100 cubic feet.
[5]
Minimum charges:
Meter Size
(inches)
Water Allowance
(cubic feet) Minimum Charge
5/8 1,600 $201.63
3/4 2,400 $272.66
1 4,000 $414.73
1 1/2 8,000 $769.92
2 12,800 $1,158.19
3 24,000 $1,621.47
4 40,000 $2,283.28
6 80,000 $3,937.81
(b)
Private fire protection:
Availability. This rate is available to customers using the Town
water service for private fire protection. The following rates
apply to fire protection only and include no allowance for water
for other than for fire-fighting purposes.
(a)
Rates.
Each private hydrant furnished, installed and maintained
by the user for private protection shall be charged for per
year: $1,362.
[1]
Private fire service rate for automatic sprinklers,
standpipes or hose connections to be used only for fire
protection inside buildings: a charge per inch of service
pipe diameter of $170 per year.
[2]
(b)
(5)
Public fire protection:
Availability. This rate is available to the Town of Bar Harbor for
municipal fire protection.
(a)
(b) Rates.
(6)
§ 201-12 TREES § 201-12
185:825
For the existing 105 hydrants installed as of January 1,
2016, a total annual amount of $585,602.
[1]
Rates for hydrants installed after the effective date of
the PUC order shall be determined in accordance with
Chapter 690 of the Public Utilities Commission's Rules and
Regulations.
[2]
§ 201-12 BAR HARBOR CODE § 201-12
185:826
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2002-3 8-13-2002 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2002-4 11-19-2002 General Assistance Program Repealed by
Ord. No. 2005-7
2002-5 11-19-2002 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A; Appendix B;
Appendix C
Ch. 102
2003-1 3-4-2003 Parks; public places amendment;
food and merchandise sales
amendment; Parks and
Recreation Committee
amendment
Ch. 144; Ch.
147; Ch. 94; Ch.
31, Art. V
5-5-2003 Land use amendments (3) Ch. 125
2003-2 6-4-2003 Special amusement permits
amendment
Ch. 14, Art. I
11-4-2003 Land use amendments (12) Ch. 125
2003-3 11-18-2003 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment
Ch. 102
2003-4 12-16-2003 Parks and Recreation Committee
amendment
Ch. 31, Art. V
2003-5 1-20-2004 Port and harbor amendment Ch. 153
2004-01 3-16-2004 Port and harbor amendment Ch. 153
5-3-2004 Land use amendment Ch. 125
2004-02 6-15-2004 Ethics Ch. 78
2004-03 6-1-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2004-04 5-18-2004 Shellfish conservation
amendment
Ch. 170
2004-05 5-18-2004 Life safety code amendment Ch. 85
2004-06 5-18-2004 Building construction Repealed by
Ord. No.
2015-04
2004-07 9-7-2004 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2004-08 10-5-2004 Noise amendment Ch. 139
11-2-2004 Charter amendment Charter
11-2-2004 Land use amendments (7) Ch. 125
§ 201-12 TREES § DL-1
185:827
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2004-09 12-7-2004 Board of Appeals amendment Ch. 31, Art. II
2005-01 2-1-2004 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment
Ch. 102
2005-02 4-5-2005 Floodplain management
amendment
Ch. 90
2005-03 4-5-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2005-04 5-17-2005 Shellfish conservation
amendment
Ch. 170
5-2-2005 Land use amendments (13) Ch. 125
2005-05 Not yet adopted
2005-06 10-18-2005 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment
Ch. 102
2005-07 10-18-2005 General Assistance Program Ch. 102
(repealed by
Ord. No.
2014-04); Ch.
102, Appendixes
D, E, F, G and H
2005-08 12-6-2005 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2006-01 4-18-2006 Vacation rentals Ch. 190
2006-02 Number not
used
2006-03 5-16-2006 Taxation of time-share estate Ch. 178, Art. II
6-13-2006 Land use amendments (19) Ch. 125
2006-04 Emergency enactment Superseded by
Ord. No.
2006-05
2006-05 7-11-2006 Planning Board amendment Ch. 31, Art. I
2006-06 8-15-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
11-7-2006 Charter amendment § C-10
11-7-2006 Charter amendment §§ C-5, C-39
11-7-2006 Official Neighborhood Districts
Map amendment
NCM
11-7-2006 Land use amendments (10) Ch. 125
2006-07 11-21-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
§ DL-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § DL-1
185:828
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-08 11-21-2006 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment
Ch. 102
2007-01 3-6-2007 Food and merchandise sales
amendment
Ch. 94
2007-02 Smoking ban Defeated by
voters
6-12-2007 Land use amendments (2) Ch. 125
2007-03 Not adopted
2007-04 9-4-2007 Ethics amendment Ch. 78
11-6-2007 Charter amendment Art. VII
11-6-2007 Land use amendment Ch. 125
2007-05 11-20-2007 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment;
Appendix F amendment;
Appendix G amendment
Ch. 102
6-10-2008 Land use amendment (4) Ch. 125
2008-01 6-11-2008 Parks amendment Ch. 144
2008-02 9-2-2008 Ethics amendment Ch. 78
2008-03 10-7-2008 Vacation rentals amendment Ch. 190
2008-04 10-21-2008 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
11-4-2008 Land use amendments (11) Ch. 125
2008-05 11-18-2008 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment
Ch. 102
2009-01 4-7-2009 Port and harbor amendment Ch. 153
2009-02 4-7-2009 General Assistance Program:
Appendix B amendment
Ch. 102
6-9-2009 Land use amendments (2) Ch. 125
2009-03 6-16-2009 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2009-04 10-6-2009 Harbor Committee amendment;
port and harbor amendment
Ch. 31, Art. IV;
Ch. 153
11-3-2009 Land use amendments (6) Ch. 125
§ DL-1 TREES § DL-1
185:829
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2009-05 11-17-2009 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment
Ch. 102
2010-01 1-5-2010 Cruise Ship Committee Ch. 31, Art. VIII
2010-02 3-2-2010 Cruise Ship Committee
amendment
Ch. 31, Art. VIII
6-8-2010 Charter Charter
6-8-2010 Land use amendments (8) Ch. 125
2010-03 8-17-2010 Ethics amendment Ch. 78
2010-04 9-21-2010 Water; water supply pipes
repealer
Ch. 201
2010-05 9-21-2010 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
11-2-2010 Land use amendments (6) Ch. 125
2010-06 11-16-2010 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment
Ch. 102
2010-07 11-30-2010 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2011-01 3-1-2011 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
6-14-2011 Land use amendments (4) Ch. 125
2011-02 6-21-2011 Cruise Ship Committee
amendment
Ch. 31
2011-03 10-4-2011 Water amendment Ch. 201
2011-04 11-1-2011 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment
Ch. 102
2011-05 11-1-2011 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
11-8-2011 Land use amendments (3) Ch. 125
2012-01 1-3-2012 Consumer fireworks Ch. 87
2012-02 6-19-2012 Shellfish conservation
amendment
Ch. 170
2012-03 7-17-2012 General Assistance Program
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. No.
2014-04
2012-04 7-17-2012 Port and harbor amendment Ch. 153
2012-05 10-16-2012 Water amendment Ch. 201
§ DL-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § DL-1
185:830
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-06 11-20-2012 General Assistance Program:
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment;
Appendix D amendment;
Appendix E amendment;
Appendix F amendment
Ch. 102
2012-07 11-20-2012 Special amusement permits
amendment
Ch. 14, Art. I
2012-08 12-18-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
2012-09 12-18-2012 Parks amendment Ch. 144
2013-01 6-18-2013 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
2013-02 6-18-2013 Water amendment Ch. 201
2013-03 8-6-2013 Buses, limousines, taxicabs,
pedicabs and carriages for hire
amendment
Ch. 40
2013-04 9-17-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2013-05 8-16-2013 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment;
Appendix D amendment;
Appendix E amendment;
Appendix F amendment
Ch. 102
2013-06 8-6-2013 General provisions: enforcement Ch. 1, Art. III
2013-07 11-19-2013 General Assistance Program:
Appendix B amendment
Ch. 102
11-5-2013 Land use amendment Ch. 125
2013-08 11-19-2013 Excise taxes Ch. 178, Art. III
2014-01 4-15-2014 Vacation rentals amendment Ch. 190
2014-02 8-5-2014 Parks and Recreation Committee
amendment
Ch. 31, Art. V
2014-03 8-5-2014 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment
Ch. 102
2014-04 8-5-2014 General Assistance Program Ch. 102
2014-05 8-19-2014 Water amendment Ch. 201
2014-06 10-20-2014 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
2014-07 11-18-2014 General Assistance Program:
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment;
Appendix G amendment
Ch. 102
§ DL-1 TREES § DL-1
185:831
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2015-01 6-16-2015 Water amendment Ch. 201
2015-02 8-4-2015 Shellfish conservation
amendment
Ch. 170
2015-03 8-4-2015 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
2015-04 10-6-2015 Building construction Ch. 36
2015-05 10-6-2015 General Assistance Program:
Appendix A amendment;
Appendix B amendment;
Appendix C amendment;
Appendix D amendment
Ch. 102
6-9-2015 Land use amendments (2) Ch. 125
6-14-2016 Land use amendments (12) Ch. 125
2016-01 6-21-2016 Floodplain management Ch. 90
2016-02 7-19-2016 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
2016-03 7-19-2016 Water amendment Ch. 201
2017-01 3-7-2017 Boards, committees and
commissions: Cruise Ship
Committee amendment
Ch. 31, Art. VIII
6-13-2017 Land use amendments (9) Ch. 125
2017-02 6-20-2017 Water amendment Ch. 201
2017-03 8-15-2017 Sewers amendment Ch. 165
2017-04 8-15-2017 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 194
2017-05 10-3-2017 General assistance amendment Ch. 102
2017-06 10-3-2017 Boards, committees and
commissions: Cruise Ship
Committee amendment
Ch. 31, Art. VIII
2017-07 12-5-2017 Animals: sales of dogs and cats Ch. 18, Art. II
2017-08 12-5-2017 Animals: display of wild and
exotic animals
Ch. 18, Art. III
2018-01 5-1-2018 Boards, Committees and
Commissions: Parking and Traffic
Committee Amendment
Ch. 31, Art. VI
2018-02 5-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic Amendment Ch. 194
6-12-2018 Land Use Amendment (4) Ch. 125
2018-03 8-7-2018 Sewers Amendment Ch. 165
2018-04 8-7-2018 Water Amendment Ch. 201
§ DL-1 BAR HARBOR CODE § DL-1
185:832
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2018-05 10-16-2018 Boards, Committees and
Commissions: Harbor Committee
Amendment
Ch. 31, Art. IV
2018-06 10-2-2018 General Assistance Program
Amendment
Ch. 102
3 11-6-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 125
2018-07 11-27-2018 Boards, Committees and
Commissions: Age Friendly
Committee
Ch. 31, Art. IX
2019-01 1-15-2019 Food and Merchandise Sales:
Single-Use Carryout Bags
Ch. 94, Art. II
2019-02 1-15-2019 Food and Merchandise Sales:
Polystyrene Foam Food Service
Containers
Ch. 94, Art. III
2019-03 1-15-2019 Boards, Committees and
Commissions Amendment
Ch. 31
2019-04 2-5-2019 Campaign Reports in Municipal
Referenda Campaigns
Ch. 67
2019-05 2-19-2019 Vacation Rentals Amendment Ch. 190
§ DL-1 TREES § DL-1
185:833