CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article 1. Use of Code.
Sec. 1-1-1. How Code Designated and Cited 1-1
Sec. 1-1-2. Rules of Construction and Definitions 1-1
Sec. 1-1-3. Catchlines of Sections 1-4
Sec. 1-1-4. Amendments to Code 1-4
Sec. 1-1-5. Effect of Repeal of Ordinance 1-4
Sec. 1-1-6. Severability of Parts of Code 1-5
Sec. 1-1-7. General Penalty for Violation of Code;
Continuing Violations 1-5
Article II. Administrative Ordinances.
Sec. 1-2-1 Town Seal 1-5
Sec. 1-2-2. Treasurer's Warrants 1-5
Article I. Use of Code. [Adopted eff. 11/12/76 under R.S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2154.]
Sec. 1-1-1. How Code Designated and Cited. The ordinances and codes embraced in
the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "1981 Revised
Official Code, Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine", and may be so cited. Chapters 2 and
3 hereof shall constitute and be designated the "Administrative Code, Town of Cape
Elizabeth", and this Chapter 1 and Chapters 4 through 21 hereof shall constitute and be
designated the "Code of Ordinances, Town of Cape Elizabeth", and each may be so
cited. [Revised eff. 6/10/81.]
Sec. 1-1-2. Rules of Construction and Definitions. In the construction of this Revised
Official Code ( hereinafter "this Code"), and of all ordinances and codes set forth herein,
the rules and definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town Council. The rules of
construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any section of this Code
which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or where the
subject matter of context of such action may be repugnant thereon. [Revised eff. 6/10/81.]
In the interpretation and application of any provisions of this Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare.
Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter
than the general restrictions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater
restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
Generally. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this
Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the Town
Council may be fully carried out.
Computation of Time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a
certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is
2
given, or such act is done, shall not be counted in computing the time, but the day on
which such proceeding is to be held shall be counted.
Corporate of Town Limits. The term "corporate limits" or "town limits" shall mean the
legal boundaries of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Cumberland
in the State of Maine.
Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a
department or some other town officer to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be
construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer to designate, delegate
and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the
terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to
females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
Joint Authority, All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or
officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or
officers.
Nontechnical and Technical Words. Words and phrases and such others as may have
acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law, technology or other specialized
usage, shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to
several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which,
by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words
"swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
3
Officials, Boards, Commissions. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, and
commissions by title only, i.e., "Town Council", "Town Manager", etc., they shall be
deemed to refer to the officials, boards and commissions of the Town of Cape Elizabeth,
Maine.
Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a
part of such building or land.
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals.
Personal Property. Includes every species of property except real property as herein
described.
Preceding, Following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and
next after, respectively.
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.
Real Property. The word "real property" shall include lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory.
Signature or Subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark
when the person cannot write.
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Maine.
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards,
roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public or private ways in the town, and shall
include all areas thereof embraced between the property lines or dedicated to the public
use, or to the private use of two or more land owners.
Tenant or Occupant. The work "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a building or land,
shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a
part of such building or land, either alone or with others.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and
present.
Town. The word "town" shall mean the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Cumberland County,
Maine.
Town Council, Council. When the term "Council" or "Town Council" is used, it shall
be construed to mean the Town Council of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.
Written or in Writing. shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters
or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, and the term "fiscal year" shall mean
budget and accounting year adopted by the Town Council.
4
Sec. 1-1-3. Catchlines of Sections. The catchlines of the several sections of this Code
printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-1-4. Amendments to Code. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which
amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed
portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and
the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be
prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code of Ordinances
and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by
the Town Council.
Sec. 1-1-5. Effect of Repeal of Ordinances When any ordinance repealing a former.
ordinance, clause or provision shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision unless it shall be therein so expressly provided.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal
took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an
offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
Sec. 1-1-6. Severability of Parts of Code. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of
this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or
decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or
unenforceability shall not effect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and
sections of this Code.
Sec. 1-1-7. General Penalty for Violation of Code; Continuing Violations. Whenever in this
Code or in any ordinance of the Town any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful
or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be
unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any
such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00), plus costs, to be recovered for the use of the Town. Each day any
violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
Article II. Administrative Ordinances.
Sec. 1-2-1. Town Seal. The Town Seal shall be a circular disc with the words "Town of Cape
Elizabeth, Maine" on the periphery, the words "Incorporated Nov. 1, 1765" within the periphery,
and the form of Portland Head Light in the center.
Sec. 1-2-2. Treasurer's Warrants. The chairman of the Town Council and the chairman of its
finance committee shall be jointly authorized during their terms of office to draw warrants for
and in behalf of all of the municipal officers authorizing the disbursement of municipal funds at
any time made or to be made by the town treasurer. Execution of warrants by said officers shall
be deemed for all purposes to constitute execution by the municipal officers. [Adopted, effective
March 29, 1978, under R.S.1964, T. 30, Sec. 5002.]
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
[Adopted eff. 8/13/2009 under Article III, Section 8
of the Council-Manager Charter of the
Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine with Amendments through 06/13/2016]
Article 1. Municipal Departments
Sec. 2-1-1. General Provisions
Sec. 2-1-2. Administrative Services Department
Sec. 2-1-3. Assessment Department
Sec. 2-1-4. Building and Inspection Department
Sec. 2-1-5. Fire Department
Sec. 2-1-6. Thomas Memorial Library
Sec. 2-1-7 Planning Department
Sec. 2-1-8. Police Department
Sec. 2-1-9. Public Works Department
Sec. 2-1-10 Community Services Department
Article II. Positions Not Part of Other Municipal Departments
Sec. 2-2-1. Town Engineer
Sec. 2-2-2. Municipal Comptroller
Sec. 2-2-3. Cable Television Coordinator
Sec. 2-2-4. Webmaster
Sec. 2-2-5. Facilities Manager
Sec. 2-2-6. Museum Manager
Article III. Purchasing Procedure
Sec. 2-3-1. Purpose
Sec. 2-3-2. General Provisions
Sec. 2-3-3. Sale of Equipment
Article IV. Improvements to Town Owned Land and Buildings
Sec. 2-4-1. Town to be the Applicant
Sec. 2-4-2. Town Council to Review Plans
Sec. 2-4-3. Role for Community Groups and Individuals
Sec. 2-4-4. Use of Municipal Resources
Article I. Municipal Departments.
Sec. 2-1-1. General Provisions.
(a) Town Manager. The Town Manager shall be the administrative head of the Town and
shall perform all the duties and have all the responsibilities prescribed by the Town Charter and
the Town Council.
(b) Responsibilities. The Town Manager shall supervise the heads of all departments
established by this Code and the Town Charter, and shall have the power to suspend and
discipline, and to perform or delegate the duties and responsibilities of such department heads and
of statutory officers unless disqualified to do so by statute. The Town Manager shall prepare and
revise a personnel code for adoption by the Town Council and be responsible for its
administration.
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 1
(c) Rules and Regulations. The Town Manager may prescribe such rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the Town Charter and Town ordinances as the Town Manager may deem
necessary for the conduct of the various departments, and he may investigate and inquire into the
affairs of any department at any time.
(d) Municipal Departments Established. The administrative service of the Town shall consist
of the following departments and the department heads shall be known by the titles shown:
1. Administrative Services Town Clerk
2. Assessment Assessor
3. Building & Inspection Code Enforcement Officer
4. Fire Fire Chief
5. Thomas Memorial Library Library Director
6. Planning Town Planner
7. Police Chief of Police
8. Public Works Director of Public Works
9. Community Services Department Community Services Director
(e) Powers and Duties of Department Heads
1. Department heads shall be responsible for the efficient operations of their
department. They shall perform all the duties and exercise all the powers conferred
upon each office by applicable laws and ordinances. The Town Manager may not
overrule any department head or any statutory officer on a lawful decision made by
their office in their statutory capacity or as enabled by ordinance unless specifically
authorized in an applicable ordinance or statute. No department head may overrule
any statutory officer or municipal official on a lawful decision made by their office in
their statutory capacity or as enabled by ordinance unless the department head is
specifically authorized to do so in an applicable ordinance or statute.
2. Department heads may, with the approval of the Town Manager, establish such
departmental divisions as may be desirable in the interest of economy and efficiency,
and in accordance with sound administrative principles and practices.
3. Department heads may prescribe departmental regulations subject to the approval of
the Town Manager not inconsistent with law, the Town Charter, and other ordinances
and regulations of the Town Council, for the administration of their various
departments, conduct of their employees, and the proper performance of the
department's business.
4. Department heads shall attend meetings called by the Town Manager and meetings of
board and commissions to which they have been assigned a staff responsibility.
5. Department heads shall supply to the Town Manager such reports as are required by
the Town Manager.
(f) Selection, Qualification, Compensation & Terms of Office of Department Heads
1. All department heads shall be appointed and removed as prescribed in the Town
Charter and Maine statutes on the basis of merit and fitness to perform their duties.
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 2
2. The compensation of all department heads shall be determined by the Town Manager
subject to appropriations provided and any pay classification plan that may be
available from time to time.
(g) Department Staff
1. Department heads may establish subordinate positions and make appointments and
removals as may be necessary within the limits of the appropriations provided,
subject to the provisions of the Town Charter, the personnel rules and regulations,
and the approval of the Town Manager.
2. All employees shall be under the immediate supervision of their respective department
or division head, and all employees shall be compensated in a fair and equitable
manner and on the basis of any pay classification schedule that may be available
from time to time. Department heads are responsible for an annual written evaluation
of all employees within their department and copies of evaluations shall be provided
annually to the Town Manager.
Sec. 2-1-2. Administrative Services Department.
(a) Department Staff. The Administrative Services Department shall consist of the Town
Clerk, and such other level of staffing as may be recommended by the Town Manager and
approved by the Town Council.
(b) Function. The Administrative Services Department shall perform the following functions:
1. Prepare, maintain, publish and index proceedings of the Town Council.
2. Arrange for all elections, and maintain all election and voter records.
3. Obtain and maintain all statistics on births, marriages, and deaths as required by law.
4. File and preserve, as required, all contracts, bonds, oaths of office and other
documents.
5. Maintain the official record of all ordinances of the Town and of the proceedings of
all boards, commissions and committees.
6. Be responsible for the safekeeping of the Town Seal.
7. Maintain a master calendar of municipal meetings.
8. Collect daily revenues on behalf of the Tax Collector and Town Treasurer.
9. Prepare and file documents to perfect tax collections.
10. Oversee the operations of the Spurwink Church.
11. Provide administrative support to the Town Manager.
12. Perform all other related functions as required.
Sec. 2-1-3. Assessment Department.
(a) Department Staff. The Assessment Department shall consist of the Assessor and such
other levels of staffing as may be recommended by the Town Manager and approved by the Town
Council.
(b) Function. The Assessor shall perform the following functions:
1. Carry out all the duties required of an assessor by State statute.
2. Prepare all assessments, tax rolls and tax notices as required by law.
3. Check all property transfers and maintain all property records pertaining to
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 3
assessing function.
4. Perform other related functions as required.
Sec. 2-1-4. Building and Inspection Department.
(a) Department Staff. The Building and Inspection Department shall be under the immediate
supervision of the Code Enforcement Officer who shall also serve, while meeting any statutory
qualifications therefore, as the Building Inspector, Health Officer, Plumbing Inspector, and
Electrical Inspector for the Town unless and until a different person is appointed to any such
office.
(b) Function. The Department shall perform the following duties:
1. Review and issue when appropriate plumbing, building, and electrical permits.
2. Inspect existing housing, new construction, remodeling and land use for conformity
to the Zoning Ordinance and all other related and appropriate codes.
3. Provide staff assistance to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
4. Perform all other functions that may be required by statute or ordinance.
5. Perform all related functions as required.
Sec. 2-1-5. Fire Department.
1. Fire Chief, Deputies and Emergency Preparedness
1. The Fire Department shall be under the immediate supervision of the Fire Chief who
shall have all the rights, powers, duties and responsibilities prescribed in State statutes
relating to fire chiefs and in the Town Ordinances.
2. Deputy fire chiefs, not exceeding three (3) in number, shall be appointed and may be
removed by the fire chief subject to the approval of the Town Manager. The deputy fire
chiefs shall be appointed from among the memberships of the department’s companies
and shall not be carried on the rolls, receive compensation as a member, hold office in, or
be considered as a member of the company from which they were appointed. Deputy fire
chiefs shall be subject to an annual evaluation by the Fire Chief.
3. The fire chief shall appoint a Director of Emergency Preparedness who shall prepare for
disasters, interact with the Maine Emergency Management System and the County
Department of Emergency Management and who shall support disaster response during a
disaster event.
(b) Department Companies.
1. The department shall consist of at least five companies, consisting of not less than
twenty (20) nor more than forty (40) persons each, and such other companies as shall
be established by the Board of Fire Commissioners and approved by the Town
Council. Two of the companies shall be fire companies, one shall be a rescue
company, one a water rescue company and one a fire/police unit.
2. Each company shall have officers, consisting of a captain, first lieutenant and second
lieutenant, secretary, and treasurer. The officers shall be chosen by the Fire Chief
based upon merit and fitness for their respective position. The captains and
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 4
lieutenants shall be successively responsible for the condition of their apparatus and
the training and response of the companies.
3. Each company shall meet once a month for inspection of equipment or training.
Sec. 2-1-6. Thomas Memorial Library
(a) Department Staff. The Thomas Memorial Library Department shall consist of the Library
Director and such other level of staffing as may be recommended by the Town Manager and
approved by the Town Council.
(b) Responsibilities. The Thomas Memorial Library Department shall perform the following
functions:
1. Select and purchase books, magazines, periodicals and other media to best serve the
needs of the community.
2. Catalog and organize all such materials to ensure easy accessibility.
3. Circulate library materials for general use.
4. Provide a reference service for answering requests for specific information.
5. Provide library services in the library during the hours which best meet the needs of
the community and provide an online catalogue and website to enable patrons to
access library services.
6. Promote the availability of the library material to stimulate a wider general interest in
its use.
7. Promote special services and guidance to adults and children in the use of educational
and recreational materials.
8. Cooperate with community organizations to provide assistance in program planning
and projects.
9. Maintain and care for all property assigned to the library.
10. Prepare and maintain all records pertaining to the Thomas Memorial Library.
Sec. 2-1-7 Planning Department
(a) Department Staff. The Planning Department shall be under the supervision of the
Town Planner and consist of the Town Planner and such level of staffing as may be
recommended by the Town Manager and approved by the Town Council.
(b) Function: The Planning Department shall perform the following functions:
1. Provide staff assistance to the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, and to
other committees when requested by the Town Manager.
2. Maintain the Town’s geographic information system (GIS)
3. Maintain records and maps of the Town’s open space and greenbelt.
4. Assist with all issues related to the Comprehensive Plan.
5. Assist citizens with accessing property records.
6. Provide clerical assistance to the Assessment and the Building and Inspection
Departments.
7. Perform all other functions that may be required by statute or ordinance.
8. Perform all related functions as required.
Sec. 2-1-8. Police Department
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 5
(a) Department Staff. The Police Department, under the supervision of the Chief of Police,
shall consist of such forces of officers, reserve officers and other personnel as may be
recommended by the Town Manager and approved by the Town Council. The Chief of Police
shall appoint and may remove a Harbormaster who shall be responsible for the administration of
the Harbors Ordinance and undertake statutory duties and responsibilities given to harbormasters
in Maine.
(b) Function. The Police Department shall perform the following functions:
1. Enforce the laws and ordinances.
2. Prevent crime and maintain law and order.
3. Protect lives and property from malicious damage and injury.
4. Maintain and care for all property of the Police Department.
5. Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the Police Department.
6. Provide assistance to the public in all matters of law enforcement
7. Liaison with the school department to ensure proper safety in the schools and on
school grounds.
8. Coordinate the animal control and dispatch relationship with neighboring
communities.
9. Coordinate the municipal street lighting program.
10. Perform all related functions as required.
Sec. 2-1-9. Public Works Department
(a) Department Division. The Public Works Department, under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works, shall consist of the divisions of Highway, Parks, Sewer, Refuse
Disposal and Garage. Each division shall consist of such level of staffing as may be
recommended by the Town Manager and approved by the Town Council.
(b) Highway Division. The Highway Division shall perform the following functions:
1. Construct, maintain and repair all roads, bridges, and sidewalks, except where
specific projects may be let to contractors.
2. Remove snow and distribute salt and sand on all highways, streets, bridges,
municipal and school properties, and public ways.
3. Remove snow on sidewalks designated by the Director of Public Works.
4. Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the Highway
Department.
5. Issue all permits for street openings.
6. Perform all other related functions as required.
(c) Parks Division. The Parks Division shall perform the following functions:
1. Develop, maintain and care for all municipal parks, school grounds, municipal lots,
and cemeteries.
2. Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the Division.
3. Perform all other related functions as required.
(d) Sewer Division. The Sewer Division shall perform the following functions:
1. Repair, maintain and operate the Town sewer system and treatment facilities, except
that part of the system maintained by the Portland Water District, and except where
specific projects may be let out to contract.
2. Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the Sewer Division.
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 6
3. Prepare and maintain all necessary records pertaining to the Sewer Division except
sewer billing records.
4. Perform all other related functions as required.
(e) Refuse Disposal Division. The Refuse Disposal Division shall perform the following
functions:
1. Operate, maintain and repair the Town Recycling Center and all other municipal
refuse disposal and recycling facilities.
2. Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the Refuse Disposal
Division.
3. Perform all other functions as required.
(f) Garage Division. The Garage Division shall perform the following functions:
1. Operate, maintain and repair the Town Garage and its facilities.
2. Repair and maintain all the motorized Town vehicles and other public works
equipment.
3. Purchase stock and charge to the using department parts and accessories as required,
in conformance with the purchasing procedure.
4. Maintain and care for all property and equipment assigned to the Garage Division.
5. Perform all other related functions as required.
(g) Tree Warden. The Tree Warden shall be appointed and may be removed by the Director
of Public Works subject to approval by the Town Manager. The Tree Warden shall be charged
with such duties and exercise such powers as shall be prescribed from time to time by statute,
local ordinances and regulations.
Sec. 2-1-10. Community Services Department
(a) Department Staff. The Community Services Department shall consist of the Community
Services Director, and such other level of staffing as may be recommended by the Town Manager
and approved by the Town Council.
(b) Function. The Community Services Department shall perform the following functions:
1. Plan, implement, evaluate and promote a comprehensive program of recreational,
educational, cultural and social activities as well as enrichment opportunities for
citizens of all ages.
2. Promote the general fitness of the community though aquatics programs at the
Donald Richards Community Pool, operation of a fitness center, and through
providing classes and activities that are exercise related.
3. Provide day care and preschool services in the community center.
4. Provide a comprehensive program of activities and support for senior citizens.
5. Provide support and coordination in the use of municipal and school facilities for
community groups.
6. Represent non-school interests in issues involving athletic field use and coordinate
with the school athletic director and public works director on field use issues.
7. Provide staff assistance to the Community Services Committee.
8. Maintain a close liaison with the school department on the use of school facilities and
on adult education opportunities .
9. Perform all other related functions as required.
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 7
Article II. Positions Not Part of Other Municipal Departments
Sec. 2-2-1. Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall be appointed by, and may be removed by,
the Town Manager and is charged with such powers as may be prescribed by statute, regulation
and ordinance.
Sec. 2-2-2. Municipal Comptroller.
(a) Municipal Comptroller. The Municipal Comptroller, who shall also serve as School
Department Business Manager, shall be appointed by the School Board and shall be an employee
of the School Department, which shall establish the salary and other terms of employment. The
Superintendent of Schools shall consult the Town Manager on appointments and removals from
this position.
(b) Function. The Municipal Comptroller shall serve the following functions:
1. Coordination of the municipal/school computer system including planning of system
enhancements, arrangement of personnel training, accounting control functions and
system maintenance.
2. Supervision of municipal/school accounting practices including the establishment of
the chart of accounts, preparation of required financial reports to outside agencies,
drafting of the annual financial statement and provision of assistance to the
independent auditors.
3. Attend meetings of Town Department Heads.
4. Perform such functions as the School Department may require.
5. Perform related functions as required.
Sec. 2-2-3. Cable Television Coordinator. The Cable Television Coordinator shall be
appointed and removed by the Town Manager. The coordinator shall operate the Town’s public
access channel and bulletin board in conformance with guidelines approved by the Town Council
and shall perform related functions as required.
Sec. 2-2-4. Webmaster. The Webmaster shall be appointed and removed by the Town
Manager. The Webmaster shall maintain the municipal website in conformance with guidelines
approved by the Cape Elizabeth Town Council and shall perform related functions as required.
Sec. 2-2-5. Facilities Manager. The Facilities Manager shall be appointed and removed by the
Superintendent of Schools. The Facilities Manager shall oversee building and energy related
projects on municipal and school property. The Facilities Manager shall also maintain records on
all municipal and school properties including records of energy use and work completed on
buildings and shall perform related functions as required.
Sec. 2-2-6. Museum Director. The Director of the Museum at Portland Head Light shall be
appointed and removed by the Town Manager, subject to the approval of the Board of Directors
of the Museum at Portland Head Light. . The Museum Director shall provide for the curatorial
direction and operation of the Museum at Portland Head Light, shall operate the gift shop at
Portland Head Light and perform related functions as required.
Article III. Purchasing Procedure
Sec. 2-3-1 Purpose. The primary purpose of this purchasing procedure is to ensure that the
goods and services purchased by the Town are of the quality needed and are secured at the lowest
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 8
possible price. A second objective is to purchase goods and services in a manner that all qualified
vendors have an equal opportunity to do business with the Town.
Sec. 2-3-2. General Provisions.
(a) Department heads may purchase goods and services not to exceed $5,000 without prior
specific approval of the Town Manager provided funds are available in the budget line item. All
purchases over $250 shall be done with three price quotes which shall be kept in a log record
within the department.
(b) Department heads may purchase goods and services of value between $5,000 and $10,000
with specific approval of the Town Manager provided funds are available in the budget line item.
Department heads shall provide quotes to the Town Manager from at least three vendors or
provide evidence of having sought three quotes.
(c) The Town Manager may purchase goods and services of value between $10,000 and .05% of
the last state valuation provided funds are available in the budget line item. All purchases shall
be made with written sealed competitive bids concurrently opened in public.
(d) The Town Manager may purchase goods and services of value over .05% of the late state
valuation only after the purchase has been specifically authorized by the Town Council.
(e) The Town Manager may make recurring purchases of professional services based on a
competitive selection process and the competition shall be opened at least once every five years.
(f) The Town Manager may purchase on a recurring basis without competitive bidding goods
and services from regional and statewide organizations serving local government and from other
units of government. Such purchases shall be specifically disclosed as part of the annual budget
process.
(g) The Town may participate in collaborative bidding with other entities including regional
entities and may utilize prices given to the collaborative bid processes and the State of Maine
though their competitive bids in lieu of obtaining bids independently.
(h) The Department Head, Town Manager, or Town Council, as applicable, shall accept the
lowest best bid/quotation meeting specifications and may decide to accept or reject any or all
bids. The Town Manager may waive any provision of the purchasing policy in times of
emergency and if an insufficient number of bids or quotations are able to be obtained. This
purchasing procedure shall not apply to goods purchased for resale. In determining the lowest
best bid/quotation meeting specifications, the following shall be considered:
1. The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide
the service required,
2. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or
within the time specified, without delay or interference;
3. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the
bidder;
4. The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
5. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances
relating to the contract or services;
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 9
Chapter 2- Administrative Code - Page 10
6. The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services
to the particular use required;
7. The sufficiency of the financial resources and any required performance
guarantees required to perform the contract or provide the service.
8. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the
subject of the contract;
9. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid or proposal;
10. The life cycle costs of all good or service to be provided;
11. In the event of a tie bid, quality and service being equal, preference may be
given to a local vendor.
Sec. 2-3-3. Sale of Equipment. No Town equipment or property may be sold without
authorization of the Town Manager except goods specifically purchased for resale. Any
equipment or property with a value in excess of $15,000 may be only be sold upon authorization
of the Town Council. Property in this instance is defined as “goods” and does not include real
property and property interests which may be sold only with Town Council authorization.
Article IV Improvements to Town Owned Land and Buildings
Sec. 2-4-1. Town to be the Applicant. All projects on municipal and school property needing
review or a permit shall be directly overseen by the Town Manager or a designee of the Town
Manager. The Town manager shall be responsible for all permitting including local building
permits, state and federal permits, and for coordinating presentation before all review agencies.
Any private groups interested in a project may represent their own interest before any review
board, but shall not be recognized as representing the Town.
Sec. 2-4-2. Town Council to Review Plans. Any project over $50,000 in estimated costs and
requiring a building permit shall not be submitted to any review agency without first being
authorized by the Town Council. This shall not apply to drainage projects or to emergency
repairs. The Town Council authorization shall include two separate authorizations. The first shall
be for funding and project planning and design. The second authorization shall be for approval of
the specific application/plans to be submitted.
Sec. 2-4-3 Role for Community Groups and Individuals. Some projects on municipal or school
property may involve contributions of funds and/or in-kind services from groups or individuals.
The Town Treasurer may not accept any gifts for projects without acceptance by the Town
Council or unless the Town Council has authorized fund raising for the project. Persons and
groups providing financial or in-kind support for a project may provide input into project
planning, but the scope of any project must be approved by the Town Council. Any projects
within school buildings involving community groups shall be subject to school department
regulation.
Sec. 2-4-4 Use of Municipal Resources. Some projects on municipal and school property may
be jointly funded by private groups and individuals and by the Town. The Town Council shall
approve a cost sharing agreement for any joint project and no physical work may begin on a
project or any construction contract signed unless funds are in place to complete the project or
written cost sharing plan provides otherwise.
3-1
CHAPTER 3
CAPE ELIZABETH PERSONNEL CODE
[Adopted effective 10/12/94 with amendments through 11/13/2019]
Article I General Provisions 2
Sec. 3-1-1 Employment........................................................................................................ 2
Sec. 3-1-2 Promotion............................................................................................................ 4
Sec. 3-1-3 Compensation ..................................................................................................... 4
Sec. 3-1-4 Training............................................................................................................... 5
Sec. 3-1-5 Retirement........................................................................................................... 5
Sec. 3-1-6 Hours of Work .................................................................................................... 5
Sec. 3-1-7 Employment Conditions ..................................................................................... 6
Sec. 3-1-8 Overtime ............................................................................................................. 6
Sec. 3-1-9 Attendance at Work ............................................................................................ 7
Sec. 3-1-10 Disciplinary Proceedings .................................................................................... 7
Sec. 3-1-11 Job Performance.................................................................................................. 8
Sec. 3-1-12 Political Activity ................................................................................................. 9
Sec. 3-1-13 Order of Layoffs ................................................................................................. 9
Sec. 3-1-14 Grievances ......................................................................................................... 9
Sec. 3-1-15 Payroll Deductions............................................................................................ 10
Sec. 3-1-16 Mileage Reimbursement ................................................................................... 10
Sec. 3-1-17 Solicitation ........................................................................................................ 10
Sec. 3-1-18 Smoking ............................................................................................................ 10
Sec. 3-1-19 Firearms………………………………………………………………………10
Sec. 3-1-20 Proper Dress …………………………………………………………………..10
Sec. 3-1-21 Safety and Health……………………………………………………………...12
Sec. 3-1-22 Accidents and Injuries…………………………………………………………13
Sec. 3-1-23 Modified Duty………………………………………………………………....14
Article II Benefits 14
Sec. 3-2-1 Holidays ............................................................................................................ 14
Sec. 3-2-2 Sick Leave and Family Sick Leave................................................................... 15
Sec. 3-2-3 Special Leave and Jury Duty ............................................................................ 15
Sec. 3-2-4 Military Service Leave...................................................................................... 16
Sec. 3-2-5 Leave for Victims of Domestic Violence ......................................................... 16
Sec. 3-2-6 Vacation ........................................................................................................... 17
Sec. 3-2-7 Unpaid Leaves of Absence ............................................................................. 18
Sec. 3-2-8 Workplace Injuries and Workers’ Compensation Insurance Coverage ......... 23
Sec. 3-2-9 Retirement and Disability ................................................................................. 23
Sec. 3-2-10 Maine State Group Life Insurance.................................................................... 25
Sec. 3-2-11 Employee Health Benefits .............................................................................. 25
Sec. 3-2-12 Health Insurance Coverage During Leaves of Absences……………………
Sec. 3-2-13 COBRA………………………………………………………………………
Article III Miscellaneous Policies [Added eff. 1/9/2002] 27
Sec. 3-3-1 Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment Policy............................................ 27
Sec. 3-3-2 Disability Accommodation ............................................................................... 29
3-2
Sec. 3-3-3 Employee Computer and Internet Use Guidelines............................................ 30
Sec. 3-3-4 Substance Abuse Policy.................................................................................... 32
Sec. 3-3-5 Drug and Alcohol Testing Program for Employees Required to Hold
Commercial Drivers Licenses .......................................................................... 33
AppendixA Salaried Positions ............................................................................................. 33
Appendix B Employee Acknowledgement Form………………………………………..….34
Statement of Personnel Policy
This Personnel Code is to guide the Town Manager and each department head in the
administration of personnel activities. Presentation of this information to all regular employees
will also serve to instruct them in their rights as well as their responsibilities while in the
employment of the Town. All provisions of this Personnel Code shall apply to all Town
employees except as may otherwise be specified in this Personnel Code, in the Town Charter, or
in any collective bargaining agreement that may exist. This Personnel Code shall not be
construed as limiting in any way the right and authority of the Town Manager and department
heads to manage and direct the operations of the Town departments and working force, including
the right to plan, direct and control department activities, to schedule and assign work to
employees, to determine means, methods, procedures and equipment to maintain the efficiency
of departments and their employees, to determine the manning of jobs, create, revise and
eliminate jobs, to establish and require observance of reasonable rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this Personnel Code, to formulate and adopt ordinances and other regulations
incidental to the management of the affairs of the Town and to maintain order. The Personnel
Code does not constitute a contract of employment.
Note: In any instance where any provision of this personnel code is in
conflict with any collective bargaining agreement that may exist, the
collective bargaining agreement shall take precedence for employees
covered under the agreement.
Article I General Provisions
Sec. 3-1-1 Employment
(a) Equal Employment Opportunity
The Town shall employ, without discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
ancestry, age, political affiliation, physical or mental disability, Veteran’s status, status as a
whistleblower, sexual orientation or any other legally protected status, the best qualified persons
who are available at the salary levels established for Town employment, first preference being
given always to citizens of Cape Elizabeth, all other factors being equal. In order to ensure
confidence in Town personnel practices, favoritism or nepotism will not be tolerated.
Within the limits of time in which a position must be filled, there shall be as wide a search for
qualified candidates as is practicable. The character of the search will vary from position to
3-3
position, but may include advertising, open competitive examinations and contacts with special
sources of information in each case. It shall be the duty of the Town Manager, or other
responsible person or body, to seek out the most desirable employees for the Town.
(b) Police Department Entry Level Vacancies
Vacancies for regular patrol officers and dispatchers within the Police Department shall be filled
by the Chief of Police after a process with which scheduled appearances by not less than three
(3) candidates receiving the highest scores before an oral interview board of not less than three
members who shall be selected as required by the Chief of Police with the approval of the Town
Manager. Any applicant who fails to appear for an examination or interview at the time and
place specified by the Chief of Police may be dropped from the list of applicants. The oral
interview board shall rate each candidate and such rating, the results of the written examination
and an evaluation of experience and training, shall be used by the Chief of Police in his final
selection of a candidate for the vacant position. All ratings shall remain in force for one year
after the date of the written examination from which such ratings were made. If an additional
vacancy becomes effective within the aforementioned one-year period, the Chief may, at his
option, fill the vacancy utilizing the ratings still in effect or may begin the process anew.
[Adopted eff. 6/22/82 and Revised eff. 1/9/02]
(c) Physical Examination
The final candidate for any full-time police, fire or public works positions and part-time
volunteer public safety positions shall, at the Town’s expense, have a complete medical history
and examination made by a licensed physician designated by the Town. The physician shall
recommend whether any condition exists which would make the candidate unsuitable for Town
employment. Copies of the physician’s report shall be forwarded to the appropriate department
head and shall be made a part of any successful applicant’s personnel record.
(d) Psychiatric and Polygraph Examination
The Chief of Police is authorized to arranged for psychiatric and/or polygraph examination of
candidates for original and promotional appointments within the Police Department. The
opinion of a licensed psychiatrist that a candidate is mentally, emotionally or temperamentally
unsuited for police service shall be sufficient cause for rejection. Polygraph examinations shall
be used only to verify qualifications and suitability for police service.
(e) Application Forms
Applications for employment must be filled out on forms approved by the Town Manager. Such
forms may require whatever relevant information is deemed desirable and all applications must
be signed by the applying person. All applications shall be kept on file for not less than three
years. The application process will be public to the extent required by the Maine Freedom of
Information Act.
3-4
(f) Residency Requirement
There is no residency requirement for Town employees. However, all regular employees should
live in close proximity to Cape Elizabeth in order to be readily available for emergency duties
and to be at their work site in inclement weather. Department heads may, with the approval of
the Town Manager, establish residency requirements for departmental employees provided such
requirements are uniformly applied and do not require any employee to live less than 15 miles
under/ or 30 minutes response time from the Town Hall. Any such requirements established
shall not apply to persons employed at the time of adoption of the requirements, unless such
persons move substantially outside a required area after the adoption of any requirements.
(g) Other requirements
All candidates for regular positions must be of high moral character, high school graduates or
equivalent and at least 18 years of age. In evaluating moral character, the Town shall consider
sufficient evidence of criminal, infamous, and/or dishonest conduct. Any applicant who has
been convicted of a felony or who has been convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude may not be considered for employment.
(h) Immigration Law Compliance
In compliance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, the Town is committed to
employing only those individuals who are authorized to work in the United States and does not
unlawfully discriminate on the basis of citizenship or national origin. All new employees, as a
condition of employment, will be required to complete the Employment Eligibility Verification
Form I-9 and must present documentation establishing identity and employment authorization.
This form must be completed within 3 days of your start date. Failure to comply with this
requirement will result in termination of employment.
Sec. 3-1-2 Promotion
Town employees shall be given maximum opportunity for promotions. Any vacant positions,
which are not entry level, shall be filled in the same manner as detailed in Sec. 3-1-1 (b) or Sec.
3-1-1 (c) when applicable, unless otherwise specified by the Town Charter. Advertising,
however, may be limited to within the department involved. Unless waived by the Town
Manager at the request of the department head, no person shall be considered for promotion to a
supervisory position unless he shall have served at least twelve months in the next lower grade.
Promotion shall be based on merit and competence and upon the superior qualifications of the
person, and due weight shall be given to seniority.
Sec. 3-1-3 Compensation
It is the intent that Town employees be paid on a basis that is commensurate with salaries and
wages for comparable public and private work in the Cumberland County area and that will
attract and retain well-qualified employees. Compensation of Town personnel shall be fixed by
the Town Manager in accordance with a pay classification plan approved by the Town Council
or in conformance with any collective bargaining agreement that may exist.
3-5
Sec. 3-1-4 Training
Both the Town and its employees profit from the provision of educational training opportunities
for employees. The Town strongly encourages participation in programs and courses, which
enhance an employee’s ability to provide effective service to the community.
Each year, at the time of the annual employee evaluation, supervisors and employees shall
prepare a training program for each employee. Training may include specific technical skills,
personal development programs and/or course work leading to a degree or a professional
designation.
As scheduling permits, the Town will provide release time for any training specifically required
by the Town. For required training outside the normal work schedule, the time spent within the
training program shall be paid or compensatory leave shall be provided in accordance with the
Fair Labor Standards Act.
The Town will pay fees and expenses for required training programs and for optional programs
when prior approval is given.
Optional course work intended to lead to a degree or a professional designation, or for a specific
course related to one’s work, may be reimbursed provided the employee earns a grade of “C” or
better. Reimbursement shall be at no higher than the resident rate charged by the University of
Southern Maine per credit hour for the same level course. Reimbursement is limited to fifteen
credit hours per fiscal year per employee. No reimbursement shall be granted unless the
employee received written signed approval from their supervisor and the Town Manager prior to
the commencement of the course. The Town may withhold approval if sufficient funds have not
been budgeted or if the course being taken does not relate to the training plan agreed upon during
the employee’s most recent evaluation. The Town does not pay for mileage or for other
expenses related to optional course work.
Representing the Town at out-of-state conferences shall be authorized by the Town Manager, if
funds permit, and upon such conditions as the Town Manager may determine.
Sec. 3-1-5 Retirement
There is no mandatory retirement age for municipal employees in the State of Maine.
Sec. 3-1-6 Hours of Work
As a general rule, the regular workweek is 40 hours per week, or 8 hours per day. Occasionally
overtime work in excess of forty hours per week shall be compensated at the rate of 1-1/2 times
the regular hourly rate, or compensatory time off in accordance with Sec. 3-1-8.
3-6
Sec. 3-1-7 Employment Conditions
(a) Probationary Period
Every person receiving an original or promotional appointment to a position in any department
shall be evaluated during a probationary period beginning upon appointment and continuing for
one year for police department employees and for 180 days for employees of all other
departments. The appointing department head may at any time during such period reject for any
reason any person appointed to a position. The department head shall forthwith report to the
Town Manager in writing each rejection during such period, stating the date the rejection
becomes effective and the reason for the rejection. Any probationer rejected as provided in this
rule shall be considered permanently separated from the position he has held and shall have no
appeal under provisions of this ordinance. Any probationer rejected following a promotional
appointment shall revert to the position and pay status from which he was promoted.
(b) Regular Employee Appointment
A regular employee is defined as one who has completed satisfactorily the probationary period,
and works a regular weekly work schedule of at least 35 hours per week as determined by the
Town Manager and department head. However, all benefits described in Article II of this
Personnel Code shall be provided after 120 days for all employees who work a regular weekly
work schedule of at least 35 hours per week unless otherwise specified in the Personnel Code or
in any collective bargaining agreement, which may exist.
(a) Part-time Employee
A part-time employee is a person who is hired to work less than 35 hours per week, and/or who
works a position which is seasonal or temporary in nature, or who works on an on call basis.
Part-time employees are eligible for only those benefits, which are required by federal and/or
state laws unless as otherwise provided in this policy. If a part-time employee with at least 120
days of service becomes a full-time employee, the 120-day waiting period for holiday, sick pay
and vacation time shall be waived for that employee.
(b) Outside Employment
Regular employees may engage in active part-time outside employment on approval of their
department head, so long as the department head determines the outside work does not affect the
efficiency of the employee’s work for the Town, and that the part-time position is not in conflict
with the Town position. Department heads may engage in active part-time employment on
approval of the Town Manager utilizing the same criteria as departments utilize for regular
employees.
Sec. 3-1-8 Overtime
As a general rule, occasional overtime work in excess of established regular hours may be
required and will be compensated by overtime pay at the regular rate or by compensatory leave,
except it is understood that the salaried positions are paid on the basis of job responsibility and it
is the responsibility of the person filling the position to accomplish the work assigned to that
3-7
position regardless of hours required to do the work, within reason. Attached in Appendix A is a
listing of positions that are salaried. All compensatory leave shall be taken within the pay period
that it is earned however, an employee may, in writing, request that during a calendar year up to
a total of forty (40) cumulative hours may be taken as compensatory leave outside the pay
periods when earned. All compensatory leave shall be scheduled at the convenience of the Town
of Cape Elizabeth by the appropriate department head.
Sec. 3-1-9 Attendance at Work
Employees shall be at their respective places of work in accordance with the general
departmental regulations pertaining to the hours of work. All departments shall keep regular
attendance records and furnish to the Town Manager such periodic reports, as he shall request. In
the event of necessary absence because of illness or any other cause, it is the responsibility of
employees to see that their department head is advised of the reason for absence within a
reasonable time, and at least before the time the employee is expected to report to work.
Sec. 3-1-10 Disciplinary Proceedings
Each department head may discipline any member of his department on account of violation of
department rules, inefficiency, incompetence, misconduct, negligence, insubordination,
disloyalty or other cause, by suspending the employee from the performance of his duties
without pay for not more than ten consecutive workdays for any one offense, but not more than
an aggregate of thirty days in any calendar year for more than one offense, or on account of the
same or other sufficient cause may, with the approval of the Town Manager, demote or dismiss
any such employee. At the time of taking such action the department head shall present to the
employee if possible, otherwise mailed to their most recent residence, charges specifically stating
the cause for complaint and specifying the sanction therefor, and shall promptly file copies of
such charges with the Town Manager. The sanction imposed shall be effective immediately
unless otherwise stated. Department heads may also reprimand, in writing, any member of their
department on account of violation of department rules, inefficiency, incompetence, misconduct,
negligence, insubordination, disloyalty or other cause. Reprimands may be appealed only to the
Town Manager and not to the Personnel Appeals Board.
(a) Appeal to the Manager
An employee who is dissatisfied with the disciplinary action taken by the department head, may
appeal in writing the same within three working days to the Town Manager. The Town Manager
shall make a separate investigation and inform the employee in writing of his decision and the
reasons therefore within seven (7) days or as soon thereafter as practicable. The Town Manager
may confirm or reverse the action appealed from or may modify such action including more
stringent or more lenient punishment.
(b) Appeal to Personnel Appeals Board
Any full-time employee who is not a department head, against whom disciplinary action other
than reprimands has been taken under this Section, may appeal the same to the Personnel
Appeals Board (established under Sec. 4-1-1 of the Code of Ordinances), hereinafter in this
3-8
Section “Board,” by filing notice thereof with the Town Clerk within three working days after
the decision of the Town Manager. The Board shall promptly fix the time for such hearing,
which shall be within ten days following receipt of the charges by the department member or
such longer time as the department member may require for preparation of his defense.
(c) Hearing
Such appeal shall be heard by the Board in executive session, unless otherwise requested by the
employee as set forth in the notice of appeal. Court rules of evidence shall not be applicable and
the Board shall hear and weigh all evidence presented which it deems relevant. The employee
and department head may each present and cross-examine witnesses, and all testimony shall be
given under oath. If the employee against whom charges have been presented shall fail or refuse
to give testimony before the Board, the hearing may continue and action may be taken by the
Board without the participation of the employee.
(d) Decision
The decision of the Board, which shall be rendered no later than 14 days after the close of the
hearing, may confirm or reverse the action appealed from or may modify such action including
more stringent or more lenient punishment. If the Board reverses the action appealed from, it
may make appropriate orders.
(e) Deadlines
Any deadline for decisions in any Disciplinary Proceeding within this section may be extended if
any party in the proceeding had a previously scheduled vacation or an illness requiring
hospitalization. Any such extension shall be reasonably granted by any party and no employee
shall suffer loss of pay as the consequence of any such extension. Extensions shall be granted
under the same conditions if the Personnel Appeals Board is not fully appointed,
(f) Further Appeals
The decision of the Board shall constitute final administrative action and may be further
appealed only as provided by the Maine Rules of Civil Procedures; provided, however, that if
any provision for arbitration is then in effect and applicable to the charges and department in
question, the department head or employee charged may appeal the decision of the Board under
the procedures so established, which shall govern all further proceedings.
Sec. 3-1-11 Job Performance
The Town Manager may establish reasonable criteria and standards of job performance to be
used for the purpose of evaluating candidates for vacant positions and for evaluating current
regular employees. All regular employees shall be given annual performance evaluations by
their immediate supervisor. These evaluations may be utilized in disciplinary proceedings and in
determining compensation. The criteria and standards of job performance shall be consistent for
all persons in the same or similar job classification and shall be applied fairly to all persons
regardless of age. They shall be consistent with provisions of the Maine Human Rights Act and
3-9
the Americans With Disabilities Act, including those provisions relating to the employment of
physically and mentally handicapped persons.
Sec. 3-1-12 Political Activity
While working for the Town, all employees shall refrain from seeking or accepting nomination
or election to any elective office in the Town government, and from using influence publicly in
any way for or against any candidate for elective office in the Town government. Town
employees shall not work at the polls or circulate petitions or campaign literature for elective
Town officials, or be in any way concerned with soliciting or receiving subscriptions,
contributions, or political service from any person for any political purpose pertaining to the
Town government. This rule is not to be construed to prevent Town employees from becoming,
or continuing to be, members of any political organization, from attending political meetings,
from expressing their views on political matters, or from voting with complete freedom in any
local, state or national election. This section shall not apply to volunteer/call public safety
personnel unless they have another position with the town, nor shall it apply to family members
of employees.
Sec. 3-1-13 Order of Layoffs
In the event it becomes necessary to lay off employees for any reason, employees shall be laid
off in inverse order of their seniority, by job title, with displacement rights in the same
department. No new employee shall be hired until all employees in the same department on
layoff status for not more than twelve months, who desire to return to work, have been recalled.
(Rev. Eff. 01/10/11)
Sec. 3-1-14 Grievances
(a) Definition
A grievance is a misunderstanding or disagreement that relates to working conditions or
relationships considered by an employee, other than a department head, as grounds for
complaint, excepting a complaint concerning position classification, pay, demotion, suspension
or dismissal, or a complaint concerning the interpretation of application by the Town of any
provision in any collective bargaining agreement that may exist.
(b) Policy
The most effective accomplishment of the work of the Town requires prompt consideration and
equitable adjustment of employee grievances. It is the desire of the Town to adjust grievances
informally and department heads, supervisors and employees are expected to make every effort
to resolve problems as they arise. However, it is recognized that there will be grievances, which
will be resolved only after a formal appeal and review. Accordingly, the following procedure is
established.
(c) Procedure
3-10
An employee shall first present the grievance to the department head who shall make a careful
inquiry into the facts and circumstances of the complaint. The department head shall attempt to
resolve the problem promptly and fairly. Whenever a grievance is submitted in writing to a
department head, the department head shall investigate the grievance and provide a written
response with reasons to the employee within seven (7) calendar days after receipt of the
grievance.
An employee who is dissatisfied with the decision of the department head shall, within thirty
(30) calendar days of the decision, submit the grievance in writing to the Town Manager. The
Town Manager shall make a separate investigation and inform the employee and the department
head in writing of a decision and the reasons therefor within seven (7) calendar days after receipt
of the employee’s grievance. The decision of the Town Manager shall be final. The above
mentioned seven (7) calendar days response time may only be extended by mutual agreement
between the employee and the party required to respond.
Sec. 3-1-15 Payroll Deductions
The Town provides optional payroll deductions for banks and credit unions and for an annual
combined charitable appeal for umbrella organizations in accordance with a Town Council
adopted policy. Direct deposit of payroll checks is also available. Payroll deductions and direct
deposit shall be authorized in writing by each employee.
Sec. 3-1-16 Mileage Reimbursement
The town shall reimburse employees who use their vehicles for approved municipal purposes at
the rate set by the Internal Revenue Service. Any employee with a municipal vehicle or with a
set monthly mileage allowance shall annually provide a report to the town on use of the vehicle
or mileage stipend so that the town may properly report any private use to the Internal Revenue
Service. (Rev. Eff. 11/13/2019)
Sec. 3-1-17 Solicitation
Employees may not solicit members of the public for purposes unrelated to town business while
on duty or while on municipal property.
Sec. 3-1-18 Smoking
The Town of Cape Elizabeth maintains a tobacco free environment for its employees and visitors
to municipal facilities. There is no tobacco use permitted in any municipal building or in any
municipal vehicle. Employees and other visitors shall not utilize tobacco products at any
entranceway to any building. Employees may use their regular breaks for use of tobacco
products and are not entitled to additional breaks. (Rev. Eff. 3/10/2013)
3-11
Sec. 3-1-19 Firearms
Employees, other than those authorized to do so, may not possess or carry firearms of any kind
in Town buildings, Town vehicles, or otherwise while working for the Town. Employees may
keep their firearm in their personal vehicle, as long as it is covered and the vehicle is locked.
(Add. Eff. 9/14/2015)
Sec. 3-1-20 Proper Dress (Add. Eff. 9/14/2015)
Workplace attire and grooming must be neat, clean and appropriate for the work being
performed and the setting in which the work is performed. Natural and artificial scents may also
become a distraction from a well-functioning workplace, and are also subject to this policy.
Department heads may determine appropriate workplace attire and grooming for their area.
Managers should communicate their department’s workplace attire and grooming guidelines to
employees during the orientation and evaluation period. Any questions about the department’s
guidelines for attire should be discussed with the department head.
Employees are expected to present a professional, businesslike image to residents, taxpayers,
visitors, and the public. Acceptable personal appearance, like proper maintenance of work areas,
is an ongoing requirement of employment with the Town.
The Police and Fire Department staff may be required to meet special dress, grooming and
hygiene standards, such as wearing uniforms or protective clothing, depending on the nature of
their job. Uniforms and protective clothing may be required for certain positions and will be
provided to employees by the Police or Fire Departments.
At its discretion, a department may, such as during unusually hot or cold weather or during
special occasions, allows staff to dress in a more casual fashion than is normally required. On
these occasions, employees are still expected to present a neat appearance and are not permitted
to wear ripped, frayed or disheveled clothing, athletic wear, tight, revealing or otherwise
inappropriate clothing.
Any employee who does not meet the attire or grooming standards set by his or her department
will be required to take corrective action, for example leaving the premises to change clothing.
Hourly-paid staff will not be compensated for any work time missed because of failure to
comply with designated workplace standards.
The Town recognizes the importance of individually held religious beliefs to persons within its
workforce. The Town will reasonably accommodate a staff member’s religious beliefs in terms
of workplace attire unless the accommodation creates an undue hardship. Accommodation of
religious beliefs in terms of attire may be difficult in light of issues of safety for the particular
employee as well as co-workers. Employees requesting a workplace attire accommodation based
on religious beliefs should be referred to the Town Manager.
Violations of the policy can range from inappropriate clothing items to offensive perfumes, body
odor and tattoos. If an employee comes to work in inappropriate dress, the employee will be
3-12
required to go home, change and return to work.
If an employee’s poor hygiene or use of too much perfume/cologne is an issue, the department
head should discuss the problem with the employee in private and should point out the specific
areas to be corrected. If the problem persists, managers should follow the normal corrective
action process.
Sec 3-1-21 Safety and Health (Add. Eff. 9/14/2015)
Fire Safety
Work areas should be kept clean and free of rubbish and other material that could be a potential
fire hazard. Flammable and other potentially dangerous materials are to be stored and
maintained in accordance with federal, state and local fire regulations.
Fire extinguishers are located in clearly marked spots throughout the premises. The
extinguishers should be checked once each month to make sure they are in proper working
condition. They are also certified once a year. Department heads are responsible for showing
employees under their supervision and each new employee where the extinguishers are located
and for instructing employees in the proper use of the extinguishers. They are also responsible
for reporting quickly any fire and for seeing that their employees and visitors to our facility know
where the exits are located and that all their people are safely out of the building in the event of a
fire.
Well-being
Employees are entitled to a safe and healthful place in which to work. The Town’s goal is to
minimize human injury, illness, and property damage caused by accidents, fire or other hazards.
Each employee is expected to fully accept accountability for safety and health inherent in its
operations, recognize hazards, anticipate possible risks, and then act to eliminate or control
hazards or risks. Safety goes hand in hand with the Town’s goals of production efficiency and
quality control. A good safety program enhances the Town’s opportunity to achieve these goals.
Equally important, a good safety program, which is conscientiously implemented and enforced,
avoids suffering and hardship resulting from injuries.
The Town aims to:
a) Develop and establish operating methods with consideration for safety and health;
b) Maintain compliance with Federal and State agencies;
c) Encourage and support employees safety training programs;
d) Hold regular meetings to review and upgrade safety performance;
e) Recognize achievements through inspection/auditing methods; and
f) Take immediate action where necessary to improve safety conditions.
Each department head and manager is expected to:
a) Give sincere, active and constant support to all safety activities and procedures;
3-13
b) Instill a safety awareness in each employee;
c) Teach each employee what the hazards are involved during his or her employment and how
to avoid them;
d) Assure that each employee is provided with the needed and appropriate safety equipment and
protective devices, and to assure that the devises are used;
e) Take prompt corrective action whenever unsafe conditions or acts are noted;
f) Make regular safety appraisals of his or her assigned area; and
g) Investigate and find the cause of accidents and to take corrective action, if possible, through
the post injury response program.
Each employee is responsible for keeping his or her own work area clean. Good housekeeping is
especially important in our business. Good housekeeping is a necessary adjunct to the
maintenance of a safe and healthy workplace. A basic rule of fire prevention is good
housekeeping and management will make periodic inspections of the premises, including
individual offices, to insure that potential hazards are eliminated and that any and all dangerous
practices and conditions are quickly corrected.
Observance of all the Town safety procedures and OSHA standards is a requirement for
continued employment, and violators may be appropriately disciplined.
Any safety matter should be referred to the Town Manager.
Sec. 3-1-22 Accidents and Injuries (Add. Eff. 9/14/2015)
Any injury, which occurs on the job, must be reported immediately to the department head
regardless how slight the injury may seem. The same applies to illnesses, which appear to be
related to the job in any way. A job-related injury or illness, which is not reported by an
employee, can result in medical complications, unnecessary loss of time and wages, and delay in
or even loss of applicable benefits under the Workers' Compensation Insurance Program. Failure
to report such incidents also denies the Town the opportunity to remedy the cause of the injury or
illness in the first place.
The department head will determine whether or not the injury requires only basic first aid
treatment by the Town personnel trained in first aid, or if it is more serious so as to require
treatment at a doctor's office or at a hospital. Whenever there is any doubt about an employee’s
condition, the department head should escort or make arrangements for the person to be taken to
the medical provider or to a hospital.
When a job-related injury/illness, or incident is reported, the department head or manager, with
the employee, is responsible for gathering all the pertinent facts about the situation such as: time,
place, cause, extent, equipment or process. This information is then put in the First Report of
Injury Form and forwarded, within 24 hours of the incident, to the Payroll Supervisor, who is
responsible for sending it to the insurance company and the Workers’ Compensation Board.
Department heads are responsible for conducting an accident analysis and developing modified
duty jobs, where or when applicable.
3-14
Each employee is expected to observe safety practices on his or her shift so as to keep accidents
and injuries at the Town to a minimum.
Department heads are expected to ensure that each employee follows the
procedures, which have been established to assure a safe and healthful workplace.
Sec. 3-1-23 Modified Duty (Add. Eff. 9/14/2015)
When possible and appropriate for the Town’s staffing needs, modified, short-term, or early
return-to-work assignments (“modified-duty”) may be made available to an employee as a
positive means of rehabilitation following a disabling work injury.
A medical provider must approve any candidate for modified-duty. Temporary assignments may
not last longer than 30 working days. Employees on modified duty can be utilized in any
department, performing any function that they are able to do.
As soon as Modified-duty is requested or appropriate, the Town Manager will evaluate any
health restrictions and search for modified-duty at the employee’s worksite. If none exists in that
area the Town Manager may deem it necessary to look elsewhere within the Town to provide
Modified-Duty. If there is no Modified-Duty available or appropriate under the circumstances,
the employee will be instructed to return to work on a date when such work exists or when fullduty
is possible, whichever comes first. The Town Manager will notify an employee as to
availability of work.
The duration of Modified-Duty is limited to an initial period of 30 working days, but the period
of Modified-Duty may be extended upon determination of the Town Manager. Extensions may
be approved based upon an assessment of the medical evidence, which is presented. Any
extension will be re-evaluated by the Town Manager on a weekly basis.
All employees returning to full-duty work must present the Town Manager with appropriate
medical documentation authorizing the employee’s return to full-duty work.
Article II Benefits
Note: In any instance where the benefits listed in this Personnel Code are not consistent with
benefits provided for in any collective bargaining agreement that may exist, the collective
bargaining agreement shall take precedence.
Sec. 3-2-1 Holidays
Paid holidays for all employees shall be as follows:
New Year’s Day Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
President’ Day Patriots’ Day
Memorial Day Independence Day
Labor Day Columbus Day
Veterans’ Day Thanksgiving Day
Thanksgiving Friday December 25th
3-15
Holiday pay is earned from the first day of employment for full-time employees and part-time
employees working a regular weekly schedule of fifteen or more hours. Part-time employees
who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more hours per week on a year-round basis shall
receive holiday time on a pro rata basis. Specifically, an employee shall earn holiday pay at the
percentage of a 40-hour workweek they are regularly scheduled to work. For example, an
employee who works 16/40ths of a week would earn 16/40th of a holiday or 3.2 hours.
Sec. 3-2-2 Sick Leave and Family Sick Leave
Sick leave shall accrue for regular, employees at the rate of one (1) day for each calendar month
of service accumulative to a maximum of one hundred forty days. Upon separation in good
standing, an employee will receive reimbursement for one-third of accumulated sick leave after
10 years service but not to exceed 40 days, one-half of accumulated sick leave after 15 years
service, but not to exceed 60 days, both computed at the employee's final base rate. Illness for
which sick leave may be granted is defined as actual personal illness or bodily injury, doctor's
visits, Family Medical Leave as provided for in Sec. 3-2-6, and Family Sick Leave as described
below.
The Town Manager or the department head may at any time, as a condition precedent to the
continuance of sick pay, require a doctor’s certificate or other medically reliable evidence to
justify the employee’s continued absence from employment.
Probationary employees shall not be entitled to paid sick leave until they have completed 30 days
of employment. At the completion of 30 days employment by probationary employees,
cumulative sick leave days shall be computed from the original date of full-time employment.
Five days of sick leave will be charged for each calendar week of qualified absence. Absence
from duty when sick leave is paid shall not constitute a break in service.
Part-time employees who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more hours per week on a
year-round basis shall receive sick time on a pro rata basis.
Family Sick Leave: Employees may utilize accrued sick, vacation or compensatory time to care
for a child, spouse or parent who is ill. Employees are entitled to elect which type and amount of
paid leave to apply to family sick leave. The Town Manager or Department Head may require a
doctor’s certificate or other medically reliable evidence for the illness of a child, spouse or parent
requiring continued absence of the employee.
Sec. 3-2-3 Special Leave and Jury Duty
Special leave with pay shall be granted regular employees as follows:
(a) A regular employee shall be excused from work for up to five (5) days
upon request as required due to death of a spouse, partner, child, stepchild,
parent or step-parent residing in the household.
3-16
(b) A regular employee shall be excused from work due to the death of
parents, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandparents, motherin-
law, father-in-law, stepparent or stepchild, for up to three (3) days. It is
intended that this time be used for the purpose of handling necessary
arrangements and attendance at the funeral.
(c) Extension to special leave may be made by the department head upon
request of the employee. Extensions may be of time and/or for other
family members.
(d) Part-time employees who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more
hours per week on a year-round basis shall receive special leave on a pro
rata basis.
Any full time employee or part time employee working a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more
hours per week called to jury duty shall have full pay and benefits during that period. The
employee shall provide the Town all reimbursements received from the court and shall report to
work when released from jury duty if during their regular hours.
Sec. 3-2-4 Military Service Leave (USERRA)
In accordance with state and federal law, all employees will be granted time off from work for
annual training obligations or active service in the United States uniformed services. Employees
engaged in active military service will be placed on military leave of absence status.
Full-time employees will be granted paid military service leave, not to exceed two weeks in any
calendar year. For each such period of military service leave, the Town will pay the employee
the balance between service pay and the employee’s regular compensation, the total equaling the
regular pay of the employee had he or she been in the service of the Town during the period of
leave, provided that the employee on military service leave furnishes the Department head an
official statement by military authorities giving the rank, pay and allowances.
Part-time employees who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more hours per week on a
year-round basis shall receive paid military service leave time on a pro rata basis.
Sec. 3-2-5 Leave for Victims of Domestic Violence
In accordance with Maine Law, Cape Elizabeth will grant you a reasonable and necessary
amount of time off from work without pay if you are a victim of domestic violence, domestic
assault, sexual assault or stalking, and you need the time to:
• Prepare for or attend court proceedings,
• Receive medical treatment, or
• Obtain necessary services to remedy a crisis caused by domestic violence, sexual
assault or stalking.
3-17
You must request the leave as soon as circumstances make it clear that time off is necessary.
Approval of leave will be dependent upon (a) whether your absence will create an undue
hardship for the Town, (b) whether you requested leave within a reasonable time, and (c)
whether the requested leave is impractical, unreasonable or unnecessary given the facts made
available to the Town at the time of your request.
Vacation and sick days do not accrue and holidays are not paid while you are on unpaid leave.
You will not be discriminated against for taking or asking for leave.
Sec. 3-2-6 Vacation
Vacation is earned from the first day of employment.
Per Week
Hours
Per Year
Days
Date of Hire to the 5th Anniversary of Date of Hire 1.84 12
5th Anniversary of Date of Hire to 14th Anniversary 2.61 17
14th Anniversary of Date of Hire to 19th Anniversary 3.38 22
19th Anniversary of Date of Hire to Separation 3.70 24
Vacation time may be granted only for time already accumulated. Vacation cannot be given to
another employee.
Part-time employees who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more hours per week on a
year-round basis shall receive vacation time on a pro rata basis based on a forty hour work week.
For example, an employee who averages 16 hours work each week shall earn vacation time at
16/40th of the applicable accumulation rate.
If a holiday falls within a vacation period, it shall not be treated as a vacation day.
An employee may utilize vacation time if sick leave has become depleted. If an employee
becomes sick while on vacation, the Town reserves the right, but has no obligation, to offer the
employee the option of charging the previously scheduled vacation time to sick leave.
At the end of each calendar year, an employee can carry over to the next year accumulated
vacation time not to exceed ten days. Any extension beyond this amount shall be approved by
the department head and the Town Manager. As the Town believes it is in the best interest of
both the Town and employees for vacation time to be taken each year, no extension may be
granted by the department head and the Town Manager unless a specific use of the additional
accumulated time has been identified.
Vacation time shall not accumulate after an employee has been absent due to a Workers’
Compensation injury after the lapsing of one year from the first date of absence.
3-18
Vacation scheduling shall be approved by the department head or by the Town Manager in the
case of department heads.
Accrued vacation shall be approved by the department head or by the Town Manager in the case
of department heads.
Accrued vacation leave shall be paid to a regular employee in good standing upon separation
from the service or to a beneficiary or estate upon death.
Sec. 3-2-7 Unpaid Leaves of Absence
(a) Unpaid Leaves. A regular employee may be granted a leave of absence
without pay by the Town Manager upon recommendation of the
department head concerned. Such leave of absence without pay shall not
exceed one year in length and shall only be granted when it appears
because of the past record of the employee, or because of the purpose for
which the leave is requested, that it is to the best interest of the Town to
grant the leave. Absence from employment for an approved leave of
absence shall not constitute a break in service. During such a leave,
employment benefits such as vacation and sick pay, pension, etc., shall not
accrue.
Family and Medical Leave (FMLA) (Rev. eff 9-14-2015)
The Town may grant up to 12 weeks of family and medical leave during a rolling 12-month
period to eligible employees (or up to 26 weeks of military caregiver leave to care for a covered
service member with a serious injury or illness), in accordance with the Family and Medical
Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA). The leave may be paid, unpaid, or a combination of paid and
unpaid, depending on the circumstances and as specified.
In order to qualify to take family and medical leave under this law, the requesting employee must
meet all of the following conditions:
1. The employee must have worked at least 1250 hours during the 12 month, or 52 weeks
period, immediately before the date when the FMLA leave will begin; and
2. The employee must have worked for the Town for more than 12 months or 52 weeks.
The 12 months, or 52 weeks, need not have been consecutive. For eligibility purposes,
an employee will be considered to have been employed for the entire week even if the
employee was on the payroll for only part of a week or if an employee is on leave during
the week. Separate periods of employment will be counted, provided that the break in
service does not exceed seven years. Separate periods of employment will be counted if
the break in service exceeds seven years due to National Guard or Reserve military
service obligations or when there is a written agreement, including a collective
bargaining agreement, stating the employer’s intention to rehire the employee after the
service break.
3-19
In order to qualify for FMLA leave, an employee must be taking the leave for one of the reasons
listed below:
1. The birth of a child in order to care for the child.
2. The placement of a child for adoption or foster care.
3. To care for a spouse, child, or parent with a serious health condition.
4. The serious health condition of the employee.
An employee may take FMLA leave for a serious health condition if the health conditions make
the employee unable to perform the functions of the employee's position. A serious health
condition is defined as a condition, which requires inpatient care at a hospital, hospice, or
residential medical care facility, or a condition which requires continuing care by a licensed
health care provider. Illnesses of a serious and long-term nature, resulting in recurring or lengthy
absences may be considered a serious health condition. Workers' compensation injuries are
considered serious health conditions. Employees with questions about what illnesses are covered
under this FMLA policy or under the Town’s sick leave policies are encouraged to consult with
the Town Manager.
The Town may require an employee to provide a doctor's certification of a serious health
condition.
If an employee is taking paid sick leave for a condition which progresses into a serious health
condition and the employee requests unpaid leave, the Town may designate all or some portion
of related leave taken as FMLA, to the extent that the earlier leave meets the necessary
qualifications.
An eligible employee may take up to 12 weeks of FMLA leave under this guideline during any
12-month period. The Town will measure the 12-month period as a rolling 12-month period
measured backward from the date the employee uses any leave under this policy. Each time an
employee takes FMLA leave, the Town will compute the amount of FMLA leave the employee
has taken and subtract it from the 12 weeks of available leave. The balance remaining is the
amount the employee is entitled to take at that subsequent time.
If a husband and wife are both employed by the Town, and each wishes to take leave for the birth
of a child, adoption or placement of a child in foster care, or to care for a parent (but not a parent
"in-law") with a serious health condition, the husband and wife together may only take a total of
12 weeks of leave.
5. Qualifying exigency leave for families of members of the National Guard or Reserves or
of a regular component of the Armed Forces when the covered military member is on
covered active duty or called to covered active duty.
An employee whose spouse, son, daughter or parent either has been notified of an impending call
or order to covered active military duty or who is already on covered active duty may take up to
12 weeks of leave for reasons related to or affected by the family member’s call-up or service.
The qualifying exigency must be one of the following: 1) short-notice deployment, 2) military
3-20
events and activities, 3) child care and school activities, 4) financial and legal arrangements, 5)
counseling, 6) rest and recuperation, 7) post-deployment activities and 8) additional activities
that arise out of active duty, provided that the employer and employee agree, including
agreement on timing and duration of the leave.
“Covered active duty” means:
(a) In the case of a member of a regular component of the Armed Forces, duty during the
deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country; and
(b) In the case of a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces, duty during the
deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country under a call or order to
active duty under a provision of law referred to in section 101(a)(13)(B) of title 10, United
States Code.
The leave may commence as soon as the individual receives the call-up notice. (Son or daughter
for this type of FMLA leave is defined the same as for child for other types of FMLA leave
except that the person does not have to be a minor.) This type of leave would be counted toward
the employee’s 12-week maximum of FMLA leave in a 12-month period.
6. Military caregiver leave (also known as covered service member leave) to care for an
injured or ill service member or veteran.
An employee whose son, daughter, parent or next of kin is a covered service member may take
up to 26 weeks in a single 12-month period to care for that service member.
Next of kin is defined as the closest blood relative of the injured or recovering service member.
The term “covered service member” means:
(a) A member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) who
is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status, or is
otherwise on the temporary disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness; or
(b) A veteran who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, for a serious injury
or illness and who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National
Guard or Reserves) at any time during the period of 5 years preceding the date on which the
veteran undergoes that medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy.
The term “serious injury or illness”:
(a) In the case of a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or
Reserves), means an injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on active
duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member’s active duty and was
aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that may render the
member medically unfit to perform the duties of the member’s office, grade, rank, or rating; and
3-21
(b) In the case of a veteran who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the
National Guard or Reserves) at any time during a period when the person was a covered service
member, means a qualifying (as defined by the Secretary of Labor) injury or illness that was
incurred by the member in line of duty on an active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before
the beginning of the member’s active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on
active duty in the Armed Forces) and that manifested itself before or after the member became a
veteran.
While an employee is on FMLA leave, the Town will continue the employee's health benefits
during the FMLA leave period at the same level and under the same conditions as if the
employee had continued to work.
An employee presently pays a portion of the premium for his or her health care. While on paid
FMLA leave, the Town will continue payroll deductions to collect the employee's share of the
premium. While on unpaid FMLA leave, the employee must continue to make this payment,
either in person or by mail. The payment must be received in the Payroll Department by the first
day of each month. If the payment is more than 30 days late, the employee's health care coverage
may be dropped for the duration of the leave. The Town will provide 15 days' notification prior
to the employee's loss of coverage.
If the employee chooses not to return to work for reasons other than a continued serious health
condition, the Town will require the employee to reimburse the Town the amount it paid for the
employee's health insurance premium during the FMLA leave period.
Employee Status During FMLA Leave
An employee who takes leave under this policy may be asked to provide a fitness for duty (FFD)
clearance from the health care provider. This requirement will be included in the employer’s
response to the FMLA request. Generally, an employee who takes FMLA leave will be able to
return to the same position or a position with equivalent status, pay, benefits and other
employment terms. The position will be the same or one, which is virtually identical in terms of
pay, benefits and working conditions. The Town may choose to exempt certain key employees
from this requirement and not return them to the same or similar position.
An employee who is taking FMLA leave because of the employee's own serious health condition
or the serious health condition of a family member must use all available vacation and
compensatory time prior to being eligible for unpaid leave. Sick leave and workers’
compensation may be run concurrently with FMLA leave if the reason for the FMLA leave is
covered by the established sick leave or workers’ compensation policy. The remainder of the
FMLA leave will be unpaid, except that some employees may qualify for disability benefits or
workers’ compensation benefits. Employees should consult with the Town Manager for
eligibility and available benefits.
Disability leave for the birth of the child and for an employee's serious health condition,
including workers' compensation leave (to the extent that it qualifies), will be designated as
FMLA leave and will run concurrently with FMLA. An employee who is taking leave for the
adoption or foster care of a child must use all vacation or compensatory time leave prior to being
3-22
eligible for unpaid leave.
An employee who is using military FMLA leave for a qualifying exigency must use all paid
vacation or compensatory time prior to being eligible for unpaid leave. An employee using
FMLA military caregiver leave must also use all vacation, compensatory time or sick leave (as
long as the reason for the absence is covered by the Town’s sick day policy) prior to being
eligible for unpaid leave.
The employee may take FMLA leave in 12 consecutive weeks, may use the leave intermittently
(take a day periodically when needed over the year) or, under certain circumstances, may use the
leave to reduce the work week or workday, resulting in a reduced hour schedule. In all cases, the
leave may not exceed a total of 12 work weeks (or 26 work weeks to care for an injured or ill
service member over a 12-month period).
The Town may temporarily transfer an employee to an available alternative position with
equivalent pay and benefits if the alternative position would better accommodate the intermittent
or reduced schedule, in instances of when leave for the employee or employee's family member
is foreseeable and for planned medical treatment, including recovery from a serious health
condition or to care for a child after birth, or placement for adoption or foster care.
For the birth, adoption or foster care of a child, the Town and the employee must mutually agree
to the schedule before the employee may take the leave intermittently or work a reduced hour
schedule. Leave for birth, adoption or foster care of a child must be taken within one year of the
birth or placement of the child.
If the employee is taking leave for a serious health condition or because of the serious health
condition of a family member, the employee should try to reach agreement with the Town before
taking intermittent leave or working a reduced hour schedule. If this is not possible, then the
employee must prove that the use of the leave is medically necessary.
The Town may request certification by a physician of the serious health condition. The
employee must respond to such request within 15 days of the request, or provide a reasonable
explanation for the delay. Failure to provide certification may result in a denial of FMLA leave
or continuation of the FMLA leave.
Certification of a serious health condition shall include: the date when the condition began or
begins, its expected duration, diagnosis, and a brief statement of treatment. For FMLA leave
because of the employee's own medical condition, the certification should also include a
statement that the employee is unable to perform the essential functions of the employee's
position. For a seriously ill family member, the certification must include a statement that the
patient requires assistance and that the employee's presence would be beneficial or desirable.
If the employee plans to take intermittent FMLA leave or work a reduced schedule, the
certification must also include dates and the duration of treatment and a statement of medical
necessity for taking intermittent FMLA leave or working a reduced schedule.
3-23
The Town has a right to ask for a second opinion if it has reason to doubt the certification. The
Town will pay for the employee to get a certification from a second doctor, which the Town will
select.
If necessary to resolve a conflict between the original certification and the second opinion, the
Town may require the opinion of a third doctor. The Town will pay for the opinion. This third
opinion will be considered final.
All employees requesting FMLA leave must first notify their department head. The employee
will be required to apply, in writing, for an FMLA leave to the Town Manager or designee.
Within five business days after the employee has provided this notice, the Town Manager or
designee will complete and provide the employee with the DOL Notice of Eligibility and Rights.
When the need for the leave is foreseeable, the employee must provide the Town with at least 30
days' notice. When an employee becomes aware of a need for FMLA leave less than 30 days in
advance, the employee must provide notice of the need for the leave either the same day or the
next business day. When the need for FMLA leave is not foreseeable, the employee must comply
with the Town’s usual and customary notice and procedural requirements for requesting leave,
absent unusual circumstances.
Sec. 3-2-8 Workplace Injuries and Workers’ Compensation Insurance
Coverage
The Town of Cape Elizabeth provides upon employment Workers’ Compensation Insurance
Coverage for all employees. Any employee who sustains a personal injury or compensable
illness arising out of and in the course of employment shall be paid during each week of
incapacity to work resulting from the injury an amount sufficient, when added to the weekly
payment of Workers’ Compensation paid pursuant to the laws of the State, to equal regular
salary or normal wage for a period not to exceed eight weeks. No additional payments shall be
made in any instance when, in the opinion of the department head and Town Manager, the
accident occurred as a result of intoxication, willful intent, or violation of rules and regulations
on the part of the employee. Eligible employees will automatically be placed on a Family And
Medical leave (FMLA) after three days of absence due to the work related injury or illness. (Rev.
Eff. 01/10/11)
Sec. 3-2-9 Retirement and Disability
(a) Social Security
Social Security benefits were adopted on March 3, 1952, and now extend upon employment to
all employees of the Town except teachers and volunteer fire fighters. Payroll deductions and
Town matching contributions are made in accordance with current regulations. (Rev. Eff.
01/10/11)
3-24
(b) Maine Public Employees Retirement System (MainePERS)
The Town of Cape Elizabeth became a participating district in the Maine State Retirement
System on April 1, 1966. Membership is limited to those who joined the Cape Elizabeth district
prior to July 1, 1990 and to all law enforcement personnel. All employees who participate must
contribute a percentage of wages determined by MainePERS ; the contribution being in the form
of a deduction from each paycheck. If an employee withdraws from the system, the employee
receives only their own contribution plus interest and not any funds the Town may have
contributed. (Rev. Eff. 01/10/11)
(c) Defined Contribution Plan
The Town of Cape Elizabeth became a participant in the ICMA Retirement Corporation, Sec.
401A Money Purchase Plan in 1990. The Town will match effective on the employment date
regular employees’ contributions at 7% of gross wages level with employee’s contributions to be
paid through payroll deductions. Employees are fully responsible for any fees assessed to
participants by the Plan and are responsible for choosing from among a number of investment
options for the balances in their accounts. The withdrawal of funds is in accordance with federal
regulations. Employees who participate in the MainePERS are not eligible for this defined
contribution plan. (Rev. Eff. 01/10/11)
Part-time employees who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more hours per week on a
year-round basis are eligible for this program.
(d) Deferred Compensation Plan
The Town of Cape Elizabeth became a participant in the ICMA Retirement Corporation, Section
457 Plan on November 14, 1983. The Town does not make a contribution for employees.
Employee contributions are as provided by federal law and more information is available at
www.icmarc.org. Investment options are the same as in the Sec. 401A Plan. Part-time
employees who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more hours per week on a year-round
basis are eligible for this program.
(e) Disability.
Employees in the ICMA Retirement Corporation, Sec. 401A Money Purchase Plan are eligible
for participation in a disability plan effective January 1991. Coverage is effective on the first day
of the next month after employment commences provided the disability carrier has accepted the
enrollment. The Town contributes up to 1% of an employee’s annual base salary into the Plan.
Any additional cost shall be paid by the employee through payroll deductions. Employees in
MainePERS are eligible for disability payments in accordance with the regulations of the
MainePERS. Part-time employees who work a regular weekly schedule of 15 or more hours per
week on a year-round basis are eligible for this program. (Rev. Eff. 01/10/11)
3-25
Sec. 3-2-10 Maine State Group Life Insurance
Employees are eligible to participate in the Maine State Group Life Insurance and Group
Accidental Death and Dismemberment Plan. Coverage is effective on the first day of the next
month after employment commences provided the insurance carrier has accepted the enrollment.
The Plan is offered through MainePERS separate from retirement plan membership. (Rev. Eff.
01/10/11)
Sec. 3-2-11 Employee Health Benefits
The Town participates in the Maine Municipal Employees Health Trust (MMEHT)
Comprehensive Plan. Employees have the option of choosing the MMEHT Comprehensive Point
of Service Plan (POS C), and effective March 1, 2015 may also choose from among the
MMEHT PPO 500 plan and the MMEHT PPO 2500 plan. Single employees shall assume 10%
of the cost of their health insurance premium. Employees who have coverage other than single
coverage shall assume 20% of the total premium. Any employee who chooses the MMEHT PPO
500 plan or the MMEHT PPO 2500 plan will have established a Health Reimbursement Account
which shall provide reimbursement of deductibles and co-pays for up to 70% of the applicable
out of pocket maximum. The amount of the monthly premium paid by the employee shall not
be included as part of the out of pocket expense. (Rev. eff. 12/08/14
Coverage will begin on the first day of the next month after employment begins provided the
MMEHT has approved all required forms. The Town of Cape Elizabeth reserves the right to
participate in a different medical insurance plan, with comparable or better benefits, costs and
claims service. The Town also reserves the right to change the health insurance plans if
mandated to do so by the federal or state governments. Upon leaving Town employment, federal
COBRA requirements permit employees to continue on the Town policy at employee expense.
MMEHT will notify departing employees of their options.
Any employee eligible for more than single coverage, but who opts for single coverage or no
coverage, shall receive in lieu of coverage, $120.00 in each two week paycheck or if an
employee elects for no coverage and is eligible for family coverage, then that employee shall
receive $250.00 in each two week paycheck in lieu of coverage. If an employee elects for
employee and children coverage and is eligible for full family coverage, then that employee shall
receive $90.00 in each two week pay check in lieu of coverage. These in lieu of coverage
payment provisions shall not apply to employees who receive coverage under a spouse/partner’s
plan provided through the Town of Cape Elizabeth or the Cape Elizabeth School Department.
All payments shall be prorated for part time employees. Any employee who opts for no
coverage must annually show that evidence of coverage elsewhere. The payment shall not be
considered part of compensation for purposes of retirement, life insurance and computing hourly
wages. The employee shall be responsible for any tax liability. Affected employees must elect
their coverage level once a year during the enrollment period or upon hiring. Coverage must be
elected before they become effective. (Rev. eff. 12/08/14 and 3/14/16
3-26
The Town pays 90% of the cost of the premium for those with single coverage. The Town pays
80% of the cost of the premium for those with dependent coverage.
Regular permanent employees working at least 30 hours per week are eligible for the above
premium payments. Employees working a regular year round schedule of at least 20 hours per
week, but less than 30 hours per week receive a pro rata health benefit based on their percentage
of hours worked based on a 40 hour work week. (For example, an employee working 25 hours
year round per week would receive 25/40ths or 62.5% of the applicable premium. A single
employee would have 62.5% of their premium paid. An employee with dependents would have
62.5% of 80% of their premium paid which is 50%)
Elections are binding for the plan year unless during the year the employee has a lifestyle change
such as:
1. Marriage or divorce
2. Birth, adoption, or change in custody of a child
3. Death of a spouse or child
4. Gain or loss of a spouse's employment
5. Change in job status from full time to part time by you or your spouse
and/or
6. An unpaid leave of absence by you or your spouse.
The change an employee makes must be on account of and consistent with the event.
(a) Section 125 Plan
The Town of Cape Elizabeth offers a Section 125 Plan reimbursement account through Horace
Mann Insurance. The Town may choose another provider at its option. Medical expense
reimbursement accounts are limited to the maximum permitted under federal law. Dependent
care reimbursement accounts are limited to $5,000 per calendar year per family but may be lower
if the maximum allowed by federal law is less than $5,000. The enrollment period for this
program occurs once annually or on the initial hire date. (Amended Eff 12/10/2012)
(b) Fitness
The Town shall provide up to $270.00 per calendar year to reimburse any employee who works a
regular schedule of at least 20 hours per week for a fitness class, health club membership, a
smoking cessation or weight loss program or for any other bona fide program leading to better
fitness and health. Reimbursement shall be upon Town receipt of a paid invoice or copy of a
cancelled check. (Amended Eff 04/14/2014)
Sec. 3-2-12 Health Insurance Coverage During Leaves of Absences (Add.
Eff. 9/14/2015)
3-27
Health Insurance coverage is continued during a Family and Medical Leave, Disability Leave
and Workers’ Compensation Leave for a period of twelve weeks, provided the employee
continues to pay the employee portion of the health insurance premium. If such a leave goes
beyond twelve weeks, coverage will terminate unless the employee elects coverage under
COBRA.
For Military Leave, coverage terminates when an employee enters the military. Coverage is
continued in the case of short term absences for Military Reserve or National Guard
encampments.
With the exception of the above, benefit coverage, in general, terminates when an employee
begins the leave of absence. Employees should contact the Payroll Supervisor with specific
questions prior to beginning a leave of absence.
During an employee leave of absence, where the Town is prevented from collecting medical
insurance premiums through standard payroll procedures, the Town will set up a payment
schedule with each employee at the start of the leave. Failure to make the payments on a timely
basis will result in termination of the coverage.
Sec. 3-2-13 COBRA (Add. Eff. 9/14/2015)
When health insurance coverage terminates, employees are eligible to continue to receive health
insurance under the group plan for a specified period. If an employee quits, is laid off, or is
discharged, their health insurance is terminated immediately. Employees may elect continuation
of their coverage for themselves and/or dependents for a certain period of time. Employees who
elect coverage are required to make monthly payments at the full group rate. Coverage may
terminate whenever an employee:
? Fails to make timely payments under the plan;
? Becomes entitled to Medicare benefits; or
? The Town provided plan ceases for all employees, or the contribution coverage period
expires;
? The law otherwise requires or allows termination of coverage.
Article III Miscellaneous Policies
Sec. 3-3-1 Non-Discrimination and Anti-Harassment Policy
The Town is committed to providing a workplace that is free from discrimination and
discriminatory harassment. Harassment is defined as conduct that has the purpose or effect of
substantially interfering with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile,
or offensive working environment. It is a violation of Town policy and/or state and federal law for
any employee, Town official, or any other person to discriminate against or harass an employee
based on race, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation, physical or
mental disability, veteran status, or status as a whistleblower, and for any supervisory employee to
permit any such act of harassment in the workplace by anyone, whether or not an employee. Any
3-28
employee who believes that he or she has been harassed or discriminated against in any way should
follow the "Internal Complaint Procedure" set forth below.
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature constitute sexual harassment when:
A. Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual's employment;
B. Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as the basis for
employment decisions affecting such individual; or
C. Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an
individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive
working environment.
DESCRIPTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
The following type of conduct is considered to be sexual harassment and is not permitted:
A. Physical assaults of a sexual nature such as:
(1) rape, sexual battery, molestation or attempts to commit these assaults; and
(2) intentional physical conduct which is sexual in nature, such as touching,
pinching, patting, grabbing, brushing against another employee's body, or
poking another employee's body.
B. Unwanted sexual advances, propositions or other sexual comments, such as:
(1) sexually-oriented gestures, noises, remarks, jokes, or comments about a
person's sexuality or sexual experience directed at or made in the presence of
any employee who indicates or has indicated in any way that such conduct in
his or her presence is unwelcome;
(2) preferential treatment or promise of preferential treatment to an employee for
submitting to sexual conduct, including soliciting or attempting to solicit any
employee to engage in sexual activity for compensation or reward; and
(3) subjecting, or threats of subjecting, an employee to unwelcome sexual
attention or conduct or intentionally making performance of that employee's
job more difficult because of that employee's sex.
3-29
C. Sexual or discriminatory displays or publications anywhere in the work place by
employees, such as:
(1) displaying pictures, posters, electronic materials, calendars, graffiti, objects,
promotional materials, reading materials, or other materials that are sexually
suggestive, sexually demeaning, or pornographic, or bringing into the work
environment or possessing any such material to read, display or view at
work.
A picture will be presumed to be sexually suggestive if it depicts a person of
either sex who is not fully clothed or in clothes that are not suited to or
ordinarily accepted for the accomplishment of routine work in and around
the workplace and who is posed for the obvious purpose of displaying or
drawing attention to private portions of his or her body.
(2) reading or otherwise publicizing in the work environment materials that are
in any way sexually revealing, sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning or
pornographic; and
(3) displaying signs or other materials purporting to segregate an employee by
sex in any area of the workplace (other than restrooms and similar semiprivate
lockers/changing rooms).
INTERNAL COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
Any employee who believes he or she has been the subject of discriminatory harassment should
report the incident or act immediately to his/her supervisor or to the Town Manager. In the event a
complaint relates to the Town Manager, the complaint should be brought to the Council Chair. The
Town will promptly investigate all complaints. Each employee alleging discriminatory harassment
will be requested, but not required, to put the specifics in writing. All information will be held in
confidence to the extent possible and will be discussed only with those who have a need to know in
order to either investigate or resolve the complaint. Any employee who the Town determines has
engaged in discriminatory harassment will be promptly disciplined. Disciplinary measures may
consist of suspension or termination depending upon the severity of the offense.
No employee will be punished or penalized in any way for reporting, complaining about or filing a
claim concerning discriminatory harassment, or for participating in any investigation of a
discriminatory harassment complaint.
Sec. 3-3-2 Disability Accommodation
The Town is committed to complying fully with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and
the Maine Human Rights Act, and ensuring equal opportunity in employment for qualified
persons with disabilities. All employment practices and activities are conducted on a nondiscriminatory
basis.
3-30
Hiring procedures have been reviewed and provide persons with disabilities meaningful
employment opportunities. Pre-employment inquiries are made only regarding an applicant’s
ability to perform the essential duties of the position.
Reasonable accommodation is available to all disabled employees where their disability affects
the performance of job functions. Employees who believe they may require an accommodation
should consult with their supervisor. All employment decisions are based on the merits of the
situation, not the disability of the individual.
Qualified individuals with disabilities are entitled to equal pay and other forms of compensation
(or changes in compensation) as well as in job assignments, classification, organizational
structures, position descriptions, lines of progression and seniority lists. Leave of all types will
be available to all employees on an equal basis.
The Town will not discriminate against any qualified employees or applicants because they are
related to or associated with a person with a disability. Furthermore, the Town is committed to
taking all other actions necessary to ensure equal employment opportunity for persons with
disabilities in accordance with the ADA and the Maine Human Rights Act.
Sec. 3-3-3 Employee Computer and Internet Use Guidelines
The intent of these rules is to provide employees with general requirements for utilizing the
Town’s computers, networks and Internet services.
These rules provide general guidelines and examples of prohibited uses for illustrative purposes
but do not attempt to state all required or prohibited activities by users. Employees who have
questions regarding whether a particular activity or use is acceptable should seek further
guidance from their department head.
Failure to comply with this policy, these rules and/or other established procedures or rules
governing computer use may result in disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. Illegal
uses of the Town’s computers will also result in referral to law enforcement authorities.
A. Access to Town Computers, Networks and Internet Services
The level of access that employees have to the Town’s computers, networks and Internet services
is based upon specific employee job requirements and needs. The computer system is town
property and intended for municipal business. All data and other electronic messages within
municipal computers and servers are the property of the Town of Cape Elizabeth. E-mail
messages and computer use records have been found to be public records and may be subject to
the right-to-know laws, depending on their content.
In addition, the town, through its manager and department heads, reserves the right to review the
contents of employees' e-mail communications and records of computer use when necessary for
town business purposes. Employees may not intentionally intercept, eavesdrop, record, read,
alter, or receive other persons' e-mail messages without proper authorization.
3-31
B. Acceptable Use
Employee access to the Town’s computers, networks and Internet services are provided for
administrative, educational, communication and research purposes.
General rules and expectations for professional behavior and communication apply to use of the
Town’s computers, networks and Internet services.
Employees are to utilize the Town’s computers, networks and Internet services for Town-related
purposes and performance of job duties. Incidental personal use of Town computers is permitted
as long as such use does not interfere with the employee's job duties and performance, with
system operations or other system users. "Incidental personal use" is defined as use by an
individual employee for occasional personal communications. Employees are reminded that
such personal use must comply with this policy and all other applicable policies, procedures and
rules.
C. Prohibited Use
The employee is responsible for his/her actions and activities involving Town’s computers,
networks and Internet services and for his/her computer files, passwords and accounts. General
examples of unacceptable uses, which are expressly prohibited, include but are not limited to the
following:
1. Any use that is illegal or in violation of other Town policies, including
harassing, discriminatory or threatening communication and behavior,
violations of copyright laws, etc.;
2. Any use involving materials that are obscene, pornographic, sexually
explicit or sexually suggestive;
3. Any inappropriate communications with students or minors;
4. Any use for private financial gain, or commercial, advertising or
solicitation purposes;
5. Any use as a forum for communicating by e-mail or any other medium
with internal or outside parties to solicit, proselytize, advocate or
communicate the views of an individual or non-town-sponsored
organization; to solicit membership in or support of any non-townsponsored
organization, or to raise funds for any non-town-sponsored
purpose, whether for-profit or not-for-profit. Employees who are uncertain
as to whether particular activities are acceptable should seek further
guidance from their department head;
6. Opening or forwarding any e-mail attachments (executable files) from
unknown sources and/or that may contain viruses;
3-32
7. Any malicious use or disruption of the Town’s computers, networks and
Internet services or breach of security features;
8. Any misuse or damage to the Town’s computer equipment;
9. Misuse of the computer passwords or accounts (employee or other users);
10. Any communications that are in violation of generally accepted rules of
network etiquette and/or professional conduct;
11. Any attempt to access unauthorized sites;
12. Failure to report a known breach of computer security to the Department
head;
13. Using Town computers, networks and Internet services after such access
has been denied or revoked;
14. Any attempt to delete, erase or otherwise conceal any information stored
on a Town computer that violates these rules.
Sec. 3-3-4 Substance Abuse Policy
To meet the Town’s responsibilities to its employees and the public, the Town must maintain a
healthy, productive and safe workplace free from the effects of alcohol or drug abuse. Misusing
or abusing controlled substances on the job is prohibited, as is selling, manufacturing,
distributing, possessing, using, or being under the influence of alcohol or illegal substances on
the job.
Any employee who displays any signs of impairment or substance abuse, or who is in possession
of alcohol or illegal drugs, whether on Town premises or while on Town business, is subject to
disciplinary action including suspension without pay and/or termination. Where warranted, such
employees will be encouraged to obtain proper treatment.
The legal use of prescription medications is permitted on the job only if such use does not impair
an employee’s ability to perform the essential functions of the job effectively and in a safe
manner that does not endanger the employee or others. If employees are taking a prescribed
medication that may affect their work performance, they are required to advise their supervisor
of that fact. If employees are taking a prescribed medication, including medical marijuana, that
may affect their work performance, they are required to advise their supervisor of that fact. The
law does not permit anyone using prescription medication, including medical marijuana, from
performing any safety sensitive tasks while under the influence of the drug, including operating a
vehicle.
Drivers who are subject to Department of Transportation regulations will be required to undergo
testing for alcohol and controlled substances prior to being permitted to drive. Tests will be
3-33
conducted before an employee is initially assigned to driver responsibilities; additionally drivers
may be subject to “reasonable suspicion” testing and random testing, as well as testing conducted
following an accident. No driver will be allowed to drive or continue driving unless the results
of all tests are negative. The Town’s drug and alcohol testing policy for employees required to
hold commercial drivers licenses is maintained in the Employee Manual of the Public Works
Department.
APPENDIX A
Town of Cape Elizabeth
Salaried Positions
Town Manager
Assistant Town Manager
Town Clerk
Finance Director
Town Planner
Assessor
Codes Officer
Chief of Police
Police Captain
Fire Chief
Director of Public Works
Head Librarian
Director - Museum at Portland Head Light
Director of Community Services and Fort Williams Park
Aquatics Director
3-34
Employee Acknowledgement Form
The Personnel Code describes important information about Cape Elizabeth and I understand I
should consult my department head regarding any questions not answered in the Code. Since the
information, policies, and benefits described here are necessarily subject to change, I
acknowledge that revisions to the Personnel Code may occur. All such changes will be
communicated through official notices, and I understand that revised information may supersede,
modify or eliminate existing policies. Only the Town Council has the ability to adopt any
revisions to the policies in this code.
I have received the Personnel Code, and I understand that it is my responsibility to read and
comply with the policies contained in this Code and any revisions made to it.
Employee’s Name: _____________________________________________________
Employee’s Signature: ________________________________________________
Date: _________________________________________________________________
1
Repeal CHAPTER 4, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 1 and replace with
2
3 CHAPTER 4,
4 BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
5
6
7 SEC. 4-1-1. Establishment. The Town Council shall have the authority to form boards
8 and committees as are required by statute, by town charter and ordinances adopted
9 thereunder, and by Town Council vote as it shall deem necessary from time to time. The
10 Town Council shall establish a purpose and duties for each board and committee, as
11 described below or, in the case of future boards and committees, at the time the board
12 or committee is created. Except when boards and committees are designated by statute
13 with authority independent of the Town Council, all boards and committees shall be
14 advisory to the Town Council. The Town Manager shall assign staff support to boards
15 and committees as appropriate.
16
17 SEC. 4-1-2. Appointment. Board and committee members shall be appointed by vote of
18 the Town Council. The Town Council shall consider board and committee
19 appointments recommended by the Appointments Committee. The Town Council may
20 forego the Appointments Committee process if the appointment is time-sensitive, is
21 related to unique subject matter, or the committee charge designates representatives
22 from existing committees. The Town Council may select a sitting board or committee
23 member to serve another term, but there should be no expectation of reappointment.
24
25 SEC. 4-1-3. Removal and Vacancies. Board and Committee members may be removed
26 by a vote of the Town Council for cause shown. When a Board or committee member
27 resigns prior to the end of the term, the Appointments Committee shall recommend a
28 replacement for the portion of the unexpired term.
29
30 SEC. 4-1-4. Additional Town Council Appointments. The Town Council designates
31 itself to perform the duties of the following boards. The membership and terms of these
32 boards shall be the membership and terms of the Town Council.
33
34 A. Board of Trustees of the Thomas Memorial Library
35
36 B. Board of Trustees of the Riverside Memorial Cemetery
37
38 C. Board of Directors of the Museum at Portland Head Light
39
40 D. Board of Trustees of the Thomas Jordan Trust
41
42 SEC. 4-1-5. Operations of all Boards and Committees. All boards and committees shall
43 perform their duties in compliance with the following provisions.
2
1
2 A. Chair. Every board and committee shall elect or have designated by the Town
3 Council a Chair of the board or committee. The chair shall be responsible for
4 conducting meetings, for making reports to the Town Council upon request, and
5 for coordinating with town staff meeting logistics. The chair shall serve for one
6 calendar year on a standing board or committee or for the set duration of an ad
7 hoc committee. A standing board or committee chair shall not serve more than
8 two (2) consecutive years as chair. The chair shall be a full participating and
9 voting member of the board or committee.
10
11 B. Quorum. Board and committee meetings shall only begin when a quorum is
12 present. A quorum is more than fifty percent (50%) of the total board or
13 committee membership. Meetings sponsored by a board or committee when no
14 vote will be taken are not required to have a quorum and may include, but are
15 not limited to, site walks and public information meetings.
16
17 C. Public Participation. Boards and committees shall conduct all business in
18 compliance with the spirit and letter of the Maine Freedom of Access Act, as may
19 be amended, and Town Council policy. Compliance shall include, but not be
20 limited, to the following:
21
22 1. Agenda. Every meeting of a board or committee shall have an agenda that
23 includes the name of the committee holding the meeting, date, time, and
24 place of the meeting, subject areas to be discussed at the meeting, and the
25 public participation allowed at the meeting.
26
27 2. Announcement. Board and committee meetings shall be announced in ample
28 time to allow public attendance, by posting on the town website and other
29 methods as appropriate. A meeting agenda shall be available prior to the
30 meeting. Board and committee meeting supplemental materials shall also be
31 available for the public to review at a designated town office.
32
33 3. Minutes. Minutes of all board and committee meetings shall be prepared by
34 staff and posted to the town website. Minutes shall include the name of the
35 board or committee meeting, date, time and place of the meeting, board and
36 committee members present and a summary of any votes taken. The name
37 and address of members of the public who speak at the meeting, including a
38 brief summary of their comments, shall also be included. Board and
39 committee minutes shall be reviewed and adopted at the next meeting, except
40 for the last meeting of ad-hoc committees, when the minutes shall be
41 reviewed and approved by the board or committee chair.
42
3
4. Public Access. All board and committee 1 meetings shall be open to the public
2 to attend. No board or committee business shall be conducted by board or
3 committee members outside of board or committee meetings. Individual
4 board or committee members may communicate with staff, and the board or
5 committee chair is expected to communicate with staff. Communications
6 relevant to board or committee business must be shared at the next meeting.
7 Nothing in this provision shall prohibit a board or committee from holding
8 an Executive Session as provided under state statute.
9
10 5. Public comment. Except as specified in board or committee bylaws, public
11 comment shall be allowed at every board and committee meeting. Boards and
12 committees shall also limit oral public comment at meetings to assure
13 completion of assigned duties. Boards and committees shall adopt public
14 participation rules, using the Town Council's rules of public participation as
15 guidance, and shall include public participation rules on each meeting
16 agenda. Written public comments shall be directed to the board or committee
17 staff, and staff shall distribute the comments to the board or committee
18 members and shall also keep a copy in the public file. Any written comments,
19 including email, received by a board or committee member regarding board
20 or committee business shall be forwarded to staff for distribution to all
21 members and added to the public file.
22
23 D. Conflict of Interest. Board and committee members should avoid both actual and
24 perceived conflicts of interest and bias. Conflicts of interest and/or bias shall be
25 determined in accordance with state statute. Board and committee members shall
26 also be guided by the Code of Ethics for the Town Council.
27
28 SEC. 4-1-6. Standing Boards and Committees. Boards and committees with ongoing
29 responsibilities and duties are considered standing boards and committees. Except
30 where specifically designated by statute and/or town ordinance with authority
31 independent of the Town Council, standing boards and committees are advisory to the
32 Town Council.
33
34 A. Composition. A standing board or committee shall be composed of a defined
35 number of members who are residents of the town, unless otherwise specified in
36 the board or committee description. Board and committee members shall be
37 appointed for staggered, three (3) year terms expiring on December 31st. A board
38 or committee member's service during an unexpired term shall not be included
39 in any term limit. Board and committee members shall be volunteers without
40 compensation.
41
42 B. Responsibilities. All standing boards and committees shall perform the following
43 duties:
4
1
2 1. Bylaws. If any board or committee promulgates bylaws in addition to the
3 provisions in Sec. 4-1-5, Operations of Boards and Committees, bylaws,
4 including amendments, must be submitted to the Town Council for approval.
5
6 2. Meetings. Boards and committees shall meet as needed commensurate with
7 their duties and responsibilities. When a board or committee will be meeting
8 several times a year, an effort shall be made to establish a regular meeting
9 schedule for the year to be posted on the town website.
10
11 3. Vacancy. All boards and committees shall notify the Town Clerk of any
12 vacancy (not related to the end of a term) on the board or committee.
13
14 C. Upon Request Responsibilities. All standing boards and committees shall
15 perform the following duties, and any other assigned tasks, upon Town Council
16 request.
17
18 1. Goals. All boards and committees shall develop annual goals for submission
19 to the Town Council.
20
21 2. Budget. All boards and committees shall submit to the town manager
22 funding requirements for the next fiscal year.
23
24 3. Year end report. All boards and committees shall provide a calendar year end
25 report.
26
27 SEC. 4-1-7. Establishment of Standing Boards and Committees. The following
28 standing boards and committees are established. The Town Council shall appoint
29 members with staggered terms of 3 years. Board and committee members are limited to
30 serve no more than 3 consecutive terms without a break in membership. In addition to
31 the responsibilities described below, boards and committees shall provide
32 recommendations and suggest policy changes as the Town Council may require from
33 time to time.
34
35 A. Board of Assessment Review
36
37 1. Membership. The Board of Assessment Review shall consist of three
38 members (3).
39
40 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Board of Assessment Review shall be to
41 comply with the statutes of the State of Maine in the establishment of
42 assessments for the purpose of taxation.
43
5
3. Duties. The Board of Assessment R 1 eview shall have the power to:
2
3 a. Review, on complaint of property owner, and revise assessments
4 for the purpose of taxation of real and personal property within the
5 town limits made by the town assessor.
6
7 b. Administer oaths.
8
9 c. Take testimony.
10
11 d. Hold hearings.
12
13 e. Adopt regulations regarding the procedure of assessment review
14 not inconsistent with statutory provisions.
15
16 f. Hear an appeal of a decision of the Town Council relating to
17 applications for abatement of local property taxes.
18
19 B. Community Services Committee
20
21 1. Membership. The Community Services Committee shall consist of seven
22 (7) members.
23
24 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Community Services Committee shall be to
25 advocate for versatile community programs offering educational, cultural,
26 recreational and social enrichment opportunities.
27
28 3. Duties. The Community Services Committee shall have the following
29 duties:
30
31 a. Perform regular outreach efforts to assess satisfaction with current
32 programming and identify unmet needs.
33
34 b. Advise the Community Services Director on issues of interest that
35 relate to the programming offered by the Community Services
36 Department.
37
38 C. Conservation Committee
39
40 1. Membership. The Conservation Committee shall consist of seven (7)
41 members.
42
6
2. Purpose. The purpose of the Conservation 1 Committee shall be to act in
2 the role of conservation commission as described in the statutes of the
3 State of Maine, to be the steward of the Cape Elizabeth Greenbelt, and to
4 advise on wetland and natural resource issues.
5
6 3. Duties. The Conservation Committee shall have the following duties:
7
8 a. Act as Steward of Town open space as described in the
9 Conservation Ordinance, Chapter 18, Article V, Open Space
10 Management.
11
12 b. Advise the Planning Board in the review of open space set aside as
13 part of Subdivision Review, Subdivision Ordinance, Chapter 16,
14 and in the review of Resource Protection Permits, Zoning
15 Ordinance, Chapter 19.
16
17 c. Administer the Open Space Evaluation and Preservation Program,
18 Chapter 18.
19
20 d. Prepare the Greenbelt Plan for Town Council consideration.
21
22 D. Firing Range Committee
23
24 1. Membership. The Firing Range Committee shall consist of five (5)
25 members.
26
27 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Firing Range Committee shall be to make
28 recommendations to the Town Council regarding licensing of shooting
29 ranges as conferred in the Shooting Range Ordinance, Chapter 24.
30
31 3. Duties. The Firing Range Committee shall have the following duties:
32
33 a. Review license applications and inspect firing ranges in accordance
34 with the Shooting Range Ordinance, Chapter 24.
35
36 b. Recommend rules and regulations for shooting ranges for Town
37 Council consideration.
38
39 c. Review complaints.
40
41 E. Fort Williams Park Committee
42
7
1. Membership. The Fort Williams Park Committee 1 shall consist of seven (7)
2 members.
3
4 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Fort Williams Park Committee shall be to
5 advise the Town Council on policies for Fort Williams Park.
6
7 3. Duties. The Fort Williams Park Committee shall have the following duties:
8
9 a. Recommend policies regarding use of the park.
10
11 b. Prepare or update a master plan or special reports for park
12 improvements.
13
14 c. Review any special event proposed for Fort Williams Park in
15 accordance with the current Group Use Policy.
16
17 F. Personnel Appeals Board
18
19 1. Membership. The Personnel Appeals Board shall consist of three (3)
20 members.
21
22 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Personnel Appeals Board shall be to consider
23 appeals as provided for in the Personnel Code, Chapter 3, and any
24 collective bargaining agreement that may confer such jurisdiction.
25
26 3. Duties. The Personnel Appeals Board shall have the following duties:
27
28 a. Hold hearings as provided for in the Personnel Code, Chapter 3.
29
30 b. Hold hearings as provided for in collective bargaining agreements
31 when jurisdiction has been conferred.
32
33 G. Planning Board
34
35 1. Membership. The Planning Board shall consist of seven (7) members.
36
37 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Planning Board shall be to advocate that
38 development of private and public property be done in an orderly manner
39 that protects the public health, safety and welfare.
40
41 3. Duties. The Planning Board shall have the following duties:
42
8
a. Exercise and perform such rights, 1 powers, and duties as are
2 conferred or imposed under the provisions of the statutes, local
3 ordinances, and regulations thereunder, and as the same may from
4 time to time hereafter be amended.
5
6 b. Advise the Town Council in the amendment of the Zoning and
7 Subdivision Ordinances, and other ordinances upon request.
8
9 c. Advise the Town Council, upon request, on short and long-term
10 planning policies.
11
12 d. Advise the Town Planner on planning procedures and public
13 participation efforts.
14
15 H. Recycling Committee
16
17 1. Membership. The Recycling Committee shall consist of seven (7)
18 members.
19
20 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Recycling Committee shall be to promote
21 recycling of solid waste in the community, provide environmental
22 stewardship and protect the environment.
23
24 3. Duties. The Recycling Committee shall have the following duties:
25
26 a. Recommend policies that increase reuse and recycling in the
27 community and promote environmental stewardship.
28
29 b. Conduct public education and promotional efforts to increase
30 recycling.
31
32 c. Monitor recycling trends and changes in the solid waste industry.
33
34 I. Energy Committee
35
36 1. Membership. The Energy Committee shall consist of seven (7) members.
37
38 2. Purpose: The purpose of the Energy Committee shall be to promote
39 municipal and community energy efficiency, conservation, and
40 sustainability goals.
41
9
3. Duties: The Energy Committee 1 shall have the following duties and
2 responsibilities:
3
4 a. Make recommendations to the Town Council of management
5 approaches, policies, programs, and techniques now used by other
6 municipalities in Maine and elsewhere that advance municipal and
7 community energy efficiency, conservation, and sustainability
8 goals.
9 b. Research, evaluate and recommend energy options that implement
10 goals. Evaluation shall include an analysis of anticipated energy
11 cost savings and return on investment.
12 c. Conduct public education and promote energy efficiency,
13 conservation, and sustainable energy efforts and opportunities in
14 our community.
15 d. Collaborate with neighboring communities to pursue
16 environmental sustainability and energy efficiency.
17
18
19 J. Riverside Cemetery Committee
20
21 1. Membership. The Riverside Cemetery Committee shall consist of three (3)
22 members.
23
24 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Riverside Cemetery Committee shall be to
25 advise the Town Council on policies of Riverside Memorial Park.
26
27 3. Duties. The Riverside Cemetery Committee shall have the following
28 duties:
29
30 a. Recommend management policies that preserve the park as a
31 respectful place for burial of town residents.
32
33 b. Monitor and manage capacity needs of the cemetery.
34
35 c. Prepare and update the master plan.
36
37 K. Thomas Memorial Library Committee
38
39 1. Membership. The Thomas Memorial Library Committee shall consist of
40 seven (7) members.
10
1
2 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Thomas Memorial Library Committee shall
3 be to advocate for a library that provides a wide range of services and
4 enrichment opportunities for the community.
5
6 3. Duties. The Thomas Memorial Library Committee shall have the
7 following duties:
8
9 a. Advise the Library Director on matters of the library, such as the
10 collection, services, programs, facilities, and policies.
11
12 b. Work cooperatively with groups that seek to assist the library.
13 Committee members may, upon request, serve on independent
14 boards whose purpose is to support the library.
15
16 L. Board of Zoning Appeals
17
18 1. Membership. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven (7)
19 members.
20
21 2. Purpose. The purpose of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be to provide
22 property owners an opportunity to seek relief from the provisions of the
23 Zoning Ordinance, as required by the statutes of the state of Maine, or the
24 decision of the Code Enforcement Officer.
25
26 3. Duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following duties and
27 responsibilities:
28
29 a. Exercise and perform such rights, powers, and duties as are
30 conferred or imposed under the provisions of the statutes and the
31 Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 19, and as the same may from time to
32 time hereafter be amended.
33
34 b. Consider appeals, applications for special permits, and
35 interpretations of the Sewer Ordinance, Chapter 15 and the
36 Stormwater Ordinance, Chapter 25.
37
38 SEC. 4-1-8. Ad Hoc Committees. Committees formed by the Town Council to
39 complete defined tasks and then be disbanded are ad hoc committees. The Town
40 Council may create an ad hoc committee as needed. When creating an ad hoc
41 committee, the Town Council shall adopt a committee charge that includes the name,
42 composition, and purpose of the committee, tasks to be completed, a deadline for
43 completion of committee work (which may be extended by the Town Council), and
11
direction to the Town Manager to assign staff support a 1 s needed. Ad hoc committees
2 shall perform their duties in compliance with Sec. 4-1-5, Operation of Boards and
3 Committees.
4
5
6
TOWN OF CAPE ELIZABETH
CHAPTER 5
COMMERCIAL LICENSES AND PERMITS
ARTICLE 1`. SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE. [Adopted eff.
6/21/78, pursuant to M.R.S.A. 1964, T. 28, Sec. 702.]
Sec. 5-1-1. Purpose and Definitions 5-1
Sec. 5-1-2 Permit Required 5-1
Sec. 5-1-3. Inspections 5-2
Sec. 5-1-4. Suspension or Revocation of Permit 5-2
Sec. 5-1-5. Rules and Regulations 5-2
Sec. 5-1-6. Permit and Appeal Procedures 5-2
Sec. 5-1-7. Admission 5-3
Sec. 5-1-8. Penalty 5-3
Sec. 5-1-1. Purpose and Definitions.
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the provision of music, dancing, or
other entertainment in premises within the Town licensed by the State for liquor to be
consumed on the premises, as required by M.R.S.A. Sec. 702 as used in this Ordinance.
a. "Entertainment" shall include any amusement, performance, exhibition or
diversion for patrons or customers of the licensed premises whether provided by
professional entertainers or by full time or part-time employees of the licensed premises
whose incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value.
b. "Licensee" shall mean the holder of an effective license issued by the State for
the sale of liquor to be consumed on the premises within the Town.
Permit Required
No licensee shall permit, on his licensed premises, any music, except radio or other
mechanical device, any dancing or entertainment of any sort unless the licensee shall have
first obtained from the Town a special amusement permit signed by at least a majority of the
municipal officers. The fee for a special amusement permit shall be $10. A permit shall be
valid only for the license year of the applicant's existing liquor license.
Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing to the
municipal officers and shall state the name of the applicant; his residence address; the name
of the business to be conducted; his business address; the nature of his business; the
location to be used; whether the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the business
therein described either denied or revoked and, if so, the applicant shall describe those
circumstances specifically; whether the applicant including all partners or corporate
officers, has ever been convicted of a felony and, if so, the applicant shall describe
specifically those circumstances; and any additional information as may be needed by the
municipal officers in the issuing of the permit, including but not limited to a copy of the
applicant's current liquor license.
The municipal officers shall, prior to action upon a new permit application, hold a
public hearing at the next meeting of the Town Council to be held after receipt of the
application and due notice of the hearing, which notice shall be given to the applicant and
shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation within the Town at least 7
days prior to such hearing. At the hearing, the testimony of the applicant, its municipal
officials and of any interested members of the public shall be taken. The municipal officers
shall, prior to action upon a renewal application, provide a comment period at the next
meeting of the Town Council to be held after receipt of the application to applicants,
municipal officials and interested citizens, but no formal public hearing or newspaper
advertising is required. [Amended Eff. 2/9/94]
The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find that the premises to be
used for such music, dancing or other entertainment do not fully comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Town or that issuance of the permit will be detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare, or would violate municipal ordinances, or rules and
regulations, articles, or by-laws.
Sec. 5-1-3. Inspections.
Whenever inspections of the premises used in connection with the operation of a
business which has obtained a special amusement permit are provided for or required by
ordinance or State law, or are reasonably necessary to determine compliance with any
ordinance provision or State law, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge
of the premises to be inspected, to admit any officer, official, or employee of the Town
authorized to make the inspection at any reasonable time that admission be requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
determine compliance with any ordinance provision or State law, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises, to give to any authorized officer, official,
or employee of the Town requesting the same sufficient samples of the material or
commodity for analysis.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the municipal officers may
revoke the special amusement permit of any licensee in the Town who refuses to permit any
such officer, official, analysis, provided that written demand for such inspection or sample
is sought, or who interferes with such officer, official, or employee while in the
performance of his duty.
Sec. 5-1-4. Suspension of Revocation of Permit.
The municipal officers may, after a public hearing preceded by notice to the licensee
and any other interested parties, suspend, or revoke any special amusement permits which
have been issued under this Ordinance on the grounds that the music, dancing, or
entertainment so permitted constitutes a detriment to the public health, safety or welfare, or
violates any municipal ordinances, articles, by-laws, or rules and regulations.
SEC. 5-1-5. Rules and Regulations.
The municipal officers are hereby authorized, after public notice and hearing, to
establish written rules and regulations consistent with this ordinance governing the
issuance, suspension, and revocation of special amusement permits, the classes of permits,
the music, dancing, or entertainment permitted under each class, and other limitations on
these activities required to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These rules and
regulations may specifically determine the location and size of permitted premises, the
facilities that may be required for the permitted activities on those premises, and the hours
during which the permitted activities are permitted.
Sec. 5-1-6 Permit and Appeal Procedures
a. Decision. Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit from the
municipal officers shall be notified in writing of their decision no later than fifteen (15)
days from the date his request was received. In the event that a licensee is denied a permit,
the licensee shall be provided with the reasons for the denial in writing. The licensee may
not reapply for a permit within 30 days after an application for a permit which has been
denied.
(b) Appeal. Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or
whose permit has been revoked or suspended, may, within 30 days of the denial,
suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to the Board of Zoning appeals established
under Sec. 19-4-7 of the Code of Ordinances, the jurisdiction of which is expended for
said purposes. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant or reinstate the permit if it finds
that the permitted activities would not constitute a detriment to the public health, safety, or
welfare, or that the denial, revocation or suspension was arbitrary or capricious or that the
denial, revocation or suspension was not based by a preponderance of the evidence upon a
violation of any ordinance, article, by-law, or rule or regulation of the municipality.
Sec. 5-1-7. Admission.
A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt liquor
licensee who has been issued a special amusement permit may charge admission to
designated areas approved by the municipal special amusement permit.
Sec. 5-1-8. Penalty
Any licensee, or person in charge of his licensed premises, who is found to have
violated any provision of ordinance upon complaint to the District Court shall be punished
by a fine of not more than Seventy-five Dollars ($75.00) for the first such offense, and of
not more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for any subsequent offense, to be recovered
for the use of the Town.
1
Chapter 6
CONSTRUCTION CODE
(With amendments eff. through 10/08/2008)
Article 1. In General.................................................... 6-1
Article II. Building Code............................................. 6-2
Article III. Electrical Code............................................ 6-3
Article IV. Oil Burner Equipment Code.................... 6-4
Article V. Plumbing Code........................................... 6-5
Article VI. Building & Development in Flood Hazard
Areas............................................................. 6-6
Article I. In General. Adopted eff. 11/12/76 under R.S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151]
Sec. 6-1-1. Permits Required; Fee Schedules. No person, firm, corporation or
association shall enter into, engage in or work at any activity regulated by this Chapter
without having obtained all permits required by the provisions of this Chapter, by the
provisions of Chapter 19, Zoning Ordinance, Article IV, and by other town ordinances,
state statutes, and regulations thereunder. The fee schedule for such permits shall be
prescribed from time to time by order of the town council, unless otherwise specifically
provided for.
Sec. 6-1-2. Conflicting Regulations. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of any Cape Elizabeth ordinance, state statute or regulation thereunder and the
provisions of this Chapter,
(a.) Where such conflict arises between more and less severe requirements the more
severe requirements shall govern, and;
(b.) Otherwise the provisions of state statutes and regulations shall prevail over local
provisions, and those of local ordinances shall prevail over those of this Chapter.
Sec. 6-1-3. Penalty for Violation. Any person who violates any provision of this
Construction Code set forth in this Chapter 6, or who fails or refuses to obey any order or
notice issued under any such Construction Code, shall severally for each and every such
violation be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), to be recovered for the
use of the Town. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; when not otherwise specified,
each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
[Amended Eff. 11/14/90]
2
Article II Building Code (Revised eff. 08/10/2007)
Section 6-2-1. Adoption of Codes; Copies on file That a certain document, being
marked and designated as the International Residential Code, 2003 edition, including
Appendix Chapters, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal and demolition of
detached one and two family dwellings and multiple single family dwellings
(townhouses) not more than threes stories in height with separate means of egress as here
in provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said
Residential Code. That another certain document, being marked and designated as the
International Building Code, 2003 edition, including Appendix Chapters, as published by
the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the
demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code. That the International Residential Code,
2003 and the International Building Code, 2003 as published by the International Code
Council, two (2) copies of each being on file in the Cape Elizabeth Town Offices, be and
are hereby adopted as Article II “Building Code” of Chapter 6, “Construction Codes” of
the Town of Cape Elizabeth in the State of Maine and are hereby referred to, adopted,
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this Ordinance, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 6-2-2 of this Ordinance.
Section 6-2-2. Additions, Insertions and Changes That the following sections the
International Residential Code, 2003 and the International Building Code, 2003 are
hereby revised as follows:
International Residential Code
Chapter 1 Administration
Section R101.1 Title - Insert Town of Cape Elizabeth
Section R103.1 Creation of Enforcement Agency - Add after the first sentence: The
words “building official”, where used, shall mean the code enforcement officer. The
words “department of building inspection”, where used, shall mean the code
enforcement office.
3
Section R103.3 Deputies – delete “building official” in two places and replace with
town manager
Section R107.3 Temporary Service - delete “ICC Electrical Code” and insert Town of
Cape Elizabeth Chapter 6, Construction Code, Article III Electrical Code
Section R108.5 Refunds – delete and replace with: There shall be no refunds of
permit fees if a project is abandoned or discontinued or if a permit expires. Fees for
permits not approved will be refunded at an amount equal to the total fee less
administrative costs. In the case of a revocation of a permit no refund shall be issued
unless in the judgment of the town manager exceptional circumstances so warrant.
Section R112.1 Board of Appeals, General – delete everything after the first sentence
and insert Local Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals.
Chapter 3 Building Planning
Table R301.2 (1) Climatic and Geographic Design
a. Ground snow load – insert 50 lb/sq. ft
b. Wind speed – Insert 100 mph
c. Seismic design category – Insert C
d. Subject to damage from: weathering – Insert severe
e. Frost line depth – Insert 48”
f. Termite – insert none to slight
g. Decay – Insert none to slight
h. Winter design temp – Insert -1 degree f
i. Ice shield underlayment required – Insert yes
j. Flood hazard – Insert 6/19/85
k. Air freezing index – Insert 1500
l. Mean Annual Temp – Insert 45 degrees F
Section R310.1.1 Minimum Opening Area – delete the exception
Section R323 Flood-Resistant Construction – Delete wording in entire Section and
replace with All flood resistant construction shall comply with the Town of Cape
Elizabeth Chapter 6, Construction Code, Article VI Buildings & Development in
Flood Hazard Areas.
Chapter 25 thru 32
Delete and refer to Town of Cape Elizabeth Chapter 6, Construction Code, Article V,
Plumbing Code
Chapter 33 thru 42
Delete and refer to Town of Cape Elizabeth Chapter 6, Construction Code
4
Chapter 6, Article III Electrical Code
Appendix I – Private Sewage Disposal
Section AI101.1 Scope - Delete International Private Sewage Disposal Code and
insert Town of Cape Elizabeth Chapter 15 Sewer, Article II Private Sewage Disposal
Ordinance
International Building Code, 2003
Chapter 1 Administration
Section 101.1 Title – Insert Town of Cape Elizabeth
Section 101.4.1 Electrical – delete ICC Electrical Code and insert Town of Cape
Elizabeth Chapter 6 Construction Code, Article III Electrical Code
Section 101.4.4 Plumbing – delete International Plumbing Code and insert Town of
Cape Elizabeth Chapter 6 Construction Code, Article V Plumbing Code.
Section 107.3 Temporary Power – delete ICC Electrical Code and insert Town of
Cape Elizabeth Chapter 6 Construction Code, Article III Electrical Code
Section 112.1 Board of Appeals, General – delete everything after the first sentence
and insert Local Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve as the Board of Appeals.
Chapter 10 Means of Egress
Section 1025.2 Minimum Size – delete the exception without replacement.
Chapter 16 Structural Design
Section 1612.3 – Insert Town of Cape Elizabeth and the date June 19, 1985.
Chapter 27 Electrical
Section 2701.1 Scope – delete the ICC Electrical Code and insert Town of Cape
Elizabeth Chapter 6 Construction Code, Article III Electrical Code
Section 2702.1 Installation - delete the ICC Electrical Code and insert Town of Cape
Elizabeth Chapter 6 Construction Code, Article III Electrical Code
Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems
Section 2901.1 Scope – delete International Plumbing Code in two locations and insert
Town of Cape Elizabeth Chapter 6 Construction Code, Article V Plumbing Code.
Delete International Private Sewage Disposal Code and insert Town of Cape
Elizabeth Chapter 15 Sewer, Article II Private Sewage Disposal Ordinance. Delete
remainder of Chapter.
5
Chapter 34 Existing Structures
Section 3410.2 Insert: 11/12/76
Section 6-2-3. Saving Clause That nothing in this Ordinance or in the Building Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 2 of
this Ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost,
impaired or affected by this Ordinance.
Section 6-2-4. Date of Effect That the Town Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this
Ordinance and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this Ordinance
shall take full force and effect thirty (30) days after this date of final passage and
approval.
Article III. Electrical Code. [Adopted eff. 11/12/76, R. S. 1964, T. 30, Sec 2151.]
Sec. 6-3-1. Standards and Specifications for Electrical Installation. All work in
connection with the installation, alteration, repair or maintenance of, or additions to,
electrical equipment of any nature whatsoever in the Town of Cape Elizabeth shall
hereafter be done in accordance with the standards lawfully established by statute (see 32
M.R.S.A., Sec. 1153-A, adopting the current edition of the National Electrical Code,
pamphlet #70, published by the National Fire Protection Association), and with local
ordinances and regulations there under as the same may from time to time hereafter be
amended, and shall be subject to inspection by the Town Electrical Inspector.
Sec. 6-3-2. Electrical Inspector. The town electrical inspector shall be governed by, and
shall exercise and perform the rights, powers and duties lawfully conferred or imposed
under, the provisions of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (see 30 M.R.S.A., Sec
25251-22560), local ordinance, and regulations there under, as the same may from time
to time hereafter be amended.
Article IV. Oil Burner Equipment Code. [Adopted eff. 11/12/76, R. S. 1964, T. 230
Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 6-4-1. Standards and specifications for oil burner installation. All work in
connection with the installation, repair or maintenance of oil burner equipment and fuel
storage tanks to be used in connection therewith of any nature whatsoever in the Town of
Cape Elizabeth shall hereafter be done in accordance with the standards lawfully
established by statute (see 32 M.R.S.A. Sec. 2303, adopting the then current edition of
the National Fire Protection Association Standard No. 31), and with local ordinances, and
regulations there under, as the same may from time to time hereafter be amended, and
shall be subject to inspection by the town electrical inspector.
6
Sec. 6-4-2. Oil Burner Inspection. The town electrical inspector shall be governed by,
and shall exercise and perform the rights, powers and duties lawfully conferred or
imposed under, the provisions of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (see 32 M.R.S.A.
Sec. 2303-2305), local ordinances, and regulations there under, as the same may from
time to time hereafter be amended.
Article V. Plumbing Code. [Adopted eff. 11/12/76. R.S. 1964, T. 30 Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 6-5-1. Standards and Specifications for Plumbing Installation. All work in
connection with the installation, repair or maintenance of plumbing and equipment to be
udder in connection therewith of any nature whatsoever in the Town of Cape Elizabeth
shall hereafter be done in accordance with rules and regulations lawfully established by
statute (see 22 M. R. S. A., Sec. 42 and 30 M.R.SA., Sec. 3221), local ordinance, and
regulations there under, as the same may from time to time hereafter be amended, and
shall be subject to inspection by the plumbing inspector.
Sec. 6-5-2. Plumbing Inspector. The plumbing inspector shall be governed by, and shall
exercise and perform the rights, powers and duties lawfully conferred or imposed under,
the provisions of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (see 30 M.R.S.A, Sec. 3222-
3223), local ordinance, and regulations there under, as the same may from time to time
hereafter be amended.
Article VI Floodplain Management Ordinance (Revised eff. 10/08/08)
Sec. 6-6-1. Purpose and Establishment. Certain areas of the Town of Cape Elizabeth,
Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to properties within
these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine has chosen to become a participating
community in the National Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as
delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine to require the recognition and
evaluation of flood hazards in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain
areas having special flood hazards.
The Town of Cape Elizabeth has the legal authority to adopt land use and control
measures to reduce future flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-
3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38 MRSA, Section 440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that
areas of the Town of Cape Elizabeth having a special flood hazard be identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and that floodplain management measures be
7
applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a Flood Hazard
Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, A, A1-30, AO, and V1-30, are identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of
Cape Elizabeth, Maine, Cumberland County," dated December 19, 1985 with
accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" dated July 15, 1992 and "Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map" dated June 19, 1985, which are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-6-2 Permit Required. Before any construction or other development (as defined
in Section 6-6-14), including the placement of manufactured homes, begins within any
areas of special flood hazard established in Section 6-6-1, a Flood Hazard Development
Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer except as provided in
Section 6-6-7. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be
required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.
Sec. 6-6-3 Application for Permit. The application for a Flood Hazard Development
Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including
but not limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities,
areas to be cut and filled, and lot dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.3. apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of
the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which
is determined:
8
a. in Zones A1-30, AO, and V1-30 from data contained in the "Flood Insurance
Study - Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine," as described in Section 6-6-1; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources
(such as FEMA’s Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including information
obtained pursuant to Section 6-6-6.K. and Section 6-6-9.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if
the floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour
line(s); or, in the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and
a line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the
site of the proposed building.
(4) in coastal zones use the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’ Tidal Flood Profiles New
England Coastline,, September 1988 to select the 100-year Frequency Tidal Flood
appropriate for the development site’s location on the profile.
(5) highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed
building;
(6) lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a
basement; and,
(7) level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be
floodproofed;
A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments
for which elevation standards apply as required in Section 6-6-6;
I. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional
engineer or architect, that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the
application are accurate
J. The following certifications as required in Section 6-6-6 by a registered professional
engineer or architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 01/03, as amended), to verify that the
floodproofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing
criteria of Section 6-6-3.H.4.; Section 6-6-6.G.; and other applicable standards in
Section 6-6-6;
9
2. a V-Zone Certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high hazard areas,
Zones V1-30 and VE, will meet the criteria of Article VI.P.; and other applicable
standards in Section 6-6-6;
3. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in
foundation walls will meet the standards of Section 6-6-6.L.2.a.;
4. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Section 6-6-6.M.;
5. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Section 6-
6-6.N.;
K. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a
result of the proposed development; and,
L. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable
development standard in Section 6-6-6 will be met.
Sec. 6-6-4 Application Fee and Expert’s Fee. A non-refundable application fee of
$100.00 shall be paid to the Town of Elizabeth and a copy of a receipt for the same shall
accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of
Appeals needs the assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee
shall be paid in full by the applicant within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the
applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a violation of the ordinance and be
grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be hired by the
municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to
such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An
applicant who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that
decision to the Board of Appeals.
Sec. 6-6-5 Review Standards for Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to
assure that proposed developments are reasonably safe from flooding and
to determine that all pertinent requirements of Section 6-6-6
(Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
2. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
applications:
10
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study
- Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine," as described in Section 6-6-1.;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway
data are not provided, the Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review
and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data from
federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Section 6-6-3.H.1.b.; Section 6-6-6.K.; and Section 6-6-9.D.,
in order to administer Section 6-6-6 of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by
methods outlined in Section 6-6-3.H.1.b., the community shall submit that
data to the Maine Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning
Office.
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special
flood hazard areas shown on the maps described in Section 6-6-1
of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications,
determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from
those federal, state, and local government agencies from which
prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but
not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental
Protection, and the Maine Floodplain Management Program in
the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or relocation of a
water course and submit copies of such notifications to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance,
approve the issuance of one of the following Flood Hazard
Development Permits, based on the type of development:
1. A two-part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures.
Part I shall authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the
first horizontal floor only above the base flood level. At that time the
applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a second
Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor,
registered professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit
construction, “as built”, for verifying compliance with the elevation
requirements of Section 6-6-6, paragraphs F, G, H, or P. Following
review of the Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72
hours of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
11
issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall
authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Floodproofing of Non-
Residential Structures that are new construction or substantially improved
non-residential structures that are not being elevated but that meet the
floodproofing standards of Section 6-6-6.G.1.a.,b., and c. The application
for this permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a
registered professional engineer or architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all
development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such
as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than
50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development also includes,
but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Section 6-6-6.J.,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations,
storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of materials,
public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do
not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams,
towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
For development that requires review and approval as a Conditional Use, as provided for
in this Ordinance, the Flood Hazard Development Permit Application shall be acted upon
by the Planning Board as required in Section 6-6-7.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports
of the Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Section 6-6-10 of
this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates,
Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design standards required under the
provisions of Sections 6-6-3, 6-6-6, and 6-6-8 of this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-6-6 – Development Standards. All developments in areas of special flood hazard
shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation
(excluding piers and docks), collapse or lateral movement of the
development resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage;
and
12
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components
during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems – On-site waste disposal systems shall be
located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated
portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction
occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential
structure located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation.
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in feet on
the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least two feet above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant
to Section 6-6-3.H.1.b.; Section 6-6-5.B.; or Section 6-6-9.D.
5. Zones V1-30 and VE shall meet the requirements of Section 6-6-
6.P.
13
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential
structure located within:
1. Zones A1-30 shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least two feet above the base flood
elevation so that below that elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall
be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by
Section 6-6-3.K. and shall include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to
which the structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
above the highest adjacent grade:
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in feet on
the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; or,
c. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be
floodproofed to meet the elevation requirements of this section and floodproofing
standards of Section 6-6-6.G.1.
4. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least two feet above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant
to Section 6-6-3.H.1.b.; Section 6-6-5.B.; or Section 6-6-9.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the
floodproofing standards of Section 6-6-6.G.1.
5. Zones V1-30 shall meet the requirements of Section 6-6-6.P.
14
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes
located within:
1. Zones A1-30, AE, and AH shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including
basement) of the manufactured home is at least two
feet above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured
masonry slab or foundation walls, with hydraulic
openings, or may be reinforced piers or block
supports, any of which support the manufactured
home so that no weight is supported by its wheels and
axles; and,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at
the four corners of the manufactured
home, plus two additional ties per side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes
less than 50 feet long require one
additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus
five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes
less than 50 feet long require four
additional ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system
described in Section 6-6-6.H.1.c.(1)&(2)
shall be capable of carrying a force of 4800
pounds.
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed structures.
3. Zone AO shall have the lowest floor (including basement) of the
manufactured home elevated above the highest adjacent grade:
15
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in
feet on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map;
or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified;
and,
c. meet the anchoring requirements of Section 6-6-
6.H.1.c.
4. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described
in Section 6-6-6.H.1.b., such that the lowest floor
(including basement) of the manufactured home is
at least two feet above the base flood elevation
utilizing information obtained pursuant to Section
6-6-3.H.1.b.; Section 6-6-5.B; or Section 6-6-9.D.;
and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Section 6-6-
6.H.1.c.
5. Zones V1-30 shall meet the requirements of Section 6-6-6.P.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A, and A1-30 shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is
on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and
security devices, and has no permanently attached
additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and
anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in
Section 6-6-6.H.1.
2. Zones V1-30 shall meet the requirements of either Section 6-6-6.I.1.a. or b.,
or Section 6-6-6.P.
16
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Section 6-6-14, located
within Zones A1-30, AO, and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in
Section 6-6-6.F. & G. above, if all other requirements of Section 6-6-6 and all the
following requirements are met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Section 6-6-6.L.2., in at
least two different walls of the accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as
to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be
placed further from the source of flooding than is the primary
structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric
service disconnect shall be located above the base flood elevation
and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zones A1-30 riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvement, and other development shall not be permitted
within a regulatory floodway which is designated on the community's Flood Boundary
and Floodway Map, unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments will not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
2. In Zones A1-30, and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted in the floodway as
determined in Section 6-6-6.K.3. unless a technical evaluation certified by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing development and
anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot at any point within the community; and,
17
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter
5 entitled "Hydraulic Analyses," Flood Insurance Study - Guidelines and Specifications
for Study Contractors, (FEMA 37/ January 1995, as amended).
3. In Zones A1-30, and A riverine areas for which no regulatory
floodway is designated, the regulatory floodway is determined to be the channel of the
river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width
of the floodplain as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the
floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial
improvement of any structure in Zones A1-30, AO, and A that meets the development
standards of Section 6-6-6, including the elevation requirements of Section 6-6-6,
paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts, columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or crawl
spaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided all the
following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Section 6-6-14;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood
water. Designs for meeting this requirement must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch
for every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below
the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens,
louvers, valves, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the entry
and exit of flood waters automatically
without any external influence or control
such as human intervention, including the
use of electrical and other non-automatic
mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
18
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of
vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones
A1-30, AO, A, and V1-30 shall be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the
pilings, or columns) is elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall
meet the elevation requirements of this section and the
floodway standards of Section 6-6-6.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto
are designed to resist flotation, collapse and lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all structural
components. Water loading values used shall be
those associated with the base flood.
N. Containment Walls -New construction or substantial improvement of any containment
wall located within:
1. Zones A1-30, A, and V1-30 shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least two
feet above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of
buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting
the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Section 6-6-3.K.
2. Zone AO shall have adequate drainage paths around containment walls
on slopes, to guide floodwater away from the proposed walls.
19
3. Zone AO shall have the top of the containment wall elevated above the
highest adjacent grade:
a. at least two feet higher than the depth specified in feet on the community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map; or,
b. at least three feet if no depth number is specified; and,
c. shall meet the requirements of Section 6-6-6.N.1.b. & c.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of
wharves, piers, and docks are permitted in Zones A1-30, AO, A, and V1-30, in and over
water and seaward of the mean high tide if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state,
and federal regulations; and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional
engineer shall develop or review the structural design, specifications,
and plans for the construction.
P. Coastal Floodplains -
1. All new construction located within Zones A1-30, A, and V1-30 shall
be located landward of the reach of mean high tide except as provided in
Section 6-6-6.P.6.
2. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure located
within Zones V1-30 shall:
a. be elevated on posts or columns such that:
(1) the bottom of the lowest horizontal
structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding the pilings or columns) is
elevated to two feet above the base flood
elevation;
(2) the pile or column foundation and the
elevated portion of the structure attached
thereto is anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement due to the
effects of wind and water loads acting
20
simultaneously on all building components;
and,
(3) water loading values used shall be those
associated with the base flood. Wind
loading values used shall be those required
by applicable state and local building
standards.
b. have the space below the lowest floor:
(1) free of obstructions; or,
(2) constructed with open wood lattice-work, or
insect screening intended to collapse under
wind and water without causing collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting
piles or columns; or,
(3) constructed with non-supporting
breakaway walls that have a design safe
loading resistance of not less than 10 or
more than 20 pounds per square foot.
c. require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
(1) develop or review the structural
design, specifications, and plans for the
construction, which must meet or exceed
the technical criteria contained in the
Coastal Construction Manual, (FEMA-
55/June, 2000); and,
(2) certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the criteria of Section 6-6-6.P.2.
3. The use of fill for structural support in Zones V1-30 is prohibited.
4. Human alteration of sand dunes within Zones V1-30 is prohibited unless it
can be demonstrated that such alterations will not increase potential flood damage.
5. The area below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking vehicles,
building access, and storage.
21
6. Conditional Use - Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located seaward
of mean high tide and shall be exempt from the elevation requirement in Section 6-6-6.G.
only if permitted as a Conditional Use following review and approval by the Planning
Board, as provided in Section 6-6-7, and if all the following requirements and those of
Section 6-6-6.A., K. and L. are met:
a. The conditional use shall be limited to low value
structures such as metal or wood sheds 200 square
feet or less and shall not exceed more than one
story.
b. The structure shall be securely anchored to the
wharf or pier to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement due to the effect of wind and water loads
acting simultaneously on all building components.
c. The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris
impact forces affecting nearby buildings.
d. The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall
not be used for human habitation.
e. Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage
tanks must be anchored and either elevated or
floodproofed to one foot above the base flood
elevation.
f. All electrical outlets shall be ground fault interrupt type.
The electrical service disconnect shall be located on
shore above the base flood elevation and when possible
outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
Sec. 6-6-7 Conditional Use Review The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon
applications for conditional uses provided for in this Ordinance. The Planning Board
shall hear and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all applications for
conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer that a
Conditional Use Permit is required shall file an application for the permit with the
Planning Board.
A. Review Procedure for a Conditional Use Flood Hazard Development Permit
1. The Flood Hazard Development Permit Application with
additional information attached addressing how each of the conditional use criteria
specified in the Ordinance will be satisfied, may serve as the permit application for the
Conditional Use Permit.
22
2. Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a
public hearing on the application within thirty days of their receipt of the application.
3. If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant
requirements of the ordinance, the Planning Board must approve the application or approve with
conditions within 45 days of the date of the public hearing.
4. A Conditional Use Permit issued under the provisions of this
Ordinance shall expire if the work or change involved is not commenced within 180 days of the
issuance of the permit by the Planning Board.
5. The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing over
the signature of the Chairman of the Planning Board that flood insurance is not available for
structures located entirely over water or seaward of mean high tide.
B. Expansion of Conditional Uses
1. No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or enlarged
without a permit issued under this section if that building or use was
established or constructed under a previously issued Conditional Use
Permit or if it is a building or use which would require a Conditional Use
Permit if being newly-established or constructed under this Ordinance.
Sec. 6-6-8 - Certificate Of Compliance No land in a special flood hazard area shall be
occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or substantially improved shall be
occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the
applicant shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer:
1. an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor,
registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Section 6-6-7, paragraphs F,
G, H, or P and,
2. for structures in Zones V1-30, certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction used are in
compliance with Section 6-6-6.P.2.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer
that the development is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
23
1. review the required certificate(s) and the applicant’s written
notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms to the provisions of this
ordinance, shall issue a Certificate of Compliance.
Sec. 6-6-9 Review of Subdivision and Development Proposals The Planning Board
shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require review
under other federal law, state law, local ordinances or regulations, and all projects on 5 or
more disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more
lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided in order to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine
floodplain, floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices
recognized by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval
requiring that structures on any lot in the development having any portion of its land
within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are to be constructed in accordance with Section 6-
6-6 of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and
sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in
real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The condition
shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document
previously described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any
map, plat, or plan to be signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part
of the approval process.
Sec. 6-6-10 - Appeals and Variances The Board of Appeals of the Town of Cape
Elizabeth may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance
consistent with state law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
24
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood
occur, the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization
of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with
other state, federal or local laws or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
"undue hardship," which in this sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable
return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique
circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the
essential character of the locality; and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the
applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose
such conditions to a variance as is deemed necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other
development for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Section 6-6-10 and Section 6-6-6.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional
threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of Historic Structures upon the determination that:
25
1. the development meets the criteria of Section 6-6-10, paragraphs A.
through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not
preclude the structure’s continued designation as a Historic Structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character
and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Section 6-6-10, paragraphs A. through E.
shall be notified by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of
the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
level will result in greatly increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and
property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all
the risks inherent in the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those
risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the municipality against any
claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use land
located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the
municipality from any claims the applicant may have against the
municipality that are related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of
Appeals by an aggrieved party within thirty days after receipt of a
written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the
record of the decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within
thirty-five days of its receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days
after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
26
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a
report of all variance actions, including justification for the granting of the
variance and an authorization for the Code Enforcement Officer to issue a
Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any conditions to be
attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the
proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to the
Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five days
from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
8. Any aggrieved party of a decision of the Planning Board may take an
appeal to the Superior Court in accordance with State law within fortyfive
days from the date of said decision.
Sec. 6-6-11 Enforcement and Penalties
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this
Ordinance.
C. In addition to other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall, upon identifying
a violation, submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration
requesting a flood insurance denial. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the
property sufficient to confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of
a cited State or local law, regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has
authority to do so and a citation to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the
violation and the prospective denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to
Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
Sec 6-6-12 Validity and Severability If any section or provision of this Ordinance is
declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or
provision of this Ordinance.
27
Sec. 6-6-13 Conflict with Other Ordinances This Ordinance shall not in any way impair
or remove the necessity of compliance with any other applicable rule, ordinance, regulation,
bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon
the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
Sec. 6-6-14 Definitions Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
Ordinance shall have the same meaning as they have at common law, and to give this
Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in the present tense include the future,
the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the singular. The word
"may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the
principal structure.
Adjacent Grade - the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next
to the proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Shallow Flooding - a designated AO and AH zone on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to
an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study
cited in Section 6-6-1 of this Ordinance.
Base Flood – a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - area of a building that includes a floor that is subgrade (below ground level)
on all sides.
Breakaway Wall - a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading
forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - a document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating
that a structure is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
28
Code Enforcement Officer – a person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451
(including exceptions in Section 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to
enforce all applicable comprehensive planning and land use laws.
Conditional Use - a use that, because of its potential impact on surrounding areas and
structures, is permitted only upon review and approval by the Planning Board pursuant to
Section 6-6-7.
Containment Wall – wall used to convey or direct storm water or sanitary water from the
initial source to the final destination.
Development – a manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate. This
includes, but is not limited to, buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and
the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials.
Elevated Building - a non-basement building that is:
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, A, or AO, so that the top of
the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, to have the
bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor,
elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or
"stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored to not impair the structural integrity of the building
during a flood of up to one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones A1-30, A, or AO, Elevated Building also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters, as required in Article
VI.L. In the case of Zones V1-30, Elevated Building also includes a building otherwise
meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Section 6-6-
6.P.2.b.(3).
Elevation Certificate - an official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 02/06, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program; and,
b. Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally
dry land areas from:
29
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water
exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high
water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an
unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as
defined in paragraph a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards
and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - an official map of a community, on which the
Federal Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Floodprone Area - land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes,
health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of
flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved
real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal,
state, and local floodplain maps.
30
Freeboard - a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as
wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed,
which could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size
flood and floodway conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking
facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the
National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or
a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to
qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic
preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
Locally Established Datum - for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is
generally not referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other
established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific
site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's
31
lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described in Section 6-6-
6.L. of this Ordinance.
Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term
manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level – when related to the National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a
substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose
value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. It also includes, but is not
limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Section 6-6-6.J., mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems
or water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such
as bridges, dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - the national vertical datum, a standard
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD is
based upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called “1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)”.
New Construction - structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or
after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not
including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle;
and
32
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway –
a. the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, and
b. when not designated on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map, it is considered to be the channel of a river or
other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the
width of the floodplain, as measured from the normal highwater mark to the
upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream,
brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial
improvement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling;
nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement -means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes
33
structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and a
variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain
management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a
community's floodplain management regulations.
Sec. 6-6-15 Abrogation This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance
previously enacted to comply with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-
488, as amended).
1
CHAPTER 7
DOGS
Article I. Dog Control. [Adopted eff. 7/23/69, pursuant to R.S. 1964, T. 7, Sec. 3451 ff.;
amended eff. 6/13/73; amended eff. 2/8/90; amended eff. 2/08/2018, amended eff.
10/9/2019]
Sec. 7-1-1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to control dogs throughout the
Town of Cape Elizabeth in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of its
residents.
Sec. 7-1-2. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates.
"At large" shall have the same meaning as 7 M.R.S. § 3907, Subsection 6.
"Dangerous dog" shall have the same meaning as 7 M.R.S. § 3907, Subsection 12-D.
"Dog" shall have the same meaning as 7 M.R.S. § 3907, Subsection 12-C.
"Leash" shall mean a hand held device, 30 feet or less in length, used to restrain a dog.
"Nuisance dog" shall have the same meaning as 7 M.R.S. § 3907, Subsection 20-A.
"Owner" shall mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog. When a dog is in the custody of a "Responsible Party," all
the provisions of an "Owner" shall apply.
“Responsible party” shall mean any person who has possession or custody of a dog. If a
dog is present in violation of the restrictions of this ordinance, the owner of the dog and
the responsible party are jointly and severally liable for the violation.
“Sight and Voice control” shall mean that the dog returns immediately to and remains by
the side of the responsible party in response to the responsible party’s verbal command.
“Sight control” shall mean that a dog is always within sight of the Responsible Party and
the dog is capable of complying with Voice Control. A violation of this Ordinance occurs
upon a failure to comply with the definition of either Voice Control or Sight Control. If a
dog approaches and remains within 10 feet of any person other than the responsible party
or if a dog bites a person or animal, that dog is not under voice control and a violation of
this Ordinance occurs unless such person has communicated to the responsible party by
spoken word or gesture that such person consents to the presence of the dog.
Sec. 7-1-3. License. Any person who violates any section of the dog licensing
requirements commits a civil violation for which a forfeiture may be adjudged.
(a) License and Tag Requirements. Each owner or keeper of a dog at the age of 6
months or over shall, on or before January 1, annually, or at such time as such dog
2
becomes 6 months old, obtain a license from the town clerk's office in accordance
with 7 M.R.S.A. Chapter 721. An owner or keeper of a dog declared as a wolf
hybrid is also subject as required by the laws of the State of Maine.
(b) Failure to Display Tags. It shall be unlawful for any dog owner or keeper to fail to
have affixed to the dog's collar, the license identification and rabies tag. Said tags
must be securely attached to a collar of leather, metal or materials of comparable
strength. The collar shall be worn at all times by the dog for which the license and
rabies tags were issued, except that a dog is not required to wear a tag when on
premises of the owner or off the premises of the owner while hunting, in training,
or in an exhibition.
Sec. 7-1-4. Barking and Howling. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which
by loud, frequent, and habitual barking, howling or yelping, shall disturb the peace of any
person or persons. Agricultural working dogs, when engaged in protecting or herding
livestock or in warning owners of danger to livestock, are exempt.
Sec. 7-1-5. Dangerous Dog or Nuisance Dog. The keeping of a dangerous or nuisance
dog shall be regulated by Title 7 M.R.S.A Sec. 3952-A and succeeding amendments.
If there is an incident where a dog may have engaged in dangerous or nuisance behavior,
the incident shall immediately be reported to the Cape Elizabeth Police Department. The
owner of the dog shall remain on scene to provide contact information to the Police
Department.
Sec. 7-1-6. Dogs At Large. It shall be unlawful for any dog, licensed or unlicensed, to be
at large, except when used for hunting. The owner of any dog found at large is subject to
the penalties provided in Title 7 M.R.S.A. Chapter 719.
Sec. 7-1-7 Management of Dogs on Municipal Property.
(a) General conduct on municipal property. At all times, dogs on municipal property
shall be controlled to the extent necessary to preserve access and safety for all
members of the public. The owner must carry a leash for each dog in their
possession or custody on municipal property. The owner shall not be in
possession or custody of more than three (3) dogs off-leash. When in possession
or custody of more than three (3) dogs, all dogs must be on leash.
(b) Management Category. Dogs on municipal property shall be controlled based on
the Property Management Category Designation.
1. Category 1: No dogs allowed. No dogs shall be allowed on any municipal
property assigned as Category 1 for the purpose of dog control.
3
2. Category 2: Dogs allowed on leash only. Dogs that are restrained by leash
held by the owner are allowed on any municipal property assigned Category
2.
3. Category 3: Dogs allowed on voice or leash control. Dogs that are under the
control of the owner by either voice or leash control are allowed on any
municipal property assigned Category 3.
(c) Property Manager. Property Management Category Designation shall be by
property location and may include one or more categories designated by location,
time of day, month, event or other measurement. Property managers are
designated as follows:
1. School campus: Superintendent of Schools
2. Municipal town open space (excluding Fort Williams Park and athletic fields
located on town open space): Conservation Committee
3. All other municipal property: Town Council
(d) Designation change. Property Management Category Designation shall be
assigned by the Town Council and may be changed by the designated property
manager to promote sound property management. A category change may be
made after it is included as an agenda item and an opportunity for public comment
is provided at the applicable meeting.
Property Manager Meeting
School Superintendent School Board meeting
Conservation Committee Conservation Committee meeting
Town Council Town Council meeting
A decision to change a property management category designation shall be posted
on the town website for 30 days. Within the 30 day period, notification of a
category designation change and a summary of why the change was made shall be
provided to the Town Council. The Town Council retains the authority, but not
the obligation, to change a Property Management Category Designation.
Notification of Property Management Category Designation shall be provided to
the Cape Elizabeth Police Chief.
(e) Limited Privileges List. Failure to control a dog on municipal property shall result
in an owner's loss of privileges to have a dog in their custody or possession offleash
on municipal property as follows:
1. First violation. When the Cape Elizabeth Police Department has determined
that an owner has not maintained control of a dog in accordance with Sec. 7-
4
1-7, the Police Department shall notify the owner in writing. The notification
shall require the property owner to meet with the Police Department within
five (5) business days from the date of the written notification, or such other
time as is agreed upon by the Police Department, to identify ways in which
the owner shall maintain control of their dog. The owner will agree to take all
necessary measures, which measures shall be memorialized in a written
agreement at the conclusion of the meeting. Failure of the owner to enter into
such an agreement at the conclusion of the meeting will be deemed a second
violation.
2. Second violation. When the Cape Elizabeth Police Department has determined
that an owner has not maintained control of a dog in accordance with Sec. 7-
1-7 for the second time in a five (5) year period, the Police Department shall
notify the owner in writing that off-leash privileges for any dog in the owner's
possession or custody shall be suspended for thirty (30) days. The owner shall
also pay a fine of $100.00 dollars.
3. Third violation. When the Cape Elizabeth Police Department has determined
that an owner has not maintained control of a dog in accordance with Sec. 7-
1-7 for the third time in a five (5) year period, the Police Department shall
notify the owner in writing that off-leash privileges for any dog in the owner's
possession or custody shall be suspended for five (5) years from the date of
the first violation. The owner shall also pay a fine of $500.00 dollars.
4. Subsequent violations. For each additional violation, the Police Department
shall notify the owner in writing that off-leash privileges for any dog in the
owner's possession or custody shall be suspended for an additional five (5)
years from the date of the first violation. The owner shall pay a fine of
$500.00 dollars.
5. Appeals. An owner may appeal a failure to control a dog determination to the
District Court.
Sec. 7-1-8. Removal of Dog Waste. An owner must remove and dispose of any feces
left by the owner's dog on any sidewalk, street, beach, public property or private property
(other than the property of dog owner or a person who has consented to the presence of
the dog on the person's property) and deposit such feces into an appropriate litter
receptacle.
Sec. 7-1-9. Impoundment. The Cape Elizabeth Police Department may impound any
dog in accordance with 7 M.R.S.A. Sec. 3913. An impounded dog may be temporarily
housed in the Cape Elizabeth Police Department for a period not to exceed 24 hours and
then, if necessary in an animal shelter designated by the Town and there confined in a
humane manner for a period of not more than fourteen (14) days.
Sec. 7-1-10. Disposition of Impounded Dogs.
5
(a) An owner may regain possession of an impounded dog upon compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance. A dog impounded under the provisions of this
ordinance and not reclaimed by the owner within said fourteen (14) days, shall be
considered to be abandoned by the owner.
(b) Where the ownership of any such dog is known, or can be reasonably ascertained
by a police officer or dog control officer, such officer shall, if possible, notify the
owner within three (3) days of such impoundment, but failure to give such notice
shall in no way impose any liability upon the Town for the destruction or transfer
to another of any dog so impounded and not reclaimed within said period of
fourteen (14) days.
Sec. 7-1-11. Fees and Boarding Charges. Any dog impounded hereunder may be
reclaimed upon payment to the Town, through the Cape Elizabeth Police Department, of
an impoundment fee as established in the Town Fee Schedule.
Sec. 7-1-12. Interference Forbidden. No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest
any police officer or dog control officer in the performance of any duty of such officer, or
seek release of any dog in the custody of a police officer or dog control officer, except as
herein provided.
Sec. 7-1-13. Records. It shall be the duty of a police officer or dog control officer to
keep, or cause to be kept, an accurate and detailed record of the licensing, impoundment
and disposition of all dogs coming into his custody.
Sec. 7-1-14. Enforcement. The Cape Elizabeth dog control officer and the Cape
Elizabeth Police Department are hereby directed and empowered to enforce the
provisions of this ordinance.
Sec. 7-1-15. Penalties. Whoever keeps a dog contrary to the provisions of this ordinance
shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) to be
recovered by complaint for the use of the Town of Cape Elizabeth before the 9th District
Court of Maine, Division of Southern Cumberland. In addition, said Court may make
such further order regarding the destruction, restraint or other disposition of the offending
dog as the Court deems appropriate. (Revised eff. 2/8/2018, 10/9/2019)
MUNICIPAL OPEN SPACE
Manage
ment
Group1 Pg
No
Size
(in
acres)
Property
Manager 2
Dog Ordinance Property Management
Category Designation
Dyer Woods 2/4 35 5.4 CC 3
Cliff House Beach Park 3 39 0.3 CC
1: May 1- October 1, 9:00 am 06:00 pm
2: May 1- October 1: 6:01pm - sunrise
3: May 1- October 1, 6:00 a.m. to 8:59am,
October 2 - April 30
Fort Williams Unleashed dog area - area abutting the
Southerly edge of the Central Parking Lot and extending
westerly along the Southerly side of the Heavy Equipment
Storage Building, continuing Westerly directly behind the
long garages at the rear of the Officers Row buildings to
Harrison Road; continuing on (and including) Merriman
Road along the northerly border of Delano Park to the
water’s edge; then extending northerly along the shoreline
turning westerly across “The Green” to the southern end of
Battery Blair; turning northerly then westerly back to the
Southerly edge of the Central Parking Lot * 5 45 97.2 TC 3
Fort Williams - multipurpose field playing surface* TC 1
Fort Williams - baseball and softball fields playing surface* 1
Fort Williams - remainder of park TC 2
Plaisted Park - ball field playing surface* TC 1
Plaisted Park - remainder of park* 5 46 3.5 TC 3
Stonegate Area
Stonegate Trails 5 50 86.6 CC 3
Robinson Woods II Public Access Esmt 5 48 CC 3
Loveitt Woods 5 44 18.0 CC 3
Cottage Brook 4 56 12.6 CC 3
Lions Field* 5 59 25.0 TC 3
Lions Field playing surface* TC 1
Columbus Lot 3 55 1.0 CC 3
Broad Cove Trails 4 76 20.6 CC 3
Great Pond Condos Easement 4 79 9.5 CC 3
Great Pond Sprague Easements 4 82 6.6 CC 3
Great Pond Fenway Connector 4 80 0.1 CC 3
Great Pond Golden Ridge Ped Esmt 4 77 0.4 CC 3
Great Pond Jordan Pedestrian Esmt 4 81 0.5 CC 3
Two Lights Pond Pedestrian Esmt 4 85 1.7 CC 3
Two Lights Pillsbury Pedestrian Esmt 4 87 0.1 CC 3
Two Lights St. Bart's Easement 4 88 1.7 CC 3
Two Lights Sullivan Pedestrian Esmt 4 86 0.2 CC 3
Whaleback Trails 4 89 5.2 CC 3
Gull Crest* 5 93 177.0 CC 3
Gull Crest athletic field playing surface* 1
Gull Crest Fowler Rd Conn Ped Esmt 4 91 0.2 CC 3
School Campus (see map) during the school day and from
1/2 hour before to 1/2 hour after athletic (including
practices) and community events that have fixed start and
end times* 5 97 64.8 SS 2
School campus (see map) outside of the school day and
more than 1/2 hour before or more than 1/2 hour after
athletic (including practices) and community events that
have fixed start and end times* SS 3
Hannaford field playing surface* 1
School campus athletic fields playing surface* 1
Land outside school campus (U21-12) 5 97 64.8 CC 3
Cross Hill Trails 4 102 105.0 CC 3
Eastman Meadows 4 104 10.0 CC 3
Leighton Farms Trails 4 107 6.8 CC 3
Spurwink Marsh DOI Easement 4 109 16.5 CC 3
Property Management Category Designation eff 10-9-2019
Northeast Area
Fort Williams Park
Interior Area
Great Pond Area
Gull Crest Area (excluding athletic field)
Marsh Area
Town Farm 5 110 150.0 CC 3
Winnick Woods 5 112 71.0 CC 3
Abaco Lot 3 32 0.4 CC 3
Abaco Pedestrian Easement 3 33 0.2 CC 3
Baker Lot 3 34 0.2 CC 3
Dyer Woods Pedestrian Easements 3 36 0.0 CC 3
Holan Lots 1 37 3.1 CC 3
Ivie Rd lot 1 38 0.1 CC 3
Stonybrook Lot 3 40 0.2 CC 3
Arlington Lane Easement 1 42 3.0 CC 3
Cranbrook Easement 1 43 6.8 CC 3
Shore Road Pond 1 49 1.1 CC 3
Alewive Brook Lot 3 69 0.3 CC 3
Alewive Cove Lot (no road access) 1 70 0.5 CC 2
Davis Woods 2 72 7.3 CC 3
Eastfield Lot 1 71 0.4 CC 3
Ferne Peddy Lots 1 65 3.7 CC 2
Queen Acres/State Ave 3 66 0.7 CC 3
Rice Lot 2 67 0.2 CC 3
Bothel Pedestrian Easement 2 52 1.4 CC 3
Canterbury Easement 1 53 0.8 CC 3
Canterbury Tank House Lot 1 54 0.03 CC 1
Hobstone Pedestrian Easement 4 57 0.04 CC 3
McAuley Lot 3 60 0.5 CC 3
Patricia Lot 1 61 0.5 CC 3
Tarbox Triangle 3 62 0.2 CC 3
Wildwood Easement 2 63 7.5 CC 3
Broad Cove Lot 1 75 8.3 CC 3
McKenney Point Lot 3 83 0.1 CC 3
Fowler Rd Corner lot 3 92 0.2 CC 3
Hannaford Lot 1 94 0.8 CC 3
Longfellow Lot 3 95 0.2 CC 3
Scott Dyer Rd Connector Easement 4 98 0.8 CC 3
Autumn Tides Lot 3 101 0.5 CC 3
Eastman Meadows Ped/Pkg Easements 4 105 0.6 CC 3
Park Circle 3 108 1.1 CC 3
Riverside Cemetery TC 2
Municipal Property not listed above
Public roads 2
Public sidewalks 2
Municipal parking lot and within 10' thereof 2
Other municipal property TC 3
1 Reference to the Management of Greenbelt and Open Space Plan
2 Property Manager: CC - Conservation Committee, TC-Town Council, SS-School Superintendent
Category 1: No dogs (none)
Category 2: Dogs on leash only
Category 3: Dogs on leash or voice control
*Athletic fields may be assigned a different management category than the adjacent municipal land. See Sec. 7-1-7( c).
Northeast Area
Stonegate Area
Coastal Area
Trout Brook Area
Interior Area
Great Pond Area
Gull Crest Area
Marsh Area
1
Chapter 8
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Article 1 Fire Code
Section 8-1-1 Adoption of International Fire Code, 2003 edition That a certain
document, two (2) copies of which are on file in the Cape Elizabeth Town Offices, being
marked and designated as the International Fire Code, 2003 edition, including the
Appendix Chapters, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby
adopted as the Fire Code of the Town of Cape Elizabeth in the State of Maine regulating
and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards
arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and
devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and the collection
of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said Fire Code on file in the office of the Town of Cape Elizabeth are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Section 8-1-2 of this
Ordinance.
Section 8-1-2 Additions, Insertions and Changes That the following sections of the
International Fire Code, 2003 are hereby revised as follows:
Chapter 1 Administration
Section 101.1 Title – Insert Town of Cape Elizabeth
Section 103.1 General – Add at the end of the paragraph: The words “fire code
official”, where used, shall mean the fire chief or his/her duly authorized agent. The
words “department of fire prevention”, where used, shall mean the fire department.
Section 108.3 Qualifications – delete language after “The board of appeals shall” and
replace with be the Cape Elizabeth Town Council.
Section 109.3 Violation penalties – delete language after “shall be guilty” and add as
allowed by Section 8-2-6 of Chapter 8 Fire Protection and Prevention of the Town of
Cape Elizabeth Ordinances.
Section 111.4 Failure to comply – delete the wording “shall be liable” and add as
allowed by Section 8-2-6 of Chapter 8 Fire Protection and Prevention of the Town of
Cape Elizabeth Ordinances.
Section 8-1-3 Underground Utility Lines, Flammable Type. The following
requirements shall be included in the Town Fire Prevention Code:
Section 1. Discontinued Service. When gas or other flammable service to any
building is discontinued, the existing service line shall be terminated and blocked
from the building under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department at or near
the street line. At the request of the owner of any building to which gas or other
flammable service has been discontinued at any time prior to or following the
2
enactment of these provisions, the person, firm or corporation which has provided
such service shall terminate the service line for such service under the supervision of
the Chief of the Fire Department at or near the street line and shall seal off the line
from the building at that point by replacing a section of pipe with compacted backfill,
capping the line or other equivalent methods as approved by the Fire Chief.
Section 2. Cutoffs and Fire Valves. When any new gas or other flammable service is
to be provided to any building after the enactment of these provisions, the service line
for such service shall be provided with a cutoff outside the exterior wall of such
building at or near the street line, and a fire valve and excess flow valve shall be
installed at the point where the service pipe enters the building.
Section 3. Supervision of Works. The discontinuance of any flammable utility
service line within the town and the provision of any new flammable service line to
any building shall be subject to the provision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
Such supervising officer shall be advised when any such action is proposed and shall
inspect the same before any such opening or trench is filled. Such supervising officer
may impose reasonable requirements regarding sealing off, backfill, compaction and
repaving in order to assure a safe and workmanlike installation and a proper finished
surface. Any powers given the Chief of the Fire Department under these provisions
may be exercised by the duly authorized representative of such supervising officer.
Section 8-1-4 Saving Clause That nothing in this Article or in the International Fire
Code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights accrued, or liability incurred, or any causes of action acquired or
existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 2 of this
Ordinance; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired
or affected by this Article.
Section 8-1-5 Date of Effect That the Town Clerk shall certify to the adoption
of this Article and cause the same to be published as required by law; and
this Article shall take full force and be in effect thirty (30) days after this date
of final passage and approval.
Sec. 8-1-3. Underground Utility Lines, Flammable Type. The following requirements
shall be included in the Town Fire Prevention Code:
Section 1. Discontinued Service. When gas or other flammable service to any building
is discontinued, the existing service line shall be terminated and blocked from the
building under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department at or near the street
line. At the request of the owner of any building to which gas or other flammable service
has been discontinued at any time prior to or following the enactment of these provisions,
the person, firm or corporation which has provided such service shall terminate the
service line for such service under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department at
or near the street line and shall seal off the line from the building at that point by
replacing a section of pipe with compacted backfill, capping the line or other equivalent
methods approved by the Fire Chief.
3
Section 2. Cutoffs and Fire Valves. When any new gas or other flammable service is to
be provided to any building after the enactment of these provisions, the service line for
such service shall be provided with a cutoff outside the exterior wall of such building at
or near the street line, and a fire valve and excess flow valve shall be installed at the
point the service pipe enters the building.
Section 3. Supervision of Works. The discontinuance of any flammable utility service
line within the town and the provision of any new flammable service line to any building
shall be subject to the provision of the Chief of the Fire Department. Such supervising
officer shall be advised when any such action is proposed and shall inspect the same
before any such opening or trench is filled. Such supervising officer may impose
reasonable requirements regarding sealing off, backfill, compaction and repaving in order
to assure a safe and workmanlike installation and a proper finished surface. Any powers
given the Chief of the Fire Department under these provisions may be exercised by the
duly authorized representative of such supervising officer."
Sec. 8-1-4. Saving Clause That nothing in this Article or the Fire Prevention Code
hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in any
court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in Section 2 of
this Article; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired
or affected by this Article.
Sec. 8-1-5. Date of Effect. That the Town Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this
Article and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this Article shall take
full force and be in effect thirty (30) days after this date of final passage and approval.
Article II. Violations. [Adopted eff. 11/12/76, under R.S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 8-2-1. Tampering with Fire Alarms. No person except a duly authorized
electrician and his assistants shall tamper with the town fire alarm, bells, signal or Fire
Department system or cut any wire or break or interfere with any circuits thereof.
Sec. 8-2-2. Fire Alarms. No person shall willfully or maliciously give or cause to be
given a false alarm of fire by ringing an alarm bell or by pulling in an alarm at any box of
the fire alarm system or shall willfully or maliciously break, destroy or tamper with in
any way the apparatus comprising the fire alarm system.
Sec. 8-2-3. Driving on Fire Hose Prohibited. No person shall drive any vehicle over
any fire hose within the Town of Cape Elizabeth, laid at the occurrence of a fire or at any
alarm of fire.
Sec. 8-2-4. Obstruction of Firefighter. No person shall assault or in any manner
willfully obstruct, intimidate or hinder or attempt to obstruct, intimidate of hinder any
firefighter while in the lawful discharge of their official duties.
4
Sec. 8-2-5. Exposed Fires Prohibited. No person shall kindle, maintain or assist in
maintaining any bonfire or other exposed fire within the Town, excepting under specific
permission from the Fire Chief or otherwise as provided by statute; such burning shall
be done in metallic receptacles approved by him, or under proper safeguards as he may
direct as to time and weather conditions, and on condition that such permittee keep
sufficient control of said fire and be responsible for all damages thereof, and that all
embers shall be extinguished and the hot ashes removed or wet down at the close of said
fire.
Sec. 8-2-6. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of Article I or II of this
Chapter 8 shall, severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than Twentyfive
Dollars ($25.00) nor more than One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), or by imprisonment
for not less than one (1) day nor more than five (5) days or both such fine and
imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; when not otherwise specified,
each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
Article III. Mutual Fire Aid Agreements. [Adopted eff. 1/27/71 under R.S. 1964, T.
30, Sec. 3777.]
Sec. 8-3-1. Mutual Aid Authorized. The chief, or the chief’s duly authorized
representative, of the Fire Department of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, upon request for
aid from a duly authorized representative of a municipal or incorporated volunteer Fire
Department of another municipality, within or without the state, is hereby authorized to
send to such other municipal or incorporated volunteer Fire Department such equipment
and/or personnel belonging to the Fire Department of the Town of Cape Elizabeth as he
shall deem feasible for the purpose of rendering aid in extinguishing a fire within such
other municipality.
Sec. 8-3-2. Liability. During the course of rendering such aid to another
municipality, the aiding municipality shall, as between municipalities having similar
ordinances or other regulations, be responsible for and shall assume the risk or any
personal injury or property damage caused to or by its own personnel or equipment,
and for any payments required to be made to any member of its Fire Department or
the member’s surviving spouse or other dependents, on account of injuries or death
so required by the Worker’s Compensation Act of the State of Maine, all without
affecting the right of the aiding municipality to recover damages from any other
person or entity legally liable therefore.
Sec. 8-3-3. Town Manager to Execute Agreement. The Town Manager may execute,
with authorization of the Town Council, for and on behalf of the Town of Cape
Elizabeth, a mutual aid agreement in accordance with the provisions of the above sections
5
with any other municipality of municipalities having a similar ordinance or other
regulation.
Article IV. Alarm Systems Ordinance. [Adopted eff. 1/9/80, under R.S. 1964, T. 30,
Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 8-4-1. Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Alarm
Systems Ordinance of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine."
Sec. 8-4-2. Purpose. This ordinance recognizes the need for regulations of the
installation and use of Alarm Systems in order to assure compatibility of equipment with
the facilities of the Public Safety Communications Center, to avoid use of improper
equipment, to assure adequate installation of equipment, to minimize false alarms or
other interference with the orderly conduct of Town business and to clarify the rights and
responsibilities of the property owner and of the Town.
Sec. 8-4-3 Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
(a) “Alarm system” means any mechanism, equipment or device designed to
automatically transmit a signal, message or warning indicating fire, burglary, health
emergency or like need for public safety assistance, from a private facility through
telephone facilities to the Public Safety Communication Center.
(b) "Appropriate", with respect to a Chief or Department, means the Fire Department
for fire or rescue alarms and the Police Department for alarms of unlawful entry, theft or
other criminal activity.
(c) "Center" means the Public Safety Communications Center for the Town of Cape
Elizabeth, Maine.
Sec. 8-4-4. Permit Required. No person shall install, operate, maintain, alter, or
replace an Alarm System within the Town after December 31, 1979, without an
effective permit therefore signed by the Chief of the appropriate Department.
Sec. 8-4-5. Application Procedure. Application for an Alarm System permit shall be
made to the appropriate Department by the owner of the premises to be protected, upon
forms prepared by the Town, accompanied by prepayment of the first annual service fee
and tender of an agreement signed by the applicant releasing and discharging the Town of
Cape Elizabeth, its officers, agents and employees, from any liability arising from the
failure of such Alarm System to operate properly, or from any other act or omission by
the Town, its officers, agents and employees excepting any knowing and intentional act
or omission. The application shall require the full name, telephone number and address of
6
the owner of the premises to be protected, of his designated agent with the Town, and of
the proposed installer who must have the capacity to maintain and service such Alarm
System from a point within the Greater Portland area; the application shall also require a
description of the principal use of the premises to be protected, a description of the
proposed system and the location for its installation, and such other data as the Chiefs
may reasonably require in order to assure the use of appropriate equipment and its proper
installation. The appropriate Chief shall issue any permit with such conditions as he
deems reasonably designed to assure the foregoing objectives, and the Chiefs shall
establish procedures and guidelines for processing such applications.
Sec. 8-4-6. Service Fee. The annual service fee for each Alarm System shall be fixed and
may be changed by order of the Town Council and is initially fixed at $25.00. Such fee
shall apply to each Alarm System connected from the same premises or by the same
owner, and to any dialer Alarm System programmed to activate the Center telephone. For
any Alarm System installed after June 30th of the calendar year, the fee shall be one-half
the regular annual fee. Such fee shall be for the calendar year and, after the initial
prepayment, shall be payable prior to January 31st of each year. Alarm Systems not
connected to the Center shall pay a $25.00 annual registration fee to the Town. It shall be
collected in the same manner as service fees for alarm systems connected to the Center.
Sec. 8-4-7. Prohibited Systems. No system shall be permitted which automatically
transmits to the Center telephone lines except to a number designated by the permit
issued or as otherwise approved by the appropriate Chief. Each alarm shall be reported
individually, and no system shall be permitted which uses a constant signal for one
type of alarm and a pulsating signal for another.
Sec. 8-4-8. Use Regulated. No Alarm System shall be placed in operation until its
location, equipment and installation have been finally approved by the appropriate Chief
as conforming to the terms of the permit and the provisions of this ordinance. Thereafter
the appropriate Chief may inspect, or cause the inspection by a qualified person of, any
Alarm System to determine that its condition, location and use comply with its permit
and this ordinance, and to assure that it will not interfere with the operation of the Center;
access shall be permitted at all reasonable hours for such purpose. Any deficiency noted
shall be reported to, and promptly corrected by, the owner. Information concerning any
Alarm System shall be maintained confidentially and release of any such information by
any person to one not concerned with the maintenance or operation thereof, or the
enforcement of this ordinance, shall constitute a violation of this ordinance.
Sec. 8-4-9. Alarm Response. The property owner or his designated agent, as kept on file
at the Center, shall respond to each alarm at the request of the appropriate Department for
the purpose of securing the premises.
Sec. 8-4-10. False Alarms. Any permit holder whose system causes the transmittal of a
non-emergency alarm more than three (3) times in any calendar year, after a 30-day
start-up period for new installations, shall pay a fee of $25.00 for each instance of a
non-emergency alarm in excess of that number, upon demand by the appropriate Chief;
7
the appropriate Chief shall give suitable written warning to any permit holder, or to his
designated agent, whose alarm sends a third non-emergency alarm in any calendar year.
Non-emergency alarms shall include, but shall not be limited to, false alarms caused by
malfunctioning equipment, accidental or negligent activation of the alarm, or
improperly monitored equipment. In the event an alarm is activated as a result of a
natural or unnatural event beyond the property owner's control (i.e. disruption of
electrical service due to storm, motor vehicle accident, and the like), no fee shall be
imposed at the direction of the appropriate Chief.
Sec. 8-4-11. Permit Revocation. The appropriate Chief may revoke the permit for any
Alarm System in the event that:
(a) Payment of any fee therefore is not made within sixty (60) days after the due date
therefore;
(b) Any deficiency therein reported to the owner is not corrected within a reasonable
time;
(c) Such Alarm System persistently causes an excessive number of non-emergency
alarms or otherwise persistently interferes with the orderly operation of the Center;
(d) The owner refuses reasonable access for inspection of such System;
(e) Such System is placed in operation without final approval by the appropriate Chief, or
(f) Any date provided in the application for such System is found to have been
falsified willfully or through gross negligence of the applicant. Such revocation shall not
be effective until the appropriate Chief has given the permit holder or his designated
agent actual notice of the reason therefore and reasonable opportunity to justify the same.
Sec. 8-4-12. Appeal. In the event of the refusal to issue or the revocation of any permit
hereunder, the permit holder may appeal to the Town Manager within twelve (12)
business days after actual notice of such decision is given to the permit holder or his
designated agent. The Town Manager may affirm, modify or rescind such decision, and
his action thereon shall be final and conclusive without right of further appeal.
Sec. 8-4-13. Civil Violation. In addition to the foregoing grounds for revocation of a
permit hereunder, the following events shall each constitute a civil violation, punishable
in proceedings before the District Court by a fine not exceeding $300.00.
(a) The installing, operation, maintenance, alteration or replacement of an Alarm System
in the absence of an effective permit therefore signed by the Chief of the appropriate
Department;
(b) The falsification of any data provided in an application for an Alarm System, done
willfully or through gross negligence;
(c) The release of any information concerning any Alarm System to one not concerned
with the maintenance or operation thereof or with the enforcement of this ordinance.
CHAPTER 9
FIREARMS
Article I. Discharge of Firearms.
[Adopted eff. 3/9/64; R.S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151. Revised eff. 8/7/91.]
Sec. 9-1-1. Prohibition of Discharge of Firearms. The discharge of firearms, air
rifles or pistols is prohibited in all areas of Town excepting the salt marshes, property
owned by the Spurwink Rod and Gun Club, and property under federal jurisdiction, and
excepting the use of such weapons at military exercises or in the lawful defense of person,
family or property of any individual or entity. Use of rifles except on target ranges
authorized by the Police Department is prohibited within all areas of the Town.
Sec. 9-1-2. Killing Wildlife Damaging Crops. No person shall discharge
firearms at any deer, raccoons, skunks, woodchucks or other wild animals doing damage
to any orchards or growing crops except in accordance with applicable state statutes. Such
person shall notify the Police Department, prior to commencing such activity, of the time
and location where such activity is proposed and shall also notify the Police Department
immediately upon the completion of each such activity, unless other arrangements are made
with the Police Chief. Such person shall exhibit to the Police Department once during its
effective period any written permission required by state statute or regulation for such
activity. The Police Department may impose such reasonable restrictions upon the time or
location of said activities, and the type of firearms to be used, as may be necessary to
protect the public health and safety; it shall not prevent any such activity unless it has
evidence that the person proposing the same is not competent to do so safely, and it shall
not require that any police officer observe or take part in such activities. [Added, eff.
12/22/76.]
Sec. 9-1-3. Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating Sec. 9-1-1 or Sec. 9-1-2
shall be subject to a fine for each such violation in an amount not to exceed $500.00, to be
recovered for use of the Town by complaint to the District Court. [Revised, eff. 12/22/76.]
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 1 1
1 COASTAL WATERS and HARBOR ORDINANCE
2
3 (Effective May 8, 2019)
4
5 CHAPTER 10
6
7 ARTICLE I
8 General
9 Provisions
10
11 Sec. 10-1-1. Purpose. This Ordinance is to establish regulations for marine activities
12 within the harbors, waterways and tidal waters of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine to
13 ensure safety to persons and property, to promote availability and use of a valuable public
14 resource and to create a fair and efficient framework for the administration of that
15 resource. This Ordinance shall be subordinate to existing Federal and State Laws
16 governing the same matters and is not intended to preempt other valid laws.
17
18 Sec. 10-1-2. Harbor Limits.
19
20 (a) Seal Cove Harbor Limits. The harbor limits of Seal Cove, sometimes referred to
21 as Kettle Cove, shall include the area of water northerly of the straight line between
22 McKenney Point and East Point, so called, on Richmond Island. The Inner Harbor at Seal
23 Cove (northerly of a line from McKenney Point to can buoy 'C-1' near the harbor
24 entrance and easterly of a straight line from such can buoy through Crow Rock, so called,
25 to the shore) is hereby designated as a mooring area.
26
27 (b) Maiden Cove Harbor Limits. The harbor limits of Maiden Cove shall include
28 the area of water located southwesterly of a straight line running approximately 345
29 magnetic from the point forming the easterly end of Maiden Cove and located
30 southeasterly of the rocks off the cliff at the westerly end of Maiden Cove. The waters
31 within such harbor limits, excepting the swimming area utilized by the Cape Cottage
32 Beach Association, are hereby designated as a mooring area.
33
34 (c) Additional Harbors. In addition to the two major harbors listed above,
35 numerous other coves and inlets are used for mooring and anchorage of vessels. This
36 Ordinance shall also apply to these coves and inlets although no harbor limits have been
3378 established.
39
40
41 ARTICLE II
42 Sec. 10-2-1. Definitions.
43 (a) Anchorage: Shall mean an area of a harbor set aside for the temporary anchoring of
44 vessels.
45
46 (b) Auxiliary: Shall mean any vessel having both sails and either an inboard or outboard
47 motor and which may be propelled by its sails or by its motor, or both.
48
49 (c) Basin: Shall mean a naturally or artificially enclosed or nearly enclosed body of water
50 where small craft may lie (anchor).
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 2 2
1 (d) Beach: Shall mean a public or private beach area bordering the waters of Cape
2 Elizabeth.
3
4 (e) Commercial Vessel: Shall mean any vessel whose primary use is commercial marine
5 activities such as but not limited to fishing, aquaculture, or supportive services.
6
7 (f) Distress: Shall mean a state of disability or a present or obviously imminent danger,
8 which, if unduly prolonged, could endanger life or property.
9
10 (g) Emergency: Shall mean a state of imminent or proximate danger to life or property in
11 which time is of the essence.
12
13 (h) Fairway: Shall mean a navigable channel in a harbor.
14
15 (i) Float: Shall mean any floating structure normally used as a point of transfer for
16 passengers and goods and/or for mooring purposes.
17
18 (j) Houseboat: Shall mean a raft, hull, barge, or vessel designed primarily to be used as
19 living quarters, and providing living, sleeping, cooking, and sanitary facilities, whether
20 temporarily or permanently.
21
22 (k) Mooring: Shall mean any appliance used by a vessel for permanent anchoring
23 purposes and which appliance is not carried aboard such vessel when underway as
24 regular equipment.
25
26 (l) Non-Resident: Shall mean a person who does not fall within the definition of
27 Resident.
28
29 (m) Out Haul: Shall mean a mooring system for a dinghy or boat that allows the dinghy
30 or boat to be hauled to and from a mooring block or anchor to the shore by a system of
31 lines secured at the shore.
32
33 (n) Resident: Shall mean any person whose principal residence is in the Town of Cape
34 Elizabeth; or who owns property and uses that property as a residence for at least 60 days a
35 year. Proof of residency may be established through voter registration, payment of real estate
36 taxes or rental receipts for residential property within the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
37
38 (o) Riparian Owner: Shall mean an owner of a parcel of land located in the Town of
39 Cape Elizabeth which borders upon a harbor, cove or inlet commonly used for mooring
40 or anchorage of vessels.
41
42 (p) Shore: Shall mean that part of the land in immediate contact with a body of water,
43 including the area between the high and low water lines.
44
45 (q) Shall and May: 'Shall" is mandatory, 'May' is
46 permissive.
47
48 (r) State: Shall mean the State of Maine.
49
50 (s) Stray Vessel: Shall mean (1) an abandoned vessel, (2) a vessel the owner of which is
51 unknown, or (3) a vessel underway without a competent person in command.
52
53 (t) To Anchor: Shall mean to secure a vessel to the bottom within a body of water by
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 3 3
1 dropping an anchor(s) or other ground tackle, which is carried aboard a vessel when
2 underway as regular equipment.
3
4 (u) Transient vessel: Shall mean a vessel using a mooring for which someone else holds
5 the permit and seeking a temporary harbor of refuge, or a vessel dropping anchor for a
6 temporary period not to exceed 14 days.
7
8 (v) Underway: Shall mean the condition of a vessel not at anchor, without moorings, and
9 not made fast to the shore nor aground.
10
11 (w) Vessel: Shall mean a floating object, boat or craft of any size designed for self12
propelled travel on water.
13
14 (x) Wash: Shall mean a surge of water, wave.
15
16 (y) Waterway: Shall mean any water area providing access from one place to another,
17 principally a water area providing a regular route for water traffic.
18
19
20 ARTICLE III
21 Harbor Master
22
23 Sec. 10-3-1. Harbor Master Appointment. A Harbor Master for the Town of
24 Cape Elizabeth shall be appointed and may be removed by the Chief of Police subject to
25 the approval of the Town Manager and shall be subject to all the provisions of Title
26 38, Maine Revised Statutes Annotated Section 1 et seq. as amended.
27
28 In addition, the Harbor Master for the Town of Cape Elizabeth shall also be subject to the
29 following local provisions:
30
31 Sec. 10-3-2. Maritime Agent. The Harbor Master is to be considered the maritime
32 agent of the Cape Elizabeth Town Council and shall have full authority for the
33 interpretation and enforcement of all regulations affecting the harbors, waterways and
34 tidal waters of the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
35
36 Sec. 10-3-3. Appeals. The Town Manager shall serve as the appeal authority for any
37 person (s) aggrieved by any decision, act or failure to act by the Harbor Master. Any
38 party aggrieved by a decision of the Town Manager may seek review of such decision
39 pursuant to Rule 80 of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, as may be amended.
40
41 Sec. 10-3-4. Responsibility for Equipment. The Harbor Master shall be the
42 municipal overseer of all town owned marine oriented equipment not specifically
43 included within the purview of any other Town Board or Department.
44
45 Sec. 10-3-5. Mooring Records. The Harbor Master shall maintain copies of all mooring
46 records as well as any waiting list for mooring location assignment.
47
48
49 ARTICLE IV
50 Anchoring of Vessels
51
52 Sec. 10-4-1. Anchoring Only With Permission. There shall be no anchoring of
53 vessels in the designated mooring areas of the Town of Cape Elizabeth without the
54 permission of the Harbor Master except under emergency conditions
55
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 4 4
1 Sec. 10-4-2 Shifting Berths of Anchored Vessels. Anchoring will be permitted
2 within all other tidal waters of the Town of Cape Elizabeth at the discretion of the vessel’s
3 operator. Anchored vessels may be required to shift their berth at the direction of the
4 Harbor Master if they are the subject of noise or other complaints, or for the safety of the
5 vessel or the safety of others. Vessels anchoring outside mooring areas for more than 72
6 hours shall notify the Harbor Master.
7
8 Sec. 10-4-3 Anchored Vessels to Abide by Regulations. All anchored vessels
9 shall abide by all Federal Regulations for anchored vessels including but not limited to
10 Day Signals and/or lights for signals, etc.
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 5 5
1 ARTICLE V
2 Moorings
3
4 Sec. 10-5-1. Mooring Location Assignments. All mooring locations shall be assigned
5 by the Harbor Master. No mooring shall be placed without a written permit from the
6 Harbor Master authorizing placement of a mooring at a specific location. Moorings shall
7 be placed within thirty (30) days of obtaining a permit or July first (1) of the year the
8 permit is obtained, whichever is later.
9
10 Sec. 10-5-2. Mooring Permit. All permits issued hereunder shall be for a period of one
11 (1) year, and shall be subject to renewal annually. Permit holders who elect not to renew
12 must notify the Harbor Master and remove their mooring. The mooring permit of any
13 person who violates any of the provisions of these regulations may be revoked by written
14 notice to that effect signed by the Harbor Master.
15
16 Sec. 10-5-3. Moorings to be Registered and Numbered. Moorings shall be
17 registered and numbered at all times. Mooring numbers shall be issued by the Harbor
18 Master at the time a mooring permit is issued.
19
20 Sec. 10-5-4. Mooring Locations Subject to Change. All moorings shall be subject
21 to change in location at the owner's expense if such change is deemed by the Harbor
22 Master to be in the best interest of the Town.
23
24 Sec. 10-5-5. Harbor Master Empowered to Remove Moorings. If a mooring
25 owner refuses to move his mooring after receiving written notice to do so, the Harbor
26 Master is authorized, after a fourteen (14) day waiting period to remove the mooring
27 float, mark the mooring chain with an identifying tag and drop the chain to the bottom.
28 If the Harbor Master determines that the anchor and chain could pose a fouling hazard
29 to anchoring vessels or there is other reason for removal, the mooring gear may be pulled
30 and the permit holder billed for the cost. The Harbor Master shall store any removed
31 mooring gear up to six (6) months. During that period of time, the owner may reclaim the
32 equipment after payment of any expenses or fines as provided under Title 38 M.R.S.A. §4.
33
34 Sec. 10-5-6. Location and Waiting Lists. Within the limitations of Sections 3 and 6
35 of Title 38, the Harbor Master shall assign mooring locations and maintain a waiting list
36 for mooring locations.
37
38 Sec. 10-5-7. Standards. All moorings shall be of sufficient size and weight with chain
39 and rope in sound condition to properly secure the moored vessel and the float attached to
40 the mooring line shall be of sufficient size and buoyancy to remain afloat when not
41 attached to the vessel.
42
43 Moorings shall comply with the Mooring Standards as set by the Harbor Master. The
44 adequacy of each mooring set remains the responsibility of the individual boat owner.
45 Standards set by the Town are minimum standards.
46
47 Sec. 10-5-8. Fees. The Town Council shall establish mooring permit fees.
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 6 6
1 Sec. 10-5-9. Renewals and Abandoned Moorings. Any mooring not used by the
2 vessel(s) named on the permit application for at least seven (7) days during the previous year
3 may be refused a permit renewal if its presence is preventing applications for that mooring area
4 from being approved or requiring new mooring installations to be placed in more exposed
5 locations. All mooring gear is to be removed by the owner within two (2) weeks of permit
6 expiration. Moorings without current permits may be removed by the Harbor Master as
7 provided in Sec.10-5-5 of this Ordinance.
8
9 Sec. 10-5-10. Inspection. All moorings shall be inspected according to a schedule and
10 procedures to be posted by the Harbor Master. Inspection shall be performed only by
11 individuals or organizations authorized by the Harbor Master and written reports of all
12 inspections must be submitted to the Harbor Master. The mooring permit holder shall be
13 responsible for all costs associated with mooring inspections.
14
15 Sec. 10-5-11. Buoys. Mooring marker buoys shall be visible at all tides. Buoys shall be white
16 with a blue stripe.
17
18 Sec. 10-5-12. Town Moorings. Any moorings placed by the Town of Cape Elizabeth in any
19 harbor under the jurisdiction of the Town shall not be used for a period longer than twelve (12)
20 hours by any vessel, except by permission of the Harbor Master.
21
22 Sec. 10-5-13. Subletting of Mooring Space. The owner of any vessel having mooring space
23 shall not sublet said mooring or mooring space to another user or vessel owner; however,
24 another vessel owner may use the mooring, provided the original owner pays the fee or fees
25 and has received permission from the Harbor Master to moor such vessel.
26
27 Sec. 10-5-14. Dinghies. Dinghies may not be tied astern of moored vessels for more than
28 24 hours.
29
30 Sec. 10-5-15. Mooring Limitations. Lobster crate or lobster car moorings are not to be used
31 for vessel moorings.
32
33 Sec. 15-5-16. Houseboat. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary,
34 houseboats, not including transient vessels as defined herein, are prohibited from mooring or
35 anchoring in the anchorage except at marinas that provide the following:
36
37 (1)A permanent float, dock, or slip from which the houseboat may be directly boarded from
38 land;
39
40 (2) Connection to a public water supply by means of an individual anti-backflow valve;
41
42 (3) A sewer connection to a public sewage system;
43
44 (4) A year-round, all weather supply of electricity;
45
46 (5) Parking as required by the codes and ordinances of the municipality where the marina is
47 located; and
48
49 (6) Compliance with the applicable land use codes.
50
51 Sec. 10-5-17. Out Haul. Any vessel that is less than fourteen feet in length may be out hauled
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 7 7
1 provided the Out Haul does not hinder navigation. All Out Hauls must obtain a permit from the
2 Harbor Master. The Harbor Master shall review the permit for compliance with the Out Haul
43 Standards.
5
6
7 ARTICLE VI
8 Channels
9
10 Sec. 10-6-1. Channel Designations and Restrictions. The Town Council may from
11 time to time establish channels for the passage of vessels in the harbors and waterways of the
12 Town after due consideration of the recommendations of the Harbor Master. There shall be no
13 anchoring or mooring in any channels designated as such.
14
15 Sec. 10-6-2. Interference with Channel Markers. Whoever moors a vessel, boat, raft or
16 scow to any buoy or beacon placed by the Town of Cape Elizabeth in any waters subject to
17 its jurisdiction to define the channels for vessels, or in any manner make the same fast thereto,
18 or willfully destroys any such buoy or beacon shall be in violation of this Ordinance and liable
19 upon complaint of the Harbor Master as provided in Sec. 10-8-1 of this Ordinance.
20
21 Sec. 10-6-3. Obstruction of Channels and Removal of Sunken Vessels.
22
23 (a) It shall be unlawful to tie up or anchor a vessel in a Cape Elizabeth harbor in such a manner
24 as to obstruct the fairways, launch ramps or channels or to prevent or obstruct the passage of
25 other vessels; or to voluntarily or carelessly sink or allow to be sunk any vessel in any
26 channel, fairway, berthing space; or to float loose timbers, debris, logs or piles in any channel,
27 fairway or berthing space in such manner as to impede navigation or cause damage to vessels
28 therein. It is understood that wrecked or sunken vessels within a harbor are subject to the
29 published rules and regulations of the United States Coast Guard and any applicable state law,
30 rules or regulations.
31
32 (b) Whenever the navigation of any waters within a Cape Elizabeth harbor or maritime
33 facility, including anchorages and berths herein, shall be obstructed or endangered by any sunken
34 vessel or other obstruction or danger which has existed for a period of more than ten (10) days,
35 the vessel or obstruction shall be subject to removal, sale or other disposition. The owner(s) of
36 such vessel or other property causing said obstruction or danger shall be liable to the Town of
37 Cape Elizabeth for all costs incident to said removal and disposition, and the Town of Cape
38 Elizabeth, its employees, agents and officers shall not be liable for damages of any nature
39 whatsoever originating out of or in any way connected with removal, sale or disposition of such
4401 vessel or other property.
42
43
44 ARTICLE VII
45 General Boating and Traffic Control Regulations
46
47 Sec. 10-7-1. Traffic Control Authority. The Harbor Master shall have the authority to
48 control water borne traffic in any portion of the waters of a harbor or maritime facility under the
49 Town's jurisdiction by use of authorized State regulatory markers, signals, orders or directions
50 at any time preceding, during and after any race, regattas, parade or other special event held in
51 any portion of the waters of a harbor or maritime facility or at any time when the Harbor Master
52 deems it necessary in the interest of safety of persons and vessels or other property, and it shall
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 8 8
1 be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any authorized State
2 regulatory marker utilized by the Harbor Master, or with any signal, orders or directions of the
3 Harbor Master.
4
5 Sec. 10-7-2. Basic Speed Law. The operation of any vessel within the harbor area in
6 excess of posted speed limits or, in the absence of such limits, in a manner to create a wash
7 which endangers persons or property, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance; provided
8 that special written permission may be granted to conduct and engage in water sports and
9 regattas in specific designated areas.
10
11 Sec. 10-7-3. Discharge of Refuse and Sewage. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to
12 discharge into the waters of the harbor any sewage, refuse, garbage or waste matter, petroleum
13 or petroleum matter, paint, varnish, timber or any other foreign matter, including dead animals,
14 fish and bait.
15
16 Sec. 10-7-4. Responsibility for Sanitation of Facilities. The owner, captain, lessee,
17 agent, manager or person in charge of a vessel, facility or water area adjacent to or within a Cape
18 Elizabeth harbor shall, at all times, maintain the premises under their charge in a clean, sanitary
19 condition, free from malodorous materials and accumulations of garbage, refuse, debris and
20 other waste materials. Should the Harbor Master find that any vessel, facility or water area is
21 not so maintained, the Harbor Master shall, in writing, notify said
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 9 9
1 owner, captain, lessee, agent, manager or other person in charge of said vessel, facility or
2 area to immediately commence and diligently prosecute to completion of the necessary
3 correction of the unsanitary condition to the satisfaction of the Harbor Master. Failure to
4 do so with reasonable dispatch shall be a violation of this Article, and the Harbor Master
5 may then cause the condition to be corrected and charged to said owner, captain, lessee,
6 agent, manager or person in charge.
7
8 Sec. 10-7-5. Buoys. No person shall place buoys of any type, other than lobster pot
9 buoys and marker buoys, within the boundaries of the mooring areas established by these
10 regulations without written permission of the Harbor Master.
11
12 Sec. 10-7-6. Water Skiing. There shall be no water skiing within established mooring
13 areas.
14
15 Sec. 10-7-7. Launch Ramps. Motor vehicles are not to be left unattended on or near
16 launch ramps. All motor vehicles are to be parked only in designated areas and motor
17 vehicle operators are to comply with all parking regulations as posted by the Town of
18 Cape Elizabeth or the State of Maine.
19
20 Sec. 10-7-8. Liability.
21
22 (a) Vessel Owner: Any person using the facilities within the limit of a harbor or
23 maritime facility shall assume all risk of damage or loss to his property and the Town of
24 Cape Elizabeth assumes no risk on account of fire, theft, Act of God or damages of any
25 kind to vessels within harbors or maritime facility.
26
27 (b) Secure Berthing and Anchoring of Vessels. The owner of any vessel moored
28 or anchored within Cape Elizabeth harbors or maritime facilities shall be responsible
29 for causing such vessel to be tied and secured or anchored with proper care and
30 equipment and in such manner as may be required to prevent breakaway and resulting
31 damage, and shall, thereafter, provide for periodic inspection maintenance,
32 replacement and adjustment of anchor, mooring or tie lines at reasonable intervals.
33
34 Sec. 10-7-9. Unseaworthy Vessels Prohibited in Harbor. A person shall not moor
35 or permit to be moored, in any harbor, a vessel of any kind whatsoever which is
36 unseaworthy or in a badly deteriorated condition or which is likely to sink or to damage
37 docks, wharves, floats or other vessels or which may become a menace to navigation,
38 except in cases of emergency.
39
40 Sec. 10-7-10. Correcting an Unsafe Berthing. If any vessel shall be found, in the
41 judgment of the Harbor Master, to be anchored or moored with any harbor or maritime
42 facility in an unsafe or dangerous manner, or in such a way as to create a hazard to other
43 vessels, persons or property, the Harbor Master shall order and direct necessary measures
44 to eliminate such unsafe or dangerous condition. Primary responsibility for compliance
45 with such orders and directions shall rest with the owner of the improperly anchored or
46 moored vessel or his authorized agent; in the absence of such owner or agent, said
47 responsibility shall rest with the authorized operator of the facility at which the vessel is
48 anchored or moored. In an emergency situation and in the absence of any such
49 responsible person, the Harbor Master shall forthwith board such vessel and cause the
50 improper situation to be corrected, and the owner of the vessel shall be liable for any
51 costs incurred by the Town of Cape Elizabeth in effecting such correction.
Chapter 10 – Coastal Waters and Harbor O rdinance - Page 10 10
1 Sec. 10-7-11. Removal and Custody of Illegally Berthed or Abandoned Vessels.
2 If any unattended vessel shall be found to be anchored or moored illegally within a
3 harbor or maritime facility, or if the Harbor Master has reasonable grounds to believe
4 that a vessel has been abandoned within a Cape Elizabeth harbor or maritime
5 facility, the Harbor Master may assume custody of such vessel and cause it to be removed
6 and held or placed in storage. The Town of Cape Elizabeth or its officials shall not be
7 held liable for any damage or loss to such vessel or its contents nor liable to its owner
8 before or after assuming custody. Vessels so taken into custody shall be released to the
9 owner by the Town Manager only after satisfactory proof of ownership has been
10 presented and full reimbursement made to the Town for all costs incident to
11 recovery, movement and storage.
12
13 Sec. 10-7-12. Damage to Harbor or Other Property. It shall be unlawful to
14 willfully or carelessly destroy, damage, disturb or interfere with any public or private
15 property in the harbor area.
16
17 Sec. 10-7-13. Tampering With or Boarding Vessels Without Permission. It shall
18 be a violation of this Ordinance for any person willfully to board, break in, enter,
19 damage, move or tamper with any vessel or part thereof located within the harbor
20 unless authorized by the rightful owner of such vessel. Violation of this provision
21 shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by the penalties hereinabove provided
22 for violations of this Ordinance and to additional penalties not to exceed the
23 aggregate
24 $1,000 and six months imprisonment for each offense. Any person violating this
25 provision shall, in addition, be responsible to the rightful owner of any such vessel for
26 any damages caused by such violation and to the reasonable costs incurred as a result
27 thereof including any attorney's fees.
28
29 Sec. 10-7-14. Obstruction of facilities. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for
30 any person to willfully prevent any other person from the use and enjoyment of the
3312 harbor facilities.
33
34
35 ARTICLE VIII
36 Enforcement and Invalidity
37
38 Sec. 10-8-1. Enforcement. Except as enumerated elsewhere in this Ordinance or as
39 stated by the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated, violation of this Ordinance shall be
40 punishable as follows:
41
42 a) Any person who shall violate any provision of this Ordinance shall be punished upon
43 conviction, by a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25.00) and not more than one hundred
44 ($100.00) dollars. All fines shall be paid to the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
45
46 b) Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Any
47 law enforcement officer vested with the authority to carry a weapon and make arrests
48 shall have the authority to enforce this Ordinance.
49
50 Sec. 10-8-2. Invalidity Provisions. If any provision of this Ordinance is held invalid or
51 inoperative, the remainder shall continue in full force and affect as though such invalid or
52 inoperative provisions had not been made.
1
CHAPTER 11
HEALTH and SANITATION
Article I. Foods and Food Service Establishments 11-1
Article II. Solid Waste Disposal Ordinance 11-10
Article III. Rodent and Vermin Control 11-16
Article IV. Single Use Carryout Bags 11-20
Article 1. Food and Food Service Establishments.
[Adopted eff. 1/4/67 under R. S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151; amended eff. 1/10/74,
11/12/76 and 1/8/86, amend eff.12/6/2017.]
Sec. 11-1-1. Purpose 11-1
Sec. 11-1-2. Definitions 11-1
Sec. 11-1-3. Permit Required 11-2
Sec. 11-1-4. Application for Permit 11-2
Sec. 11-1-5. Requirements for Establishments 11-3
Sec. 11-1-6. Temporary Food Service Establishment 11-5
Sec. 11-1-7. Inspection of Food Establishments 11-6
Sec. 11-1-8. Orders to Correct 11-6
Sec. 11-1-9. Right of Entry 11-6
Sec. 11-1-10. Rules and Regulations 11-6
Sec. 11-1.11. Disposal of Unwholesome, Unsanitary or Unfit Food 11-7
Sec. 11-1-12. Sampling 11-7
Sec. 11-1-13. Approved Sources 11-7
Sec. 11-1-14. Uninspected Meat Prohibited 11-7
Sec. 11-1-15. Records and Reports 11-7
Sec. 11-1-16. Plans and Specifications 11-7
Sec 11-1-17. Penalty 11-8
Sec. 11-1-18. Appeal 11-8
Sec. 11-1-19. Applicability 11-8
Sec. 11-1-1. Purpose.
This Article shall govern the registration and requirements
of food service establishments, and the manufacture, sale, storage, delivery and
distribution of food and food stuffs in the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
Sec. 11-1-2. Definitions.
(a) "Food” shall include all substances, used for food or drink, and all substances used as
components of any article of food or drink, for human consumption.
2
(b) "Food establishment" shall mean any permanent or temporary public or private place
within the Town at which food or drink, other than live shellfish, raw vegetables or fruit
is processed, prepared, packaged, mixed, cooked, served, sold in an unpackaged
condition, or offered for direct or ultimate distribution to and consumption by the public
including butcher shops or departments, home bakeries, restaurants, dining rooms, lunch
rooms or counters, soda fountains, diners, boarding house food services, church, school,
or other municipal kitchens, cafeteria and facilities, and all areas and facilities used in
conjunction therewith.
(c) “Food handler” shall mean any person who is employed in a food establishment or
who handles food during storage, manufacture, preparation, handling, sale or serving in
such a manner that some portion of his clothes or body may come in contact with such
food or with utensils used in connection therewith.
(d) “Food packager” shall mean any person located within the Town who places meat,
eggs, bakery products, or other food in packaging materials for the purpose of retail sale
of those products.
(e) “Health Officer” shall mean the Town health officer, or his/her duly authorized
representative.
(f) “Perishable food” is food that is not preserved in a manner so as to prevent the quality
of the food from being adversely affected if held longer than 7 days under normal
shipping and storage conditions.
(g) “Person” shall mean human being as well as a firm, a corporation, or an association.
(h) “Polystyrene foam” shall mean blown polystyrene and expanded and extruded foams
(sometimes incorrectly called Styrofoam, a Dow Chemical Company trademarked form
of polystyrene foam insulation) that are thermoplastic petrochemical materials utilizing a
styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited
to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene). Polystyrene foam is
generally used to make cups, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays and
egg cartons. For the purposes of this ordinance, the term “polystyrene” shall not include
clear polystyrene known as “oriented polystyrene”.
(i) “Prepared food” shall mean food or beverages which are served at the food vendor’s
location having been previously prepared elsewhere, or are prepared at the vendor’s
location by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, brewing, freezing or squeezing. Prepared
food does not mean raw uncooked meat or eggs. Prepared food may be eaten either on or
off premises.
(j) “Retail vendor” shall mean any person, restaurant, store, shop, sales outlet or other
establishment including, without limitation, a grocery store, convenience store or
delicatessen, located within the Town that offers prepared food for retail sale.
3
(k) “Temporary food service establishment” shall be any food service establishment
which operates for a temporary period of time, not to exceed two (2) weeks, in
connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or similar transitory gathering.
(l) “Utensils” shall include all kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers, and
other kinds of utensils and equipment with which food comes in contact during
preparation, processing, storage, handling or sale.
Sec. 11-1-3. Permit Required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the
business of conducting a food establishment in the Town of Cape Elizabeth without first
obtaining a permit therefor issued upon application to the health officer and upon his
approval of plans for such establishment, the character and qualifications of the applicant
and inspection of the location of said establishment. The fee for permanent, temporary or
seasonal food service establishments shall be as determined by the Town Council from
time to time. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the establishment for
which issued, visible to the public on an inside wall; the permits is the property of the
Town and shall at all times be kept in a clean condition, protected against mutilation, soil
or damage. Each permit shall be for the person and location specified therein and shall
not be transferable to any other person or location. Upon the transfer of a food service
establishment, the transferee shall submit new application to the health officer and shall
not commence operations until a new permit is issued therefor.
Sec. 11-1-4. Application for Permit.
Application forms shall be furnished by the health officer upon which shall be supplied
the following information.
(a) The name of the person, firm or corporation.
(b) The residence of such applicant or of each of the individual members of
such firm and its principal place of business.
(c) The kind of food establishment and the nature of the undertaking to be
performed or carried on.
(d) The street address, if any, where such food establishment is to be located.
(e) New applicants shall be of reputable character regarding which two
references shall be provided and such character shall be established to the satisfaction of
the health officer.
(f) Any other relevant information required by the health officer in respect to
the undertaking proposed to be conducted, the facilities and equipment of the
establishment and the qualification of the applicant.
Sec. 11-1-5. Requirements for Establishments.
The following basic requirements shall
apply to all food establishments, provided that the health officer may establish from time
to time rules and regulations which amplify and augment these requirements with respect
4
to sanitation, cleanliness and adequacy of facilities, equipment and structure for particular
types of food establishments:
(a) Floors. Floors shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned, equipped
with proper drainage when necessary, and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(b) Walls and Ceilings. Walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair.
All walls and ceilings of areas in which food is stored shall have a smooth, washable,
light-colored surface and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(c) Doors and Windows. When flies are prevalent, all openings into the outer air
shall be effectively screened, and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective means
are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. The presence of flies or flying insects within
the structure shall be presumptive evidence of failure to comply with this section.
(d) Lighting. In all areas in which food is prepared, stored, handled, served, or
sold, and in all areas in which food utensils are washed, rinsed or dried, lighting shall be
adequate for working purposes and for effective and thorough cleaning.
1. The source of light (bulb, tube, or others) in any area shall be protected by
fixtures which will prevent any contamination of food should the source of light
shatter.
2. Adequate lighting for preparation and handling of food and for cleaning
utensils shall consist of an intensity of not less than 20 foot candles of light as
measured by an appropriate device. (While light intensity is dependent on several
factors including wattage, reflectors, distance, etc., Generally a double 4-foot tube
per 64 sq. ft. is deemed adequate.
(e) Ventilation. All areas in which food is prepared, stored, handled, served or
sold, or in which utensils are washed shall be well ventilated.
(f) Toilet Facilities. Toilet and lavatory facilities for employees shall be provided
on the premises. Food establishments with a seating capacity of 30 or more shall provide
separate lavatories and toilets for males and females conveniently located for patrons. All
lavatories and toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, well lighted,
and with self-closing doors. Toilet facilities shall not open directly into any room in
which food is being prepared, stored, handled, served or processed, or in which utensils
are being washed.
(g) Water Supply. Running water under pressure shall be readily accessible to all
areas in which food is prepared or utensils washed. The water supply shall be adequate
and of a safe, sanitary quality approved by the health officer.
(h) Lavatory Facilities. Adequate and convenient hand washing facilities shall be
provided, including hot and cold running water, soap and approved sanitary tissues or air
drier. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after
5
using the toilet without first washing hands. Soiled linens, aprons, etc., used in
preparation, storage, service of food, shall be kept in separate, closed, ventilated
containers.
(i) Utensils. All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases or windows,
work surface, counters, shelves, refrigerating equipment, sinks, stoves, hood, and other
equipment or utensils used for the transportation, storage or display of food in connection
with the operation of any food establishment shall be so constructed as to be easily
cleaned and shall be kept clean and in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with
cadmium or lead or other poisonous substances shall not be used, except that lead solder
may be used for jointing. Approved single-service utensils may be substituted for
multiuse utensils; provided that such single-service utensils shall be used only once.
(j) Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils. Utensils and all show and
display cases or windows, work services, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating
equipment, stoves, sinks, hoods and other equipment for the transportation of food used
in connection with the operation of any food establishment shall be kept clean and free
from chips, cracks, open seams, insects, and other contaminating material; furthermore
they shall be disinfected in such a manner as to be free from bacilli of the coliform group
and to have a total bacteria count of not more than 100 per utensil as determined by test
in a laboratory approved for the purpose. All cloths used shall be clean and sanitary.
Utensils used in the preparation, storage handling or sale of food shall be thoroughly
cleansed and effectively subject to an approved bactericidal process immediately
following the day's operation or more frequently if necessary. An adequate supply of hot
running water, maintained at not less than 1808 temperature and 15 pounds per inch
pressure shall be provided for the purpose of cleansing and disinfection. Drying cloths if
used shall be clean and sanitary and used for no other purposes. No article, polish, or
other substance containing any poisonous material shall be used for cleaning or polishing
any utensils or equipment. No substance containing any poisonous material shall be kept
or used as an insecticide or exterminator in any place where food is exposed during sale,
preparation, holding or dispensing or in such manner as to contaminate such food.
(k) Storage and handling of equipment. After bactericidal treatment, utensils
shall be stored in a clean, dry place, protected from dust or other contamination and shall
be handled in such manner as to prevent contamination. Single-service utensils shall be
purchased only in sanitary containers and stored in a clean, dry place until used, and shall
be handled in a sanitary manner.
(l) Disposal of Wastes. Pending ultimate removal, all garbage, trash and other
waste shall be kept in suitable receptacles and disposed of in an approved manner, in
accordance with the Housing Code.
(m) Refrigeration. All readily perishable food shall be kept properly refrigerated
at all times except when being processed, prepared or served.
(n) Wholesomeness of Food. All Food shall be clean, wholesome, free from
6
spoilage and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All food shall be from
approved sources.
(o) Preparation, storage, handling and sale of food. All food shall be prepared,
stored, handled, displayed or sold in such manner as to be protected from dust, fumes,
toxic substances, flies, vermin, depredation, and pollution by rodents, droplet infection,
overhead leakage, or other contamination. No live animals, or live fowl, except those
which are themselves intended for food, shall be kept or allowed in any food
establishment and such animals or poultry intended for slaughter shall be cared for in
areas entirely and completely segregated from any room where food is processed, stored
or prepared. All approved means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches, other
vermin, and rodents shall be used (see Housing Code).
(p) Employees. No food handlers in any food establishment shall engage in any
practice which is unsanitary or which tends to be detrimental to the cleanliness and
sanitation of the food establishment or the health of the patrons thereof, all persons
working in food establishments shall keep clean and shall wear clean outer garments.
Head bands, caps or hair nets or head cover shall be worn by food handlers working over
unprotected food and shall be kept reasonably clean and shall be used for no other
purpose than for use during food handling. Special types of clothing as are deemed
essential by the health officer may be required.
No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or who is a
carrier of such disease or any person with open lesion or sores shall work in a food
establishment except upon authorization of the health officer. The use of tobacco in any
room where food is cooked or prepared in prohibited.
(q) Premises. The premises, both inside and out, of all food establishments shall
be kept clean and free of litter and refuse. Stoves, counter tops, tables, bare floors,
lavatories, and other frequently used solid surfaces shall be cleaned daily under the
supervision of the manager or owner. Soap and hot water of not less than 1808 F. shall
be used for washing and there shall be a hot water rinse for all these surfaces.
(r) Polystyrene Foam. Polystyrene foam food containers shall be replaced with
reusable compostable, or recyclable alternatives, as specified below:
i. No retail vendor in the Town shall serve or sell prepared food in
polystyrene foam containers and no food packager shall package meat,
eggs, bakery products, or other food in polystyrene foam containers.
ii. No retail vendor in the town that sells tangible personal property at retail
shall sell polystyrene foam food or beverage containers.
iii. The Town shall not use polystyrene foam food or beverage containers at
any Town facility or Town sponsored event.
7
iv. No Town department or facility shall purchase or acquire polystyrene
foam food or beverage containers.
v. All parties who contract with the Town shall be prohibited from using
polystyrene foam food and beverage containers in Town facilities or on
Town funded projects within the Town.
vi. Exemptions from a prohibition in using polystyrene foam food containers
shall apply to:
a. The sale and packaging of perishable food for shipment, which
may include live shellfish, or raw meat, raw vegetables or raw
fruits;
b. A retail vendor or food packager existing in the Town of Cape
Elizabeth prior to December 6, 2017 that has received an
exemption from the Town Manager or his/her designee. Prior to
granting an exemption, the Town Manager or his/her designee
shall receive a written request for an exemption. The written
request shall state and the Town Manager or his/her designee shall
consider: (1) If polystyrene foam food containers were used by the
vendor or food packager prior to December 6, 2017; and (2) If the
use of polystyrene foam food container alternatives will constitute
an undue hardship. Undue hardship includes, but is not limited to
situations unique to the food vendor that are not generally
applicable to other retail vendors or food packagers in similar
circumstances. The Town Manager or his/her designee shall make
a written decision on each exemption request.
c. A federal, state or local government emergency when the
immediate preservation of public health, safety or welfare requires
the use of polystyrene foam.
Sec. 11-1-6. Temporary Food Service Establishment.
A temporary food service establishment shall comply with all of the provisions of this
Article with only such exceptions as the health officer may specifically authorize as not
threatening any imminent hazards to public health. Temporary food service
establishments which do not fully meet the requirements of this Article may be permitted
to operate when food preparation and service are restricted in whatever manner may be
prescribed by the health officer.
Sec. 11-1-7. Inspection of Food Establishments.
The health officer or his representative shall make or cause to be made periodic
unannounced inspections, surveys and investigations of food establishments at least every
8
six (6) months for year-round facilities and every 12 months for seasonal facilities in
order to determine that all food establishments are constructed, operated and maintained
in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and all rules and regulations
hereunder. Similar inspections, surveys and investigations shall be made upon written
complaint filed against any establishment. A copy of each inspection report shall be
issued to the permit holder or applicant, the Town Manager and any complainant.
Sec. 11-1-8. Orders to Correct.
If the health officer finds any violation of any provision of this ordinance, any regulations
issued hereunder, or any other applicable state or local requirement, he shall issue a
written order to the operator of such establishment noting such violations and directing
their correction within a reasonable period of time specified in the order, not exceeding
60 days. If the violation imperils the health of the public, he may immediately order the
establishment closed until its correction, for a period not exceeding 30 days. If any
violations are not corrected as so ordered, the health officer may issue such further order
as he deems required, including the closing to the establishment until correction, or he
may seek criminal prosecution therefor under Section 11-1-17.
Sec. 11-1-9. Right of Entry.
The health officer or his representative shall be accorded free access to all food
establishments, and to all premises he has reasonable cause to believe is being used as a
food establishment, at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspection and examination
of such places. It shall be unlawful to hinder, prevent, or refuse to permit any lawful
inspection or investigation authorized in pursuance of this ordinance.
Sec. 11-1-10. Rules and Regulations.
In order to prevent the consumption by humans of any food that is unwholesome,
unsanitary, or otherwise unfit, and in order to prevent such items from moving in
commerce or contaminating other products intended for consumption by humans, the
health officer in conjunction with the Town Manager may promulgate. from time to time,
rules and regulations pertaining to requirements of sanitation, cleanliness and adequacy
of facilities, equipment and construction of all food establishments. Such rules and
regulations shall also provide for the inspection of such food establishments by the health
officer in accordance with, but not in derogation of, the provisions of this ordinance.
Such rules and regulations shall establish criteria designed to protect the health and safety
of those who prepare, store, handle, or sell such food and shall provide for the
condemnation of unwholesome, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit food. The inspection of
any food by the health officer may result in approval, or order of condemnation of
unwholesome, unsanitary, or otherwise unfit food. The inspection of any food by the
health officer may result in approval, or order of disseminate, or an order to retain and
hold the same pending further investigation and examination by the Town Manager. It
shall be unlawful to dispose of any food ordered retained or held except by the express
instructions of the health officer.
9
Sec. 11-1-11. Disposal of Unwholesome, Unsanitary or Unfit Food.
The health officer may order condemned any food which is found to be unwholesome,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for purposes of human consumption or dangerous to the
public health. Such items shall be destroyed, in such a manner as to prevent consumption
by humans, under direct supervision of the health officer or his representative and in
accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the health officer. The health
officer may order to be retained under embargo and held apart from all other food and not
utilized for any purpose until such time as has been further inspected or examined and
either approved or ordered condemned.
Sec. 11-1-12. Sampling.
Samples of food in a quantity sufficient for analysis or examination may be taken by the
health officer, without cost, whenever necessary for the efficient conduct of inspections
and investigatory procedure. When samples are taken the investigators shall provide
some responsible person in the food establishment with a receipt therefor in which is
identified the type and quantity of the sample obtained.
Sec. 11-1-13. Approved Sources.
All milk and milk products, ice cream, clams, shellfish , meat and meat products shall be
from approved sources. All oysters and clams shall be from a source approved by the
State Department of Agriculture. Shippers from sources out of state shall be on the
approved list issued by the U.S.P.H.S. All shucked shellfish shall be kept until used in
containers in which they are placed at the shucking plant. Such containers shall have
thereon or attached thereto, a label, stamp or tag which shall show clearly and legibly the
source, shipper's name and address.
Sec. 11-1-14. Uninspected Meat Prohibited.
No meat or meat products shall be sold, let, transported or offered for sale unless such
meat or meat products shall bear in a clear and legible manner the "inspected and passed"
stamp or other recognized identification of the U.S. or State Department of Agriculture or
that of the Department of Health of the City of Portland.
Sec. 11-1-15. Records and Reports.
It shall be the duty of every person holding a permit to operate or maintain a food
establishment to furnish such records and information as the health officer shall deem
necessary to ascertain compliance with this ordinance.
10
Sec. 11-1-16. Plans and Specifications.
Whenever it is proposed to erect, alter or remodel any food establishment, it shall be
necessary to submit to the building inspector, and to the health officer, detailed plans and
specifications, for their approval as complying with this ordinance and any applicable
state or local health requirements, prior to starting construction. Such plans shall include
the location and layout of equipment and facilities; the layout and arrangement of all
areas in which operations are to be conducted; and the materials to be used in
construction of working areas and in utensils and equipment.
Sec. 11-1-17. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any order of the health officer, under
this ordinance or any rule or regulation promulgated under authority of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not less than $25.00 and not to exceed $100.00 or
be sentenced to six months imprisonment, or both, and each day's continuation of
violation hereunder shall be deemed a separate offense.
Sec. 11-1-18. Appeal.
Any person who is denied a permit under the provisions of this ordinance may file an
appeal within ten days from the date of such denial to the Town Manager, who may
permit exceptions to or variations from the specific terms of this ordinance in such cases
where the enforcement of this provision of the ordinance may result in undue hardship.
[Amended eff. 1/12/94]
Sec. 11-1-19. Applicability.
Wherever the requirements of this ordinance vary from those of any other lawfully
adopted regulation, the more restrictive provision or that imposing the higher standards
shall govern.
Sec. 11-1-20. Severability.
If any part or provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances are held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance including the application
of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby
and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, provisions of this ordinance are
severable.
11
Article II Solid Waste Disposal Ordinance
[Adopted eff. 9/18/68 under R.S. 1965, T. 30, Sec. 2151; repealed and replaced in its
entirety eff. 6/21/78; Revised eff. 1/8/86; 11/11/94; 12/10/03; 07/08/2009 and
12/15/2012]
Sec. 11-2-1 Purpose 11-8
Sec. 11-2-2. Definitions 11-9
Sec. 11-2-3. Designation 11-11
Sec. 11-2-4. Governing Body 11-11
Sec. 11-2-5. Restrictions 11-11
Sec. 11-2-6. Authorized Disposal Facility Users 11-12
Sec. 11-2-7. Resource Recovery 11-12
Sec. 11-2-8. Property Rights 11-13
Sec. 11-2-9. Permit Required 11-13
Sec. 11-2-10. Application for Refuse Hauler Permit 11-13
Sec. 11-2-11. Term of Permit 11-13
Sec. 11-2-12. Exemptions 11-13
Sec. 11-2-13. Violations 11-13
Sec. 11-2-14. Penalties 11-14
Sec.11-2-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health, safety and general well-being of the
citizens of the town; enhance and maintain the quality of the environment; conserve
natural resources; prevent water and air pollution; gain management control over solid
waste; and enable the reclamation of natural resources, including energy, from solid
wastes by providing for a comprehensive, rational and effective means of regulating the
disposal of solid waste generated in the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
Sec. 11-2-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section.
(a) Acceptable waste shall mean ordinary household, municipal, institutional,
commercial and industrial solid waste including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Garbage, trash, rubbish, paper and cardboard, plastics, refuse, beds,
mattresses, sofas, and automobile or small vehicle tires, to the extent that
ecomaine determines that the air emission criteria and standards
applicable to and at the ecomaine disposal facility are not violated; and
(2) Processible portions of commercial and industrial solid waste; and
12
(3) Wood and lumber, tree limbs, branches, ties, logs and trees, if no more
than four and one-half (4 1/2) feet long and twelve (12) inches in
diameter; leaves; twigs; grass; and plant cuttings; and
(4) Residential recyclable materials and commercial recyclable materials.
(b) Commercial recyclable materials means that portion of commercial solid waste
which consists of recyclable materials.
(c) Commercial hauler means any person or entity hauling or depositing material
under this article for a fee.
(d) Commercial solid waste means solid waste generated by a sole proprietorship,
partnership, professional association, corporation or other business organization,
provided that commercial solid waste shall not include residential solid waste, or
solid waste generated by a municipal or quasi-municipal organization or by a
state-approved school administration.
(e) Construction and demolition debris shall mean solid waste consisting of one or
more of the following materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair,
and demolition of structures:
(1) Inert fill;
(2) Land clearing debris;
(3) Asphalt;
(4) Masonry;
(5) Wall board;
(6) Pipes; and
(7) Metal conduits.
(f) Disposal shall mean the discharge, deposit, dumping or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land.
(g) ecomaine shall mean ecomaine, a non-capital stock, non-profit corporation
created pursuant to Title 30-A, Chapter 115 and Title 13-B, and Title 38, Section
1304-B(5) of the Maine Revised Statutes, or any successor thereto or assignee
thereof.
13
(h) ecomaine disposal facility shall mean any land or structure or combination of land
area and structures, including waste to energy plants, landfills, transfer stations
and recycling containers owned or operated by or under a contract with
ecomaine, and/or any other site designated by ecomaine for storing, salvaging,
reducing, incinerating, reclaiming or disposing of acceptable waste pursuant to the
waste handling agreement and amendments thereto entered into between the
Town of Cape Elizabeth and ecomaine.
(i) Hazardous waste shall mean a waste substance or material in any physical state,
designated as hazardous by the terms of the waste handling agreement between
the Town of Cape Elizabeth and ecomaine and/or as defined by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection.
(j) Municipal disposal facility shall mean any land or structure or combination of
land area and structures owned or operated by, or under contract with the Town of
Cape Elizabeth, including the Cape Elizabeth Recycling Center on Dennison
Drive in Cape Elizabeth and the Riverside Land Reclamation Facility in Portland,
Maine for disposal of acceptable waste.
(k) Person shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership, sole
proprietorship, professional association or other legal entity.
(l) Public solid waste disposal facility or disposal facility shall mean any land or
structure or combination of land area and structures, including transfer stations,
used for storing, salvaging, reducing, incinerating, reclaiming or disposing of
solid wastes; this term shall include the ecomaine disposal facility and municipal
disposal facility.
(m) Recyclable materials shall mean solid waste which has useful physical or
chemical properties after serving a specific purpose and can be reused or recycled
for the same or other purposes, including: leaf and yard wastes, wood wastes,
newspapers; magazines; paperboard; paper products; cardboard; plastics; metal;
foil; and glass.
(n) Residential recyclable materials means that portion of residential solid waste
which consists of recyclable materials.
(o) Residential solid waste means household waste, residential refuse, or solid waste
generated in a residence.
(p) Solid waste shall mean useless, unwanted or discarded solid material with
insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, including by way of example, and
not by limitation, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, and inert fill
material, but shall not include septage tank sludge nor agricultural or hazardous
wastes; it shall include acceptable waste, unacceptable waste and construction and
demolition debris as defined herein.
14
(q) Unacceptable waste shall mean solid waste which is not acceptable waste and
includes, but is not limited to, sewage and its derivatives, non-wood construction
and demolition debris, products containing asbestos, asphalt, junk vehicles,
special nuclear or by-product materials within the meaning of the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended, and hazardous waste, including hazardous chemicals.
Sec 11-2-3. Designation.
In accordance with the provisions of Title 38 M.R.S.A. §1304-B, the town hereby
designates ecomaine disposal facilities, the Cape Elizabeth Recycling Center on
Dennison Drive in Cape Elizabeth, Maine and the Riverside Land Reclamation Facility in
Portland, Maine as its public solid waste disposal facilities for the purposes cited in this
ordinance. The disposal by any person, including any person licensed as a waste hauler in
accordance with this ordinance, of any acceptable waste, except commercial recyclable
materials, generated within the municipality at any place other than at these designated
facilities is prohibited; provided, however, the owner of any lot, or any other person with
the permission of the lot owner, may dispose of inert substances such as earth, rocks,
concrete or similar material at such lot for fill purposes only, subject to state or local land
use regulations.
Sec 11-2-4. Governing body.
(a) The town council shall establish any necessary rules and regulations governing
the availability and use of its public solid waste disposal facilities on Dennison
Drive and for its recycling program.
(b) The operation of the municipal disposal facilities shall conform to all pertinent
regulations or directives of all local, county, state or federal agencies which may
have jurisdiction.
Sec. 11-2-5. Restrictions.
(a) No person shall permanently dispose of solid waste of any kind upon any land
within the corporate limits of the town unless such land has been designated by
the Town as a public solid waste disposal facility.
(b) Certain materials may be excluded by regulation from that solid waste which may
be deposited at a public solid waste disposal facility. These excluded materials
may include junk automobile bodies and similar bulky waste which may require
special processing prior to any disposal; burning materials or materials containing
hot or live coals; hazardous wastes; and other materials which the town deems
necessary to exclude. Hazardous wastes shall be handled in accordance with 38
M.R.S.A. § 1319-0.
15
(c) Except for licensed disposal of hazardous or infectious wastes, it shall be
unlawful for any person to burn or incinerate any solid waste within the Town
other than leaves or brush with a proper permit.
Sec 11-2-6. Authorized disposal facility users.
(a) The availability and use of municipal disposal facilities shall be limited to
residents of the Town and to those residents of any other municipality which may,
by mutual agreement, be authorized to use the designated municipal disposal
facilities. Non-resident Cape Elizabeth property owners and their agents may
dispose of materials generated within Cape Elizabeth in accordance with
procedures established by the Director of Public Works.
(b) As a means of user control, the attendant of the municipal disposal facilities or an
approved agent of the town shall:
(1) Authenticate a user’s right to use the facility;
(2) Affix permit stickers only onto vehicles registered in the Municipality.
(c) Any vehicle equipped with mechanized compaction equipment carrying items
destined for the compactor unit shall not be allowed to use the Recycling Center.
Vehicles not requiring a Commercial Driver's License (CDL), as defined by
M.R.S.A. shall be permitted access to, or use of the Recycling Center. Vehicles
requiring a Commercial Driver's License (CDL), as defined by M.R.S.A. shall not
be allowed access to the Recycling Center, unless otherwise approved by the
Director of Public Works.
(d) Any site clearing shall as much as possible result in all wood wastes and
stumps being recycled. No stumps shall be deposited at the municipal facility on
Dennison Drive in Cape Elizabeth.
Sec. 11-2-7. Resource recovery.
(a) The municipality may require solid waste and recyclable materials to be separated
into such categories as may be established by regulation or governed by signage
at municipal disposal facilities. Solid waste and recyclable materials may be
disposed of only in such manner and at such sites and locations as designated.
(b) No recyclable materials may be placed in the hopper at the transfer station at the
Cape Elizabeth Recycling Center.
16
Sec. 11-2-8. Property rights.
Any solid waste and recyclable materials deposited within the designated public solid
waste disposal facilities or into any recyclable bin on town property shall become the
property of the Town of Cape Elizabeth or ecomaine. No one shall salvage, remove, or
carry off any such deposited solid waste or recyclable materials without prior approval of
the Town. Material placed in a municipally designated “swap shop” may be removed
without prior approval of the town. The Director of Public Works may limit usage of the
“swap shop” to 15 minutes per day and may establish other usage rules for the “swap
shop” so that the structure is accessible for local residents.
Sec. 11-2-9. Permit required.
No person shall collect or transport solid waste, including but not limited to garbage and
recyclables, generated within the Town without obtaining a refuse permit from the
municipality and paying the required fee. Any commercial hauler shall obtain a
commercial hauler permit upon such terms and conditions established by the town
council. Such permits shall be subject to the terms and requirements set forth in this
article.
Sec. 11-2-10.
Application for refuse permit. In order to acquire a permit for the collection or disposal
of solid waste within the town, the applicant shall submit to the Town such information
as the Director of Public Works deems necessary, together with the required fees. Fees
for obtaining permits for the collection or transport of solid waste generated within the
town shall be established by order of town council.
Sec. 11-2-11. Term of permit.
Commercial hauler permit issued under this article shall be for the calendar year and
other permits shall be for such duration as determined by the Director of Public Works.
Sec. 11-2-12. Violations.
Any failure to comply with the requirements of this Article shall be considered a
violation. In addition to the penalty provisions set forth in this article, the Director of
Public Works may suspend a refuse permit for up to thirty (30) days for a first violation
of this Ordinance and for up to sixty (60) days for a second violation. Any such
suspension is appealable to the town manager who after hearing may alter the suspension
in any manner but may not extend the suspension period. The town council upon referral
of the town manager may suspend or revoke a refuse hauler permit any violation of this
for up to 12 months except that any person or entity placing unauthorized hazardous
wastes within the town may be suspended permanently from use of the town’s municipal
disposal facilities. Prior to taking any action on a potential suspension or revocation of
17
a refuse permit, the town council shall notify any person or business to whom the permit
was issued and shall hold a hearing.
Sec 11-2-13. Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance commits a civil violation,
punishable by a civil penalty of not less than $200 and not more than three thousand
dollars ($3000.00) for each violation. Fines shall be recovered upon complaint made by
the municipality. Each day upon which a violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation. The municipality shall be entitled to recover its attorney’s fees and
court costs in any action in which the court finds that a violation has occurred. In
addition to penalties, the municipality may seek injunctive relief to prevent the
continuance of an ongoing or recurring violation.
Article III. Rodent and Vermin Control.
[Adopted eff. 10/1/63 under R. S. 1954, C. 90-A, Sec. 3 (R S. 1964, T30, Sec. 2151).]
Sec. 11-3-1. Definitions 11-14
Sec. 11-3-2. Rules and Regulations 11-15
Sec. 11-3-3. Written Notice; Unlawful to Maintain in Infested Condition 11-15
Sec. 11-3-4. Erection, Alteration, Repair or Extension of Buildings 11-15
Sec. 11-3-5. Effective Date 11-15
Sec. 11-3-6. Permit Required 11-16
Sec. 11-3-7. License 11-16
Sec. 11-3-8. Inspections 11-16
Sec. 11-3-9. Notice in Writing 11-16
Sec. 11-3-10. Power to Declare Premises Unfit 11-16
Sec. 11-3-11. Creation of Unlawful Condition in Structures 11-16
Sec. 11-3-12. Consent to Dispose of Waste 11-16
Sec. 11-3-13. Containers for Garbage 11-17
Sec. 11-3-14. Separate Containers for Garbage & Waste 11-17
Sec. 11-3-15. Animal and Bird Feeding 11-17
Sec. 11-3-16. Storage of Feed 11-17
Sec. 11-3-17 Registration for Pest Control 11-17
Sec. 11-3-18. Revocation of Pest Control Registration 11-17
Sec. 11-3-19 Proof of Certificate of Registration Before
Before Pest Control Work 11-17
Sec. 11-3-20. Permit for Use of Disinfestation or Extermination 11-17
Sec. 11-3-21. Violation; Penalty 11-18
Sec. 11-3-22 Appeals, from Order 11-18
18
Sec. 11-3-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall
apply:
(a) The term "building" shall mean any structure, whether public or private,
whether vacant or occupied, that is adopted or used: for dwelling occupancy; for the
transaction of business; for the rendering of professional service, amusement, the display
or sale or storage of goods, wares, merchandise, articles of equipment; for the
performance of work or labor; for office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters,
markets, restaurants, warehouses, grain processing, factories, abattoirs, workshops,
garages, or structures where domestic or other animals or fowl are kept; for sheds, barns,
outbuildings, or other structures or premises used as necessary to any such use.
(b) The term "rodent-proof" or "rodent-proofing" applies to a form of
construction which will prevent ingress or egress of rats to or from a given space of
building, or gaining access to food, water, or harborage. It consist of the closing and
keeping closed, by the use of material impervious to rodents, every opening in
foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls, ground or first floors, roofs,
sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings and other places that may be reached and entered
by rodents by climbing, burrowing or gnawing.
(c) The term "openings" shall mean and refer to any openings in the
foundation, sidewalls, ground or first floor, basements, and roofs including chimneys,
caves, grills, windows, vents, vent pipes, ventilators, sidewalk grates, elevators and space
around any pipe, wire or other installations connected with buildings through which
rodents may enter.
(d) The term "rodent harborage" shall mean any condition which provides
shelter or protection for rodents, thus favoring their multiplying and continued existence.
(e) The term "vermin" shall include noxious little animals or insects such as
larvae, files, bed-bugs, roaches, fleas, and mites.
(f) The term "owner" shall mean the actual owner of the buildings, whether
individual, partnership, or corporation, or the agent of the building, or other person
having custody of the buildings or to whom the rent is paid.
(g) The term "occupant" as used herein shall mean the individual, partnership,
or corporation that has the use of or occupancy of any building, or a portion thereof,
whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant buildings or any vacant portion
of a building, the owner, agent or other person having the custody of the building shall
have the responsibility of an occupant of a building.
(h) The term "health officer" shall mean the town health officer or his duly
appointed representative, of the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
19
Sec. 11-3-2. Rules and Regulations.
The Town Manager is hereby empowered to promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules
and regulations for carrying out the purpose and intent of this ordinance.
Sec. 11-3-3. Written Notice;
Unlawful to Maintain in Infested Condition. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of any premises within the Town of Cape Elizabeth to maintain said premises in
a vermin or rodent infested condition after he has notice of that condition.
Sec. 11-3-4. Erection, Alteration, Repair or Extension of Buildings.
It shall be unlawful to erect, repair, alter or extend any building or structure unless such
construction, repair or alteration shall render the building or structure rodent-proof in
accordance with the definitions contained herein; provided that only such construction,
repair or alteration as affects the rat-proof condition of any building or structure shall be
considered as subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
Sec. 11-3-5. Effective Date.
Every existing building and every alteration, addition or extension thereto, shall be
rodent-proofed and maintained in such condition, and all vacant or unimproved property
shall be kept free of rodent harborage at all times.
Sec. 11-3-6. Permit Required.
It shall be unlawful to demolish any building or structure unless provision is made for
rodent and vermin eradication. No permit for the demolition of a building or structure
shall be issued by the building inspector until and unless provisions for rodent and vermin
eradication have been carried out under supervision of a registered pest control operator.
Sec. 11-3-7. License.
On and after one year from the effective date of this ordinance, no license shall be issued
for the storing, processing, preparing, manufacturing, selling or offering for sale of any
food, food stuff, or food products until the town health officer or his duly authorized
agent certifies that the building or structure where such operation is to be conducted is of
rodent-proof construction or has been rendered rodent-proof.
Sec, 11-3-8. Inspections.
The town health officer or his duly authorized representative is empowered to make such
inspections of the interior and exterior of any building or structure as, in his opinion may
be necessary, to determine full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance.
20
Sec, 11-3-9 Notice in Writing.
When any building, structure or premises is found to be rodent or vermin infested, the
town health officer or his duly authorized representative shall issue a notice in writing to
the owner or occupant setting forth the conditions of such premises and a reasonable time
limit to correct the conditions found. Such notice may require the use of necessary
measures for rodent eradication, rodent harborage removal, rodent-proofing or vermin
eradication deemed essential by the town health officer. Notices may be served by the
Town Manager or his duly authorized representative, by the Police Department or by
certified mail addressed to the person to be notified.
Sec. 11-3-10. Power to Declare Premises Unfit
If the town health officer or his duly authorized representative, shall find any building,
structure or premises so heavily infested with vermin or rodents as to result in an actual
or potential hazard to the health of the occupants or to the public health, he shall have the
authority to declare the premises unfit for any occupancy or use until vermin or rodents
have been eradicated or while vermin or rodents are being eradicated. On each and every
occasion, a full report of such findings shall be made to the Town Manager who shall be
empowered to take such action as may be necessary to abate the hazard.
Sec. 11-3-11. Creation of Unlawful Condition in Structures.
It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility employee, plumber,
or any other person to remove, damage or destroy any part of a building or its
appurtenances intended to protect such premises against ingress of rodents, or in any
other way create a condition by which ingress for rodents is made possible; provided that
this section shall not apply where the interference with the rodent-proofing is made
necessary in connection with lawful construction, or repair and the rodent-proofing is
promptly restored.
Sec. 11-3-12. Consent to dispose of waste.
No person shall throw, place, deposit or permit any person under his control or employ to
throw, place, or deposit any putrid substance, human or animal excretion, dead animal,
night soil, filth of any kind, garbage, rubbish, refuse piles, old lumber, or any
unwholesome material in or upon any vacant lot, alley, lane, sidewalk or street, beach,
harbor, pond, or stream, or upon any private lot or public grounds within the Town of
Cape Elizabeth without the consent of the town health officer or his duly authorized
representative.
Sec. 11-3-13. Containers for Garbage.
Sufficient watertight covered metal containers shall be used to receive for storage until
collected all accumulation of garbage, petrescible waste, rubbish or other waste.
21
Sec. 11-3-14. Separate Containers for garbage and nonputrescible waste to be used.
Separate containers shall be provided for garbage and other putrescible waste, and
separate containers shall be provided for ashes, rubbish, paper and nonputrescible waste.
Sec. 11-3-15. Animal and bird feeding.
No person shall place food in the open for the feeding of any domesticated fowl, birds, or
animals except in such containers that will prevent the scattering of such food upon the
ground. After such feeding, such food shall not be allowed to remain where it is
accessible to rodents.
Sec. 11-3-16. Storage of feed.
All food and feed for feeding chickens, cows, horses, and other animals shall be kept and
stored in rodent free and rodent-proof containers, compartments, or rooms unless kept in
a completely rat-proofed building.
Sec. 11-3-17. Registration for pest control.
All persons, firms or corporations intending to engage in the business of pest control in
the Town of Cape Elizabeth shall register in writing with the town health official before
so engaging and thereafter annually, on or before June 1st stating the name, business
affiliation, address and telephone number of the operator as well as the pest control
operations that the registrant is equipped to undertake, together with such other
information that the Town Health Officer may require. Such registration will also include
a signed agreement by the responsible person in charge of the pest control operation to
comply with all rules and regulations established by the town health officer and the Town
Manager for the safety of the public.
Sec. 11-3-18. Revocation of pest control registration.
Failure on the part of a pest control operator to give evidence or satisfactory performance
of control operations on two successive occasions shall be cause for revocation of
registration.
Sec. 11-3-19. Proof of certificate of registration before pest control work.
The owner or occupant of any building or structure shall not permit any person, firm, or
corporation, to enter upon any building or structure for the purpose of disinfestation or
extermination of vermin or rodents until such person, firm or corporation presents a
currently valid certificate of registration issued by town health officer.
22
Sec. 11-3-20. Permit for use of disinfestation or extermination.
No person shall employ for disinfestation or for extermination of rodents or vermin from
any building, vessel, or enclosed space, any highly toxic chemical; any poisonous or
dangerous gas; any substance emitting poisonous gas, fumes or vapor; cyanide in any
form; or sodium fluoroacetate, commonly known as "1080", without first holding a
special permit for each such use issued by the town health officer subject to such
conditions as the Board of Health may require. When such permits are issued both the
Police and Fire Departments shall be notified immediately by the town health officer.
Sec. 11-3-21. Violation; penalty.
Whoever violates any provision of this ordinance or any regulation of the Town Manager
made pursuant thereto or any order of the town health officer or his duly authorized
representative, or obstructs or interferes with the execution of such order or regulation,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 and each days violation or part thereof shall
be a separate offense.
Sec. 11-2-22. Appeals from Order.
Any person who feels aggrieved by an order of the town health officer may file an appeal
within 10 days from the date of such order to the Town Manager who may reverse the
decision; the Town Manager may permit exceptions to or variations from the specific
terms of the ordinance in such cases where the enforcement of the provisions of the
ordinance may result in undue hardship, subject always to the rule that the Town
Manager shall give due consideration to the purposes of the ordinance in promoting
public health, safety and welfare.
Article IV. Single Use Carryout Bags
[Adopted eff. December 6, 2017] ]
Sec. 11-4-1 Purpose 11-20
Sec. 11-4-2 Definitions 11-20
Sec. 11-4-3 Single Use Carryout Bag 11-21
Sec. 11-4-4 Exemptions 11-22
Sec. 11-4-5 Enforcement 11-22
Sec. 11-4-6 Severability 11-22
Sec. 11-4-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce the distribution of single use carryout bags by
stores in the Town of Cape Elizabeth, and to encourage the use of reusable bags by
residents and visitors of the Town.
23
Sec. 11-4-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply:
(a) Single Use Carryout Bag shall mean a bag other than a Reusable Bag provided at the
check stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of
transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment. The term Single Use Carryout
Bag includes compostable and biodegradable bags1 but does not include Reusable Bags,
Produce Bags, Product Bags or bags provided by pharmacists to contain prescription
drugs.
1 Compostable and biodegradable bags are included in this list because they do not
naturally decompose and require processing in an industrial facility to biodegrade.
(b) Produce Bag or Product Bag shall mean any bag without handles used exclusively
to carry produce, meats, seafood, other food items or merchandise to the point of sale
inside a store or to prevent such items from coming into direct contact with other
purchased items.
(c) Reusable Bag shall mean a bag that:
i. is designed and manufactured to withstand repeated uses over a period of
time;
ii. is machine washable or made from a material that can be cleaned and
disinfected regularly;
iii. is at least 2.25 millimeters thick if made from plastic;
iv. has a minimum lifetime of 75 uses; and
v. has the capability of carrying a minimum of 18 pounds.
(d) Store shall mean any of the following retail establishments located within the Town:
i. a full-line, self-service market located in a permanent building that sells at
retail a line of staple foodstuffs, meats, seafood, produce, household
supplies, dairy products or other perishable items;
ii. a drug store, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience store, gift
store, or other entity engaged in the retail sale of goods; or
iii. farm stand
Sec. 11-4-3. Single Use Carryout Bag.
The following provisions shall regulate the use of Single Use Carryout Bags by a store.
(a) No Store shall provide a Single Use Carryout Bag to a customer at the check
stand, cash register, point of sale or other point of departure for the purpose of
24
transporting food or merchandise out of the establishment except as provided in this
section.
(b) A Store may make available for sale to a customer a Single Use Carryout Bag for
a minimum charge of five cents ($0.05).
(c) All monies collected by a Store for Single Use Carryout Bags under this
ordinance may be used by the Store for any lawful purpose.
(d) All Stores must post signage clearly indicating the per bag charge for Single Use
Carryout Bags.
(e) No Store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of the
minimum charge required in subsection (b).
Sec. 11-4-4. Exemptions.
A Store is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance in a federal, state or local
government emergency when the immediate preservation of the public health, safety or
welfare requires the use of a Single Use Carryout Bag.
Sec. 11-4-5. Enforcement.
The Town Manager or his/her designee(s) shall have the primary responsibility for
enforcement of this ordinance. If the Town Manager or his/her designee(s) determine(s)
that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, he/she shall issue a written warning notice
to the Store that a violation has occurred. A second violation shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $100. A third and/or subsequent violation shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding $250 for each violation.
Sec. 11-4-6. Severability.
If any part or provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances are held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, including the application
of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby
and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, provisions of this ordinance are
severable.
CHAPTER 12
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
(Revisions Eff. Through 11/10/2017)
Article I. Offenses 12-1
Article II. Camping on Public Property 12-2
Article III. Loitering Dispersal 12-3
Article IV. Fort Williams Park Regulations 12-4
Article V. Consumer Fireworks Regulations 12-5
Sec. 12-1-1. Disturbing the Peace.
(a) Within the Town of Cape Elizabeth, no person shall make, continue or cause to be
made, any loud, profane, boisterous, unnecessary or unusual noises, including an
excessive volume of noise which shall either annoy, disturb, injure, or endanger the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. In addition to the person making or
causing the noise, the property owner of any building, dwelling, structure, premises, boat
or conveyance or any part thereof in the town shall also be responsible for such activity.
1. The Town believes that residents have a reasonable expectation of peaceful quiet and
enjoyment of their property during nighttime hours. During nighttime hours, no person
shall generate substantial noise as defined above beyond the property line. For the
purposes of this Article, nighttime hours shall be 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on Sunday
through Thursday, and from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday.
2. The level of noise during daytime hours shall not exceed what is reasonable and
consistent with daily living.
(b) The above provisions shall not apply to agricultural activities, school sponsored
events, fireworks shows approved by the Chief of the Fire Department or concerts or any
other activity or event approved in advance by the Town Council.
(c) No person shall perform or carry on, or cause to be performed, or carried on, any
construction or excavation work during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that
produces noise of a sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of
neighboring properties. This paragraph shall not apply in the event of an emergency in
which a sewer, conduit or utility in or under any street breaks, burst or otherwise is in
such condition as to immediately endanger the property, life, health or safety of any
individual. It shall also not apply to repairs necessitated by storm events, earthquakes,
"acts of God" and utility coordination of projects under construction. [Revised eff.
02/07/13.]
Sec. 12-1-2. Animal Control. No owner or person having charge of any animal shall turn
such animal into, or permit the same to go at large in any street, highway or public place
within the Town, or onto private property without the permission of the property owner.
For the purposes of this section, “animal” shall not include dogs, which are regulated
under Chapter 7 of the Ordinance. A rooster may not be kept on a lot of less than 40,000
sq. ft. in size. [Revised eff. 11/10/2017]
Sec. 12-1-3. Nude, Topless Bathing. No person in a nude state shall appear on a public
way, nor swim or bathe in the waters of the town or waters adjacent thereto so as to be
exposed to view of spectators.
Sec. 12-1-4. Disturbing Public Meeting. No person shall disturb any public meeting,
school activity, or meeting of any kind, by making loud or unusual noises, by shouting,
stamping, whistling, or standing around and obstructing the steps, passageways or
entrance of any buildings where such meetings are held. [Revised eff. 10/08/08.]
Sec. 12-1-5. Destruction of Fruit Trees. No person shall willfully cut or scar or bruise
any ornamental or fruit tree on any street, whether it be planted by the Town or by
individuals who were duly authorized to plant it.
Sec. 12-1--6. Defacing, Injuring Public Property. No person shall mark or write on any
public building, nor on any fence not his own nor any sidewalk, nor any other public
place in this Town.
Sec. 12-1-7 Abandoned Well or Cistern. No person shall willfully abandon or cause to
be abandoned any well or cistern without providing adequate protection by filling or
covering the same. [Added eff. 3/14/60.]
Sec. 12-1-8. Use of Fish Fertilizer. All persons who apply fish or fish refuse as fertilizer
to their land shall cause the same to be thoroughly plowed under within thirty six hours
after the time when it is deposited on the land.
Sec. 12-1-9. Penalty. Any person found to have committed any of the foregoing listed
offenses shall be punished by a fine not exceeding Two Hundred Fifty ($250.00) for
each offense, to be forfeited and paid to the use of the Town, unless different provision is
made by the laws of the State of Maine. In addition, restitution shall be made for any
damage to public property. [Revised eff. 10/08/08.]
Article II. Camping on Public Property.
[Adopted eff. 10/13/71, under R. S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 12-2-1. Permit Required. No person shall sleep, tent, camp or be housed in a
camper, trailer or other mobile home upon any property owned by the Town of Cape
Elizabeth after sunset or before sunrise except in accordance with a permit issued by the
Chief of Police upon conditions sufficient to assure that adequate water and sanitary
facilities will be preserved, that the normal use of the Town property will not be
disrupted, that the peace and property of any abutters will not be disturbed, and that any
liability which the Town might incur has been waived; such permit may be summarily
revoked by the Chief of Police, or his duly authorized agent, upon the violation of any of
the conditions recited therein.
Sec. 12-2-2. Penalty. Any person found to have violated Sec. 12-2-1 shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed Two Hundred Fifty ($250.00) to be recovered for the use of the
Town. [Revised eff. 10/08/08.]
Article III. Loitering Dispersal.
[Adopted eff. 9/27/72 under R.S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 12-3-1 Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander,
stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a public place in such a
manner as to:
(a) Obstruct any public street, public area, public sidewalk or any other public place or
public building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder or impede the free and
uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; or
(b) Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other
public place or public building any act or thing which is an obstruction to or interference
with the free and uninterrupted use of property, or any business lawfully conducted by
anyone in, upon, facing or fronting on any such street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or public building, and which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
12-3-2 Violation. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions, acts or
things enumerated in Sec. 12-3-1 hereof, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing the same and to move on or
disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such order, or any person who obeys
such order but within a period of four (4) hours after such order again causes or commits
any of said conditions, acts or things, shall be guilty of a violation of this Article and
upon conviction thereof in the District Court shall be subject to a fine not exceeding Two
Hundred Fifty ($250.00) to be recovered for the use of the Town. Any such violation
shall constitute a separate offense on each successive day committed. [Revised eff.
10/08/08.]
Article IV. Fort Williams Park Regulations.
[Adopted eff. 11/11/77 under R. S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151 and Revised eff. 10/08/08
and 08/08/13]
Sec. 12-4-1 Fires Restricted. No use which requires fires or burning of any kind shall be
permitted within Fort Williams Park except as specifically authorized by the Town
Council and as permitted by the Chief of the Fire Department in accordance with Sec. 8-
2-5 or as may be allowed in accordance with Sec. 12-4-2.
Sec. 12-4-2 Permitted Fires. Any person or group of persons may use facilities
provided by the Town within Fort Williams Park for fires for the sole purpose of cooking
food for picnics upon the following conditions:
(a) Such use shall be limited to the hours during which Fort Williams Park is open to the
general public;
(b) Such use shall be only within those areas posted for such use; and;
(c) Such persons or groups of persons shall use no facility other than provided by the
Town and shall burn no fuel other than charcoal or charcoal brickets; however, any
Underwriters Laboratory listed gas grill or appliance with a gas cylinder of no larger than
20 pounds may be utilized. Gas cylinders between 20 pounds and 100 pounds may be
utilized with permission of the Cape Elizabeth Fire Department. Firewood may be used
only at the fire pit area next to the picnic shelter. [Rev. eff. 4/29/88.]
Sec. 12-4-3 Open Hours. Fort Williams Park shall be open for use by the general public
during daylight hours throughout the year, and it shall be closed to public use between
sunset and sunrise during which time it shall be unlawful for any person to be within the
limits of Fort Williams Park except for the use of leased premises by the lessees and their
employees and agents within rights granted by their leases, and except during special
events approved by the Town Council.
Sec. 12-4-4 Filming. Any commercial filming at Fort Williams Park and at Portland
Head Light shall receive a permit from the Director of Public Works with all fees and
regulations for the issuance of commercial filming permits to be determined by Town
Council order.
Sec. 12-4-5 Weddings. All wedding and partnership ceremonies to be held at Fort
Williams Park which include an assembly of more than 20 persons shall receive a permit
from the Director of Public Works with all fees and regulations for the issuance of such
permits to be determined by Town Council order. Weddings and similar ceremonies are
not permitted on the Portland Head Light parcel.
Sec 12-4-6 Waste Materials. All refuse and recyclable materials brought into Fort
Williams Park by visitors shall be removed by the same visitors from Fort Williams Park
provided that groups permitted to utilize the park may remove material for all of their
guests.
Sec 12-4-7 Pet Excrement Removal. All pet excrement deposited in Fort Williams
Park shall be removed by the person in care of the pet.
Sec. 12-4-8 Regulation of Park Activities. The town council is hereby authorized to
adopt rules and regulations to manage commercial activities in the Park, activities that
include, but are not limited to, vending. (Added eff. 08/08/13)
Sec. 12-4-9 Smoking Prohibited. Smoking in the Park is prohibited. Smoking means the
lighting, inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any cigar, cigarette, pipe, other
tobacco product or e-cigarette, or carrying or having in one’s possession any lighted
object giving off smoke from tobacco or any other substance that emits smoke that is
customarily used and intended for inhalation (Added eff. 05/15/14)
Tobacco or tobacco product means any form of tobacco, including but not limited to cigarettes,
cigars, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco or snuff, and any material or device used in the smoking,
chewing or other form of tobacco consumption, including but not limited to cigarette papers or
pipes. (Added eff. 05-15-14)
Sec. 12-4-10 Penalty. Any person found to have violated any provision in Article IV
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed Two Hundred Fifty ($250.00) per day of
infraction to be recovered for the use of the Town. The Town shall also recover any fee
that would have been assessed if a proper and timely permit had been granted. (Amended
eff. 08/08/13)
Article V. Consumer Fireworks Regulations
[Adopted eff. 12/14/11]
Sec 12-5-1. Definitions The following definitions shall apply to this article:
Consumer Fireworks: Shall have the same meaning as in 27 Code of Federal
Regulations, Section 555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are
tested and certified by a 3rd party testing laboratory as conforming with United States
Consumer Product Safety Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States
Code, Chapter 47. Consumer Fireworks does not include missile type rockets, helicopter
and aerial spinners, all as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule. Nor does the
definition include sky rockets and bottle rockets which for purposes of this section are
defined as cylindrical tubes containing not more than 20 grams of chemical composition
as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule.
Display: An entertainment feature where the public or a private group is admitted or
permitted to view a showing or discharge of fireworks or special effects.
Sec. 12-5-2. Consumer Fireworks Prohibited. No person shall use, possess with the
intent to use, sell, possess with the intent to sell or offer for sale Consumer Fireworks
within the Town of Cape Elizabeth. This section does not apply to a person issued a
fireworks Display permit by the Town of Cape Elizabeth and/or by the State of Maine
pursuant to 8 M.R.S.A. §227-A.
Sec. 12-5-3. Seizure and Disposal of Fireworks. The Town may seize Consumer
Fireworks that the Town has probable cause to believe are used, possessed or sold in
violation of this Article and shall forfeit seized consumer fireworks to the State of Maine
for disposal.
Sec. 12-5-4. Penalties
(a) Any person who uses Consumer Fireworks or possesses Consumer Fireworks
with the intent for use in the Town of Cape Elizabeth shall be punished by a fine
of not less than Two Hundred Dollars ($200.00) and not more than Four Hundred
Dollars ($400.00) plus costs. For second and subsequent offenses, a fine of not
less than Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) and not more than Six Hundred
Dollars ($600.00) per violation plus costs shall be imposed.
(b) Any person who sells Consumer Fireworks or possesses Consumer Fireworks
with the intent to sell in the Town of Cape Elizabeth shall be punished by a fine
of not less than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) plus costs. For second and
subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than One Thousand Dollars ($1000.00) per
violation plus costs shall be imposed.
13-1
CHAPTER 13
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
(Adopted effective March 10, 2004 and with amendments effective through May 8, 2019)
Article I. In General 13-2
Sec. 13-1-1. Definitions 13-3
Sec. 13-1-2. Signs Required 13-3
Sec. 13-1-3. Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings 13-3
Sec. 13-1-4. Penalty 13-3
Article II. Parking Regulations 13-3
Sec. 13-2-1. Prohibited Purposes 13-3
Sec. 13-2-2. Prohibited Locations 13-3
Sec. 13-2-3. No Parking at Any Time 13-4
Sec. 13-2-4. Limited Parking 13-5
Sec. 13-2-5. Snow Removal 13-6
Sec. 13-2-6. Penalty 13-6
Article III. Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations 13-6
Sec. 13-3-1. Obstruction in Streets 13-6
Sec. 13-3-2. Emerging from Driveways 13-8
Sec. 13-3-3. Following Traffic Directions 13-8
Sec. 13-3-4. Required Obedience 13-8
Sec. 13-3-5. Driving on Sidewalks Prohibited 13-8
Sec. 13-3-6. Prima Facie Evidence of Operation 13-8
Sec. 13-3-7 True Name to be Given 13-8
Sec. 13-3-8. All-Terrain Vehicles 13-8
Sec. 13-3-9. Beach Access Restrictions 13-9
Article IV. Littering Town Ways 13-9
Sec. 13-4-1 Failure to Secure Litter 13-9
Sec. 13-4-2. Person Littering 13-9
Article V. Parades and Processions 13-9
Sec. 13-5-1. Permits Required for Parades, Road Races, Processions
and Assemblages 13-9
Article VI. Fort Williams Park Regulations 13-9
Sec. 13-6-1. Traffic and Parking 13-9
Sec. 13-6-2. Speed Limit 13-10
Article VII. School Property Regulations 13-10
Sec. 13-7-1. Speed Limits Within the School Complex 13-10
Sec. 13-7-2. One-Way Traffic 13-10
Sec. 13-7-3. Parking Restrictions 13-10
Sec. 13-7-4. Vehicle Travel Restriction 13-10
13-2
Article I. In General.
Sec. 13-1-1. Definitions.
a. The words "motor vehicle" means every vehicle that is self-propelled but does not
include electric personal assistive mobility devices motorized wheelchairs or vehicles
operated on rails.
b. The word "park" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading.
c. The word "standing" means any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
d. The words "street, way or road" means the entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as
a matter of right, for purposes of traffic.
e. The word "roadway" means that portion of a street, way or road, designated or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
f. The word "person" means every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
g. The words "all-terrain vehicle" means a motor driven, off-road, recreational vehicle
capable of cross-country travel on land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural
terrain. It includes, but is not limited to, a multi-track, multi-wheel or low pressure tire
vehicle; a motorcycle or related two-wheel, three-wheel or belt driven vehicle; an
amphibious machine; or other means of transportation deriving motion power from a
source other than muscle or wind. For purposes of this ordinance, "all-terrain vehicle"
does not include a snowmobile; an airmobile; a construction or logging vehicle used in
performance of its common functions; a farm vehicle used for farming purposes; a
vehicle used exclusively for emergency, military, law enforcement or fire control
purposes.
h. The term "school complex" means the portion of Cape Elizabeth that includes (i) Cape
Elizabeth High School, (ii) Cape Elizabeth Middle School, (iii) Pond Cove Elementary
School, (iv) the Donald Richards Community Pool, (v) the roadways, except Jordan Way,
extending from Scott Dyer Road and Ocean House Road leading to and around the
schools, and (vi) the sidewalks, athletic fields, tennis courts, basketball courts,
playgrounds, parking lots and other improved areas accessed from the roadways
described in (v). The "school complex" does not include the Cape Elizabeth Community
Center.
i. The term “impound” means to tow a motor vehicle for storage on the premises of the
towing company.
13-3
j. The term “immobilize” means to render a motor vehicle inoperable by affixing a
device, commonly referred to as a boot.
13-1-2. Signs Required. No provision of this Ordinance for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are
required, such section shall be effective without signs being erected to give notice
thereof.
Sec. 13-1-3. Unauthorized Signs, Signals or Markings. No person shall place,
maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal,
marking or device, which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic control device or sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic
control device or any sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain any traffic sign
or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to
prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
Sec. 13-1-4. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter 13, with the
exception of the parking provisions of Articles II, VI or VII, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars ($100.00) to be recovered for the use of the Town for each such
violation. The registered owner of a motor vehicle that is in violation of the parking
provisions of Articles II, VI or VII of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and
shall be punished by a fine in an amount to be established by order of the town council as
provided in Section 13-2-6 (a).
Article II. Parking Regulations.
Sec. 13-2-1. Prohibited Purposes. No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any
street, way or road for the principal purpose of:
a. Displaying it for sale;
b. Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except for repairs necessitated by
an emergency; or
c. Advertising.
Sec. 13-2-2. Prohibited Locations. No person shall stand or park a vehicle in any of the
following places except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or other authorized person, or traffic
control device:
13-4
a. On a sidewalk;
b. In front of a public or private driveway;
c. Within an intersection;
d. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
e. On a crosswalk;
f. Within 20 feet of the near corner of the curbs at an intersection;
g. Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic
control signal located at the side of a roadway;
h. Along or within any bikeway within a business zone or in any specially
designated safety zone reserved by order of the Town Council for a specific
purpose, including but not limited to, foot paths, jogging trails, and ways created
for recreational use;
i. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or on the side of a
street opposite the entrance to any fire station;
j. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
k. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street, or double parked, so-called;
l. On the left side of any street, way or road so that it is facing oncoming traffic;
m. At the terminus of extensions of T-type turnarounds and at the end of any
dead-end street;
n. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway; or
o. At any place designated from time to time by Order adopted by the Town
Council and which regulations shall be effective from and after the erection of
signs giving notice thereof and until revoked by further Order of the Town
Council.
Sec. 13-2-3. No Parking at Any Time. There shall be no parking at any time:
a. On the northerly side of Scott Dyer Road from Ocean House Road to Dearborn
Drive;
b. On the southerly side of Scott Dyer Road from the westerly entrance to the
school buildings to its terminus at Ocean House Road; however, parking may be
allowed in signed areas during any school construction project with the placement
of signs authorized by the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief;
c. On the easterly side of Shore Road, for a distance of 1600 feet southerly from
its intersection with Lawson Road;
d. On either side of paved way on Shore Road northerly from Route 77 to the
northerly property line of 1226 Shore Road;
e. On either side of Kettle Cove Road northerly from the Kettle Cove parking area
to a point 150 feet northerly of the Kettle Cove Road/Fessenden Road
intersection;
f. on either side of Fessenden Road from its intersection with Kettle Cove Road
northeasterly 600 feet toward Two Lights Road;
13-5
g. On the easterly side of Ocean House Road between the driveway entrances on
the northerly and southerly sides of the Town Hall;
h. On either side of Two Lights Road easterly from its intersection with Dyer
Lane, so-called, excepting within the Lobster Shack parking area;
i. On either side of Two Lights Road between a point 500 feet easterly of the
intersection of Two Lights Road and Tower Drive and a point some 600 feet
easterly of the intersection of Beacon Lane (so-called) and Two Lights Road at
the crest of the rise in Two Lights Road;
j. On the southerly or non-beach side of Cottage Lane from Shore Road Surf
Road;
k. In a fire lane designated by the Fire Chief and the Police Chief and approved by
the Town Manager;
l. On either side of Woodland Road beginning at Mitchell Road and extending
390 feet in an easterly direction;
m. On either side of Shore Road from the Chapel Road entrance of Fort
Williams Park to Dyer Pond Road;
n. On the southwesterly driveway connecting the Town Hall lot with Shore Road;
o. On the westerly side of Preble Street, beginning at the intersection of Shore
Road and extending 100’ in a northerly direction; or
p. On the southerly side of Gull Crest Drive. (The right hand side of Gull Crest
Drive from Spurwink Ave until parking area)
q. On the southeasterly side of Surf Road beginning at Shore Road and extending
to Garden Circle and on either side of Surf Road 60 feet northerly of Keyes Lane
to the terminus of Surf Road at Garden Circle.
r. On the northerly side of Cottage Lane from Maiden Cove lane to Garden
Circle.
Sec. 13-2-4. Limited Parking. Limited parking shall be as follows:
a. During the months of May through November, no motor vehicle shall be
parked on Crescent Beach, except that commercial fishermen may, in the pursuit
of their calling, park there for the reasonably necessary purposes of loading and
unloading.
b. After sunset, each day until sunrise, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of
Sea View Avenue from its intersection with Glen Avenue northeasterly to its
terminus.
c. There is no parking on any public road where emergency no parking signs have
been placed after authorization of such sign placement by the Chief of Police with
the approval of the Town Manager.
d. From 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., from May 1 through October 1, no vehicle shall
be parked on either side of Kettle Cove Road.
13-6
e. The parking spaces and areas available for parking at the Town Center Fire
Station and the Cape Elizabeth Police Station may be used only in connection
with business or activities in those buildings. The parking spaces and areas
available for parking at the Thomas Memorial Library, during Library business
hours or activities in the Library building, may be used only in connection with
business or activities in the Library building. The town manager may also
authorize the placement of signs at spaces at the Town Center Fire Station
indicating that spaces are to be used only for emergency public safety purposes,
and signs at the Cape Elizabeth Police Station indicating that spaces are to be used
only for authorized vehicles
f. The parking area at Plaisted Park may be used only in connection with activities
at Plaisted Park. The town council may authorize the collection of parking fees at
Plaisted Park in conjunction with an approved special event at Fort Williams
Park.
g. There shall be resident parking only on Maiden Cove Lane, Garden Circle,
and Garden Lane. For purposes of this section only , “resident” is defined as
persons occupying homes on Maiden Cove Lane, Garden Circle and Garden
Lane.
h. A box truck, cargo van or tractor trailer may be parked overnight on any
public road for not more than one night each year. Any such parking shall not
be in violation of any other section of these parking regulations.
i. An equipment trailer, boat trailer or other hauling trailer may not be parked
overnight on any public road for more than four consecutive days or for eight
days in any calendar year. Any trailer parked on any public road at any time
shall have a wooden block or similar device in place under the trailer tongue
to avoid pavement damage.
Sec. 13-2-5. Snow Removal. No vehicle shall be parked at any time on any street, way or
road within the Town between the hours of 1:00 am and 5:00 am from December 1 to
April 1. In the event of inclement weather or a public safety emergency, the Chief of
Police or his/her designee, may institute a parking ban upon any street, way, or road.
Sec. 13-2-6. Penalty.
a. A motor vehicle in violation of any provision of this Article II (Parking Regulations),
the parking provisions of Article VI, (Fort Williams Park Regulations) or the parking
provisions of Article VII (School Property Regulations) may be issued a ticket by a law
enforcement officer. In addition, a motor vehicle in violation of any parking provision of
Article VI (Fort Williams Park Regulations) may be issued a ticket by a municipal
employee authorized to do so by the Chief of Police. The dollar amount of the fine to be
paid in conjunction with a ticket issued for a parking violation shall be set by order of the
13-7
town council. If payment of a ticket is not received at the Public Safety Building within
30 days after the date of the issuance of the ticket, the fine shall double.
b. A registered owner of a motor vehicle that has been issued a ticket under this
Ordinance for a parking violation may request that the issuance of the ticket be rescinded
by appealing the issuance of the ticket. An appeal shall be made by delivering to the
Cape Elizabeth Police Department, within seven business days of the issuance of the
ticket, a written appeal on a form to be provided by the Police Department. Delivery of
the appeal shall be accomplished by hand delivery to the Police Department or by deposit
in the United States mail, postage prepaid, properly addressed to the Chief of Police and
post marked within seven business days of the date of issuance of the ticket. The Chief
of Police or his designee shall render a written decision granting or denying the appeal
within ten business days of the submission of the appeal. Written notice of the decision
shall be sent by regular mail to the registered owner of the motor vehicle. The failure of
the Chief of Police or his designee to timely render a decision granting or denying the
appeal shall be deemed a denial of the appeal.
c. If a motor vehicle has received two tickets in violation of parking provisions of this
Ordinance , both of which tickets were issued after December 31, 2002 and which
remain unpaid for more than thirty (30) days, and neither of which tickets is currently
under appeal as permitted under paragraph b. of this Section, the Chief of Police may
release the name of the registered owner of the vehicle to one or more local newspapers
and / or the Town webmaster, for publication of notice that the motor vehicle may be
immobilized and / or impounded if the vehicle is found to be in further violation of this
Article II while the two tickets remain unpaid.
d. If a motor vehicle has two tickets in violation of parking provisions of this Ordinance ,
both of which tickets were issued after December 31, 2002 and which remain unpaid for
more than thirty (30) days, and neither of which tickets is currently under appeal as
permitted under paragraph b. of this Section, and the vehicle is found to be in further
violation of this Ordinance, the motor vehicle may be immobilized or impounded. If the
motor vehicle is immobilized or impounded, a reasonable attempt shall be made by
telephone to contact the registered owner in order to make the owner aware of the
immobilization or impoundment.
e. If a motor vehicle has been immobilized and remains at such location for twenty four
hours the vehicle may be impounded.
f. Before an immobilized or impounded motor vehicle may be released from the
immobilization or impoundment, all outstanding tickets must be paid, along with a
$50.00 “boot” disengagement fee, if applicable, and any applicable towing fee and
storage fee. The registered owner shall have the right to appeal the ticket issued when the
motor vehicle was immobilized or impounded. If the registered owner is successful in
appealing the ticket, the owner shall not be entitled to either reimbursement of fees paid
or waiver of fees otherwise due under this paragraph.
13-8
g. This Section shall not be construed to mean that a motor vehicle must be immobilized
before it may be impounded.
Article III, Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations.
Sec. 13-3-1. Obstruction in Streets. Any vehicle of any kind or description parked upon
a street, way or road at a place, in a manner, or for a length of time prohibited by an
ordinance of the Town is hereby declared to be an obstruction in such street, way or road
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and may be removed by the
following procedure:
a. Authority to Remove. Any such vehicle may be removed by, or under the
direction of, or at the request of the Chief of Police, or any police officer of the
Town, to a garage or storage place within the limits of the Town, or outside the
Town if none within are available, and impounded therein. Such police officer
may use such force as may be necessary to enter such vehicle and cause the same
to be placed in a condition to be moved, and may employ any reputable person,
engaged in the business of towing or storing vehicles, for such purposes.
Notwithstanding any language herein contained, the removal and storage of a
vehicle pursuant to this Ordinance, and the payment of the charges specified
herein, shall in no way relieve or prevent prosecution for the violation of any
provision of the Ordinance.
b. Notice to Owner. The Police Department shall make every effort to notify as
promptly as possible the owner of any such vehicle of its removal from the
streets, ways, or roads, and as soon as possible a written notice that such vehicle
has been impounded shall be sent to the Chief of Police to the owner at his last
known address as shown by the records of the Secretary of State. If the owner is
unknown, the Chief of Police shall cause to be published, in any newspaper
printed in the City of Portland, notice of such impounding, giving the registration
number, the motor number, and the name, type and year of said vehicle.
c. Release of Vehicle. Before the owner of such vehicle, or his representative,
may remove it from the possession of the person towing or storing it, he shall:
1. Furnish satisfactory evidence of his identity and of his ownership of
said vehicle to the Chief of Police and to the person having possession of
said vehicle;
2. Pay to the person having possession of said vehicle reasonable charged
for the towing and storing of said vehicle; and
3. Sign a receipt for said vehicle.
d. Charges. The Chief of Police shall establish a schedule of charges for towing
13-9
and storage, subject to approval of the Town Council, and only those persons
agreeing to such schedule shall be called to remove and store vehicles.
13-3-2 Emerging from Driveways. The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private
driveway, automobile service station or building shall stop such vehicle immediately
prior to driving across a sidewalk, or if none, upon entering the roadway, and shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
Sec. 13-3-3. Following Traffic Directions. No person shall refuse, fail or neglect to
follow the directions of a constable or police officer directing traffic on a street, way or
road.
Sec. 13-3-4. Required Obedience. Except when otherwise directed by a police officer,
or other authorized person, the driver of any vehicle and every pedestrian shall obey the
instructions under the provisions of this Ordinance or State law, and every such person
shall obey each and every provision of this Ordinance.
Sec. 13-3-5. Driving on Sidewalks Prohibited. No person shall operate any motor
vehicle along, nor shall any motor vehicle in any way occupy or obstruct, any town
sidewalk except for municipal vehicles and agents of the municipal government in
conjunction with maintenance activities.
Sec. 13-3-6. Prima Facie Evidence of Operation. No person shall allow, permit or
suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street, way or road in
violation of any provisions of this Ordinance. The fact that a vehicle is unlawfully parked
shall be prima facie evidence of the unlawful parking of such vehicle by the person
whose name such vehicle is registered.
Sec. 13-3-7. True Name to be Given. It shall be unlawful for any person, when given a
notice by any police officer or other authorized person, to appear for an offense against
any provision of this Ordinance, to give other than his true name and true place of
residence or address, upon the request of such police officer or other authorized person.
Sec. 13-3-8. All-Terrain Vehicles. No person shall operate an all-terrain vehicle within
the Town of Cape Elizabeth upon public land, including park lands, owned or leased to
the Town of Cape Elizabeth. This provision shall supplement and shall not in any manner
limit the restrictions upon the use of all-terrain vehicles upon private property, or over
public or private ways, as provided by 12 M.R.S.A., Sec. 7851, (1983) as may be
amended. It shall also not prohibit the use of all terrain vehicles by the municipal
government in conjunction with maintenance and/or public safety.
Sec. 13-3-9. Beach Access Restrictions. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on
Crescent Beach except for the express purpose of launching a watercraft, for commercial
fishing activities, for the commercial harvesting or rockweed or seaweed, or for public
safety or authorized beach maintenance purposes.
13-10
Article IV. Littering Town Ways.
Sec. 13-4-1. Failing to Secure Litter. No person shall operate or cause to be operated
upon any public way in Cape Elizabeth a vehicle carrying or hauling any without
securing such material so as to prevent any portion of the same from falling upon the
ground.
Sec. 13-4-2. Person Littering. No person shall purposely, accidentally or by reason of
an accident drop or throw from his hand or a vehicle any material upon or beside any
public way, without forthwith making all reasonable efforts to clear such way of the
same.
Article V. Parades and Processions.
Sec. 13-5-1. Permits Required for Parades, Road Races, Processions, and
Assemblages. No person, corporation, entity, or organization may hold, sponsor, or
organize any parade, footrace, walk, or any competition of any kind, or any mass
assemblage of any kind upon any public way, or in or upon any town owned parks, fields
or lands without first obtaining approval by written permit from the chief officers of the
Police and Fire Departments and the Director of Public Works, when applicable. Such
permit may require further approval, depending on the event, from the Town Manager
and/or Town Council; such permit shall be issued upon such conditions as the appropriate
authority may prescribe. This section shall not apply to any school or municipally
sponsored events, funeral processions, and military forces. Concerns of health, safety,
and the general welfare will be the sole basis for determining the approval of said permit
and any conditions attached thereto.
Article VI. Fort Williams Park Regulations.
Sec. 13-6-1. Traffic and Parking. The following regulations shall apply at all times to
traffic circulation and parking within Fort Williams Park: (Effective 5/8/2019)
a. Parking. The Town Council shall promulgate rules for managing paring in Fort
Williams Park. Those rules may include but are not limited charging a fee for
parking, establishing seasons of parking and other parking management rules. No
person shall stand or park a motor vehicle within Fort Williams Park except in a
designated parking lot or marked parking space unless directed to a temporary
parking area by an agent of the town. The town manager and his or her designee
is authorized to designate and sign certain spaces as reserved.
b. Circulation. The Town Council shall have authority to establish, enforce and
monitor traffic circulation flow to promote safety and efficiency. Temporary
changes to traffic circulation to manage high volumes or enhance safety may be
done by the Fort Williams Park Manager or his/her designee. The sole access to
and egress from Fort Williams Park for vehicles shall be through the gate at Shore
Road opposite Plaisted Park, except that travel by municipal vehicles and
13-11
equipment and/or any vehicle in connection with a special event may be allowed
at other gate areas are so signed by an authorized agent of the town.
Sec. 13-6-2. Speed Limit. No vehicle shall travel at speeds in excess of fifteen (15) miles
per hour within Fort Williams Park or through any of its entrances or exits.
Article VII. School Property Regulations.
Sec. 13-7-1. Speed Limits Within the School Complex. The maximum speed limit for
all motor vehicles on all roadways within the school complex shall be 15 miles per hour.
Sec. 13-7-2. One-Way Traffic. Traffic flow shall be one-way as posted along the
driveway extending from in front of the front door of Cape Elizabeth High School to the
U-turn northerly of the community track and back to the high school access road. The
Police Chief and Fire Chief are authorized to place additional one-way signs as may be
advisable during any school construction project. These provisions shall not apply to
Town snowplowing vehicles during snowplowing operations nor to mowers during
mowing operations.
Sec. 13-7-3. Parking Restrictions. Within the school complex no motor vehicles may be
parked:
a. On any area that is grassed including ballfields, esplanades and lawns; or
b. Along any driveways or access roads unless signs or pavement markings have
been placed specifically permitting parking. Any such signs or pavement
markings shall be authorized by the Chief of Police and the Fire Chief.
Sec. 13-7-4. Vehicle Travel Restriction. Within the school complex, registered motor
vehicles except for those used for maintenance and public safety purposes are restricted
to the roadways and parking lots. Vehicles are prohibited from utilizing Jordan Way for
access to and egress from the school complex except for emergency vehicles or except in
accordance with a traffic plan approved in writing by the town manager for the purpose
of relieving traffic entering the school complex. Snowmobiles on the school complex
shall be restricted to those areas immediately adjacent to the Spurwink Marsh.
Unregistered motor vehicles are prohibited on the school complex.
CHAPTER 14
BICYCLES
Adopted Effective 1/9/90
Sec. 14-1-1. Purpose. The purpose of this bicycle ordinance is to ensure the safety
and welfare of bicyclists and the public at large relative to the ownership and operation of
bicycles.
Sec. 14-1-2. Bicycle Licenses. The Cape Elizabeth Police Department shall as a
public service provide a system of bicycle licensing in order to assist in the recovery of
bicycles separated from their owner. A copy of this ordinance shall be given to each
bicycle licensee and shall be distributed during any bicycle safety programs sponsored by
the Cape Elizabeth Police Department.
Sec. 14-1-3. Bicycle Operation.
A. All operators of a bicycle shall:
1. Operate their bicycle as far as is practicable to the right side of the road
except when making left turns.
2. Limit ridership on their bike only to the number of persons for which their
bike is designed.
3. Not ride other than astride a regular or permanent seat.
4. Not operate a bicycle abreast or beside any part of another bicycle upon any
public way except while passing another bicycle.
5. Be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable
to drivers of motor vehicles, except as to special regulations and to provisions
in State Statutes which by their nature can have no application.
6. Not attach themselves to a moving vehicle.
7. Obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other
control devices applicable to vehicles.
8. Stay within lined paved shoulders when at least three feet of pavement is
available within a lined paved shoulder.
9. Yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and to oncoming motor vehicles.
2
10. Not exceed a posted motor vehicle speed limit.
B. All bicycles operated on a public way shall:
1. When used at nighttime, be equipped with a lighted lamp on the front.
2. Have reflectors or reflective tape clearly visible from the rear.
3. Be equipped with a functional brake.
`
Sec. 14-1-4. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of Sec. 14-1-3 by
improperly operating a bicycle, or by operating an improper bicycle, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to a fine up to the amount of $50.00, to be recovered for the use
of the Town by action brought in the District Court or in another court of competent
jurisdiction.
1
CHAPTER 15
SEWER
Article I. Sewage Ordinance. [Originally adopted eff. 12/22/1971 under R.S.1964,
T.30. §2151 & 4353; Amended eff. 3/15/1995; Amended eff. 6/7/1995, Amended eff.
12/10/2003 and Amended eff. 8/10/2007)
Sec. 15-1-1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health and general
welfare of the citizens of the Town of Cape Elizabeth by regulating and restricting the
construction and use of sewage systems and the accumulation, transportation, treatment and
disposal of sewage in such a manner that the creation of any sewage system, whether public,
private or industrial, shall not result in pollution, health hazard or other nuisance. It is the
further purpose of this ordinance to provide for the equitable allocation of the capital and
operating costs of the public sewage system among municipal use and the general public
benefit, private use and the availability of use to properties not connected to the system.
[2nd sentence added eff. 9/27/1978.]
Sec. 15-1-2. Scope. Hereafter any person owning any building or structure within the
Town of Cape Elizabeth which is the source of sewage and/or industrial wastes or who
proposes to erect such building or structure shall conform to the requirements of the statutes,
the State Plumbing Code, this ordinance and any regulations thereunder.
Sec. 15-1-3. Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this Article shall be as follows:
(a) "Appeals Board" shall mean the Board of Zoning Appeals as provided in
accordance with Section 15-1-10 [Amended eff. 3/15/1995].
(b) "Building Drain" shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
eight (8) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
(c) "Building Inspector" shall mean the Building Inspector of the Town of Cape
Elizabeth.
(d) "Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
(e) "Combined Sewer" shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
(f) Engineer" shall mean the Engineer for the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
2
(g) "Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and
sale of produce.
(h) "Industrial Wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage, and
including any waste flow with a five-day biochemical oxygen demand of over 350
MG/L or outside a permissible Ph range of 5.5 to 8.5.
(i) "Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of groundwater.
(j) "Non-Residential Use" shall mean any use of a house, building or other
structure requiring the disposal of sewage other than a Residential Use. [Added eff.
August 13, 1986]
(k) "Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension.
(l) "Public Sewer Line" shall mean the public gravity sanitary sewer leading to
a sewage treatment plant. [Added eff. 8/13/1986]
(m) "Public Sewer Plan" shall mean the plan entitled "Pollution Control Planning
Sewerage Service Areas" dated January 22, 1993 prepared by T.Y. Lin
International/Hunter-Ballew Associates, as may be amended from time to time, as
approved by the Town Council. [Added eff. 3/15/1995]
(n) "Residence" shall mean a house, building or other structure used for human
occupancy by one or more family units in conformance with the Zoning Ordinance
at the time of adoption of this definition, or for which a building permit was issued at
the time of adoption of this definition. [Added eff. 8/13/1986]
(o) "Residential Use" shall mean the use of a house, building or other structure for
human occupancy by one or more family units in conformance with the Zoning
Ordinance. [Added eff. 8/13/1986]
(p) "Sanitary Sewer" and "Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage
and to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
[Amended eff. 3/15/1995]
(q) "Sewage" shall mean any one or a combination of waste capable of being water
carried from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establish3
ments, together with such incidental ground, surface, and storm waters as may be
present.
(r) "Sewage Treatment Plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures
used for at least secondary treatment and disinfection of sewage.
(s) "Shall" is mandatory; "May" is permissive.
(t) "Storm Drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") shall mean a sewer
which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
(u) "Superintendent" shall mean the Director of Public Works of The Town of
Cape Elizabeth or his authorized representative.
(v) "Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
skimming, settling or filtering.
(w) "Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
Section 15-1-4. Use of Public Sewers Required.
(a) Violations :
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited any sewage on public or private property within the Town of
Cape Elizabeth, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, except
in a manner approved by the Superintendent and at a site located on soils
from which such sewage will not contaminate ground or surface waters
and will not create a health hazard as determined from time to time by the
Superintendent and the Town Health Officer.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge wastewater into
any collection line, lateral sewer, interceptor or other means of conveying
wastewater to the Town treatment facilities, if such wastewater originates
from any building facility or other manner of construction which is erected
or otherwise placed on or after the effective date of this ordinance, in
whole or part upon land which is defined as a wetland area within the
meaning of Executive Order 11990 for the Protection of Wetlands or is
located within the 100 year flood boundaries shown on the Southern Cape
Elizabeth Hazard Boundary Map issued through the National Flood
Insurance Program. (Amended eff. 3/11/1989)
4
(b) Eligibility for existing residences:
A lot owner may connect an existing residence to the public sewer provided the
residence is within a Sewage Service Area as shown upon the Public Sewer Plan,
and such connection is not prohibited by Section 15-1-4(a) or any other applicable
provision of local, State or federal law or regulation. Such connection, and any
extension for such connection, shall be made at the sole cost of the lot owner.
[Amended eff. 3/15/1995]
(c) Eligibility for new residences:
A lot owner may connect a new residence to the public sewer if such lot is within
a Sewage Service Area as shown on the Public Sewer Plan, provided the criteria
set forth above in subparagraph b) are met and the lot owner pays any charges
levied pursuant to Section 15-1-11, as such sewer charges may be amended and
approved from time to time by the Town Council.
(d) Eligibility for multiple connections:
An owner of two or more lots located within a Sewage Service Area as shown on
the Public Sewer Plan may connect two or more new residences to the public
sewer, provided each lot to be connected:
1) meets the criteria set forth in paragraph c above, and
2) such owner satisfies the Town Engineer that there exists sufficient
capacity in the public sewer system proposed to serve the proposed lots
giving consideration to, among other things, the number of units/uses
presently connected, the number of units/uses approved but not yet
connected, the number of residential units which are eligible but have not
yet connected pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, as well as the
secondary impact of the foregoing on the public sewage system.
[Amended eff. 3/15/1995]
(e) Eligibility for Non-Residential Uses:
A lot owner may connect an existing or proposed structure designed or
used for non-residential use, provided:
1. The structure is within a Sewage Service Area shown upon the
Public Sewer Plan; and
2. The Town Engineer has determined there is sufficient capacity in
the public sewage system to which the structure would be
connected giving consideration to, among other things, those
factors set forth in paragraph (d)(2) above. The Planning Board
5
shall approve or deny a requested non-residential connection as
part of its Site Plan review and approval process under Section 19-
2-9 based upon the Engineer's determination of capacity. [Added
eff. 3/15/1995]
f. Lots Which Must Connect to the Public Sewer.
The owner of any house, building or other structure used for human occupancy,
employment, recreational or other purpose which requires the disposal of sewage
and which is located upon a lot eligible to connect to the public sewer as provided
above, shall at the owner's expense connect its sewer facility directly to the public
sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, unless:
(1) such house, building or other structure is located more than one hundred
fifty (150) feet from the public sewer line; or
(2) such house, building or other structure has as of the effective date of this
ordinance disposed of its sewage by a private subsurface sewage disposal
system, and such owner has filed with the local plumbing inspector a
certification by an authorized soils evaluator that the private subsurface
sewage disposal system is not malfunctioning. Such certification shall be
presumed valid and accurate but shall not bind the Town or local
plumbing inspector in regard to compliance with private sewage
requirements set forth elsewhere in this ordinance, the State Plumbing
Code, or as otherwise applicable.
(3) such house, building, or other structure is located in the Town Center
Zone as of June 7, 1995 and is in compliance with paragraph (2) above
with regard to an existing private subsurface sewage disposal system.
Connection to the public sewer shall not be required for a change of use or
addition to an existing house, building or other structure located in the
Town Center Zone, subject to compliance with the sewage requirements
set forth elsewhere in this ordinance, the State Plumbing Code, or as
otherwise applicable. [Amended Eff. 6/7/1995]
For the purpose of calculating the one hundred fifty (150) foot
measurement set forth in Sub-paragraph 1 above, the measurement shall be made
(i) from the end of any stub provided by the Town, otherwise from the public
sewer line, (ii) to a point on the building foundation other than the foundation for
any garage or other attached accessory building unless it contains a toilet or sink,
or contains other facilities regularly generating sewage, (iii) by the shortest route
passing through the property in which the owner has the right to install, use and
maintain a building sewer. [Added eff. 9/27/1978, Revised eff. 8/13/1986]
(g) Mechanical Pumping Required:
6
In any building in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to a
public sewer, sewage or industrial wastes carried therein shall be lifted by
approved mechanical means by the owner and discharged to the public sewer.
(h) No Connections Prior to Treatment Facilities Construction:
In the event that a public sewer be constructed before the treatment facilities to
which it will lead have been placed in operation, no owner shall connect to such
sewer prior to the placing of such facility in operation unless the Superintendent
has first determined that such connection and the ultimate sewage discharge there
from are lawful and that the sewers to be utilized are adequate for such additional
use. [Revised eff. 12/22/1976]
(i) Amendments to the Sewer Service Area (Added eff. 12/10/2003)
The sewer service area plan may be expanded by vote of the Town Council, after
receiving a recommendation from the Cape Elizabeth Planning Board, if:
1. The Town Council finds that the sewer system, including all
impacted pipes, pump stations and treatment works, has sufficient
non-peak and peak capacity for potential service within the area
encompassed by the expansion;
2. The expansion is in conformance with the Town’s comprehensive
plan; and
3. The expanded sewer service area is:
a. A lot designated on the Town Neighborhood Sewer
Connection Eligibility Map;
b. A lot within 500’ of an existing Sewer Service Area; or
c. An area proposed for new development in accordance with
the Open Space Zoning Standards, Sec. 19-7-2, of the
Zoning Ordinance.
If the expanded sewer service area is an area proposed for new
development in accordance with the Open Space Zoning
Standards, Sec. 19-7-2 of the Zoning Ordinance, no connection to
the sewer system shall be permitted until the development receives
approval from the Cape Elizabeth Planning Board for compliance
with Sec. 19-7-2, Open Space Zoning Standards.
4. All sewer extensions shall be designed by a registered engineer. Its
design shall be subject to review and approval by the Town
7
Engineer, and its design, construction and acceptance shall be in
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 15-1-7. An extension of the
sewer system shall be at the expense of the lot owner(s) requesting
the extension, unless the Town Council elects to fund all or part of
the sewer extension costs.
Sec. 15-1-5. Private Sewage Disposal. [Revised eff. 6/10/1981]
(a) Where a public sewer is not available under the provisions of Sec.
15-1-4(b), any new building sewer shall be connected to a private disposal
system complying with the provisions of all applicable local, state and federal
statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, as amended from time to time,
including particularly Article II, Private Sewage Disposal Ordinance, of this
Chapter 15.
(b) When a property owner is required to connect an existing structure to the
public sewer in accordance with the provisions hereof, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 90 days after date of official notice and the private
septic tank or cesspool shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run
gravel or soil.
(c) The contents pumped or otherwise removed from private sewage disposal
systems or sewage holding tanks of Cape Elizabeth residents may be discharged
to a part of the public sewer system leading to a sewage treatment plant, upon
approval from, and proof of source satisfactory to, the Superintendent and upon
payment of such fees as the Town Council shall from time to time determine.
Sec. 15-1-6. Building Sewers and Connections.
(a) Any person proposing a new discharge into the public sewer system or a
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
discharged into the public sewer system shall notify the Superintendent at least
forty-five (45) days prior to the proposed change or connection. No unauthorized
person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or
disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereto without first obtaining a written
permit from the Superintendent.
(b) There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and
commercial services, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special
form furnished by the Town. This permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the
judgment of the Superintendent. The Town Council shall establish, alter from
time to time and levy upon persons making sewer connections permit and
inspection fees for both classes of building sewer permits in such amounts and
8
with such reasonable classifications and differentiations as the Town Council may
from time to time deem adequate and reasonable.
(c) The owner of any property which the Town extends a sewer stub to a point
outside the paved way, or on which the Town connects a building sewer to the
public sewer, shall be charged a start-up assessment in such amount and payable
at such time as the Town Council may determine from time to time. [Revised eff.
9/27/1978]
(d) All cost and expense incident to the installation, connection, maintenance,
repair, replacement or use of the building sewer, including any stub provided by
the Town, shall be paid by the owner. The owner shall reimburse the Town for
any loss or damage that may be occasioned directly or indirectly, to the public
sewer, street or other property, by the installation and connection of the building
sewer. [Revised eff. 9/27/1978]
(e) A separate and independent sewer shall be provided for every building. Old
building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this ordinance.
(f) All building sewer design, materials, excavation, joints and connections shall
be made so as to prevent infiltration of surface or subsurface waters and in
accordance with standards adopted by the Superintendent, which standards shall
be published and shall follow good engineering practice. The diameter of the
building sewer shall not be less than four (4) inches. The depth of building
sewers shall be sufficient to afford protection from the frost, but in no event shall
be less than three (3) feet. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and
in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only
with properly curved pipe and fittings and with properly installed curvilinear
sewers with a minimum radius of 150 feet on a uniform grade. The ends of
building sewers which are not connected to the building drain of the structure for
any reason, shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable stopper, plug, or other
approved means. [First sentence revised eff. 9/27/1978]
(g) The connection of the building sewer into an existing public sewer shall be
made at the existing public sewer. The method of connection of the building
sewer to the public sewer will be dependent upon the type of pipe material used
and in all cases shall be approved by the Superintendent. The connection of the
building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" or "T" branch. If
none is available, a connection may be made by tapping the existing sewer by a
method approved by the Superintendent.
(h) The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent.
9
When trenches are opened for the laying of building sewer pipes, such trenches
shall be inspected by the Superintendent before the trenches are filled; and the
person performing such work shall notify the Superintendent when the installation
of the building sewer is completed. If the trench is filled before inspection, the
Superintendent shall require it to be re-excavated for inspection.
(i) When any building sewer is to serve a school, hospital, or similar institution or
public building, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial buildings, or
will receive sewage or industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent
maintenance of said building sewer can reasonably be anticipated, then such
building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer through one or more
manholes. The Engineer shall determine whether this type of connection to the
public sewer is required, and the manner of accomplishing it. Connections to
existing manholes shall be made as directed by the Superintendent.
(j) All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
Sec. 15-1-7. Sewer Extensions. (Revised eff. 12/10/2003 and 8/10/2007)
(a) The installation of all sewer extensions must be subject to periodic inspection
by the Superintendent and the expenses for this inspection shall be paid for by the
owner, builder or developer. The Superintendent's decisions shall be final in
matters of quality and methods of construction.
(b) Any sewer extension constructed in accordance with Sec. 15.1-7 shall comply
with minimum standards developed by the sewer superintendent and approved by
the town manager. A copy of the minimum standards shall be filed with the town
clerk. [Amended eff. 7/14/1987 and 8/10/2007]
Sec. 15-1-8. Use of Public Sewers.
(a) Except as provided in paragraph (c) below, no person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial
process waters to any public sewer.
(b) Except as provided in paragraph (c) below, stormwater and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Superintendent.
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet, provided that
any required waste discharge license is first obtained by the person generating
such discharge.
10
(c) An owner of a residence as defined in this ordinance may apply to the
Zoning Board of Appeals for a special permit to be allowed to continue to drain
stormwater, surface water, or melting snow or ice from roofs of such residence
into the public sewer. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant such permit only
upon finding that the cost to disconnect the present roof draining system from the
public sewer is prohibitively expensive. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall also
consider any likely physical damage which would result to the property of the
applicant, neighboring property, and any Town property which may be affected
by such discontinuance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall condition the
granting of any such special permit upon the payment to the Town of an annual
special permit fee of not less than the estimated cost, including capital and operating,
of processing such additional flow in the public sewer system, which
amount shall not be less than the minimum annual residential sewer charge. If a
special permit is granted, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall require an attested
copy thereof to be recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds setting
forth the name of the record owner(s), a description of the property affected
(including a book and page reference to such owner(s) for source of title) and any
conditions which may be imposed. [Added eff. 3/15/1995]
(d) Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F.
2. Any waters or wastes containing fats, grease, or oils, whether emulsified
or not, exceeding an average of 50 parts per million.
3. Any gasoline, benzine, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil, or other flammable
or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
4. Any noxious or malodorous gas such as hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide
or nitrous oxide or other substance, which either singly or by interaction
with other waste, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life
or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
5. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower
or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Superintendent.
6. Any ashes, cinder, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastic, cardboard, wood, or any other solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
11
7. Any waters or wastes containing a radioactive, toxic or poisonous
substance, a high chloride demand or suspended solids in sufficient
quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage works or treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the
receiving waters or the effluent of the Town's sewage treatment plant.
(e) All industrial wastes which are compatible with domestic sewage shall be
permitted to enter any public sewer. The Town reserves the right to require
pretreatment of any non-compatible industrial waste to prevent shock loads and
insure its compatibility with domestic sanitary sewage, and it further reserves the
right to require a firm, long-term service contract for all waste source generating
more than 10,000 gallons of waste water/sewage per day or generating more than
200 pounds of 5-day biochemical oxygen demand per day, under which a special
sewer service charge may be established in accordance with Sec. 15-1-11(d).
(f) In the event that grease, oil or sand may be in the wastes, such wastes may be
discharged into a public sewer provided that there shall be installed interceptors in
the building sewer which shall be of a type and of a capacity approved by the
Superintendent, shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection, shall be constructed of impervious material capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature, and shall be of
substantial construction watertight and gastight. Such interceptors shall be
maintained by the persons owning same, at their expense, and in continuously
efficient operation at all times.
(g) All other industrial wastes shall be transported in a building sewer to a
sewage disposal system which shall be controlled and maintained by the person
causing the potential nuisance, which has been specifically designed by a
registered engineer to take care of the load to which it will be subjected, and
which shall be built and maintained in accordance with the State Plumbing Code
and with all other applicable requirements.
(h) All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring
of their discharges as the Superintendent and/or other duly authorized employees
of the Town may reasonably require, including installation, use and maintenance
of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting the results of such
monitoring to the Superintendent. The Superintendent shall make such records
available upon request to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the
receiving waters.
Sec. 15-1-9. Entry on Private Property.
(a) The Superintendent, the Engineer, and other duly authorized employees of the
Town bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
12
(b) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purpose of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
Sec. 15-1-10. Appeals. (Revised eff. 9/9/1987)
Appeals from acts or failure or refusal to act by the proper authorities of the Town
under the provisions of this ordinance shall be to the Board of Zoning Appeals and shall
be governed by Sec. 19-4-7 et seq of the Zoning Ordinance. [Amended eff. 5/10/1994
and 3/15/1995]
Sec. 15-1-11 Sewer Service Charges.
(a) The Town Council is hereby authorized to establish, alter from time to time,
and levy upon persons owning land eligible to connect to the public sewer as
provided in Sec. 15-1-4 whether such public sewer has been constructed prior to
or after the effective date of this ordinance, a service charge for the use of and for
the services furnished by such public sewer, or available to such land, whether or
not such land is connected thereto or is improved.
If the owner of land eligible to connect to the public sewer is not required
to so connect pursuant to the provision of 15-1-4, the owner shall nonetheless be
liable for such service charges. An owner of land eligible for more than one
sewer connection for residential use pursuant to Sec. 15-1-4 who desires to
perpetually combine two (2) or more contiguous developable lots or to
perpetually restrict a single lot that could otherwise be developed into two or
more lots by subdivision or for two or more dwelling units by application of
Multiplex Housing Standards, may do so by executing and recording in the
Cumberland County Registry of Deeds an instrument effectively so committing
his or her land in perpetuity upon a form prepared by or satisfactory to the Town.
Such commitment shall be effective from and after its recording at the expense of
the owner. Should such owner or subsequent owner of the parcel or parcels so
committed desire to be relieved of such commitment in the future, the Town
Council may approve the release from such commitment, provided it is satisfied
there is sufficient capacity in the public sewer, upon such terms and conditions as
are just and equitable, including the requirement that the owner reimburse the
Town for all taxes, sewer service charges and/or other assessments, plus interest,
that were uncollected due to such commitment. [Amended eff. 7/8/1987 and
3/15/1995]
13
(b) The user charge system shall comply with appropriate Federal and State rules
and regulations pertaining to the costs associated with the construction and use of
public sewers, and shall further the equitable allocation of the capital and
operating costs of the public sewage system among municipal use and the general
public benefit, private use, and the availability of use to properties not connected
to the system. Subject to these requirements, such charges and any classification
thereon shall be fair and reasonable, bearing a substantial relationship to the cost
of providing sewage facilities and services to the municipality. Such charges
shall be at a rate sufficient to approximate not less than 90% of the total annual
cost on providing sewage facilities and services to the municipality. The
remainder of such total annual cost shall be raised by taxation. Such amount
raised by taxation, and all receipts from readiness-to-serve charges, shall be used
to defray construction expenditures and debt service. [Amended eff. 9/27/1978.]
(c) Sewer service charges shall be billed periodically at such intervals as the
Town Council may determine and the Town may use the service, procedures and
personnel of a third party for such purpose. Sewer service charges shall be
collected as provided by statute and an interest charge at the same rate as
currently established by the Town Council for uncollected property taxes shall be
made upon all bills not paid within such period after the date of billing as the
Town Council may determine. [Amended eff. 9/27/1978 and 7/23/1980.]
(d) A special sewer service charge and industrial cost recovery charge shall be
established for any industrial firm or organization which contributed process
waste water to the public sewer system. Such charges shall comply with appropriate
federal and state rules and regulations pertaining to the costs associated
with the use of the sewer by an industry. The Town Council, after appropriate
study and advice from the Engineer, shall establish such special sewer service
charge and cost recovery charge to the industrial firm by separate agreement with
said firm.
(e) Any person may place on his or her property, at his or her own expense, a meter
which shall be approved by the Town manager to measure the amount of water used on
the property which does not enter the public sewer, and an adjustment of the sewer
charge shall be made in conformance with said metered use. [Added eff. 5/23/1979.]
Sec. 15-1-12 Penalties.
(a) Any person, individual, firm, corporation, or partnership who violates any provision
of this ordinance, other than those provisions pertaining to the payment of charges for
services established herein, shall be guilty of a civil violation and shall be punishable by a
civil penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $100.00 to be recovered for the use of
the Town. The continued violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a
separate offense for each and every day such violation shall continue. [Amended eff.
3/15/1995]
14
(b) The proper authorities of the Town, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceedings including request for injunctive relief to prevent any
unlawful use, construction or maintenance of cesspools, septic tanks, sewage disposal
systems, pipes or drains, to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to prevent the
occupancy of any building, structure or land where said violations are found.
(c) Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall become liable to the Town
for any expense, including legal fees and costs, loss, or damage occasioned to the Town
by reason of such violation.
Sec. 15-1-13. Validity.
(a) The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this ordinance shall
not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
(b) In any case where a provision of this ordinance is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance or code of the Town existing on the effective date of this
ordinance, the provision which established the higher standard for the promotion and
protection of health, safety and welfare shall prevail.
Article II.
Private Sewage Disposal Ordinance [Adopted eff. 12/10/1980 under R.S. 1964, T.30, Sec.
2151 & Sec. 3221 revised eff. 4/8/1981 and revised eff. 08/10/2007]
Sec. 15-2-1 Regulation of Private Sewerage Disposal Systems
The regulation of private sewerage disposal systems shall be in accordance with the latest
revision of the Maine Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules 144 CMR 241 adopted under the
authority of Title 22 MRSA Sec. 42.
SHORE RD
SPURWINK AVE
SAWYER RD
MITCHELL RD
FOWLER RD
BOWERY BEACH RD
OCEAN HOUSE RD
WELLS RD
TWO LIGHTS RD
MONASTERY RD
EASTMAN RD
OAKHURST RD
FIELDWAYS
LN TRUNDY RD
HUNTS POINT RD
ZEB COVE RD
BROAD COVE RD
POMEROY RD
HANNAFORD COVE RD
KETTLE COVE RD
BELFIELD RD
CHARLES E JORDAN RD
PROUT PL
REEF RD
WOODLAND AVE
PEABBLES COVE RD
FOX HILL RD
ALEWIFE COVE RD
CRANBROOK DR
SALT SPRAY LN
LONG POINT LN
PHILIP RD
WOOD RD
OLD FORT RD
COLUMBUS RD
JEWETT RD
OCEAN VIEW RD
LITTLEJOHN RD
IVIE RD
BEACON LN
STATE AVE
DYER POND RD
OCEAN AVE
MANTER ST
TRELAWNY TRAIL
FARM HILL RD
OCEAN RD
BEACH BLUFF TER
ROCK CREST DR
CHEVERUS RD
HAMPTON RD
ALGONQUIN RD
WABUN RD
AVON RD
HARRISON RD
FOREST RD
MCKENNEY POINT RD
HILL WAY
SURF RD
PILOT POINT RD
HERON POINT
CROSSHILL RD
MAPLE LN
RAMBLE RD
OLD MILL RD
HARRIMAN
FARM DR
RUNNING TIDE RD
STILLMAN ST
EASTFIELD RD
POWERS RD
CLIFF AVE
STAR RD
ROBINHOOD RD
TIGER LILY LN
FICKETT ST
STARBOARD DR
VALLEY RD
BLAKE RD
BOAT COVE RD
DEAN WAY
PLEASANT AVE
FENWAY RD
MISTY LN
BRENTWOOD RD
LYDON LN
CUNNER LN
PREBLE ST
BROOK RD
THRASHER RD
FARM'S EDGE RD
LAWSON RD
PINE RIDGE RD
GLEN AVE
MORGAN LN
SPOONDRIFT LN
DAVCARLEY RD
ALBION RD
SUNNY
BANK RD
STONE DR
WEBSTER FARM RD
OAKWOOD RD
STONY BROOK RD
WATERHOUSE RD
STROUT RD
SUNRISE DR
MARE'S HOLLOW LN
LINWOOD ST
CHAMBERS RD
JORDAN FARM RD
CLINTON RD
ROSEWOOD
DR
STONE
BRIDGE RD
WARREN AVE
COOPER DR
SWEETSIR RD
SEA STAR LN
BRIDLE PATH WAY
POND
VIEW RD
WAINWRIGHT
DR
GOLDEN
RIDGE LN
BACCHUS PL
TWO HOUSE RD
JORDAN
WAY
TODD RD
SUSAN RD
SEAL COVE LN
SALT
MARSH
WAY
BALSAM RD
HAMLIN
ST
JULIE ANN LN
BROWNSTONE LN
RUSSET LN
HILLCREST DR
WINDMILL LN
PEARL ST
GREENVIEW DR
SPURWINK AVE
OCEAN HOUSE RD
BREAKWATER FARM RD
COLE FIELD RD
CANTER LN
MURRAY DR
LONGFELLOW DR
STONEGATE RD
GLADYS RD
COTTAGE FARMS RD
FESSENDEN RD
ANGELL POINT RD
LEDGEWOOD LN
WAUMBEK RD
MERRIMAN RD
ARBOR LN
TALL PINE RD
HIGH VIEW RD
ORCHARD RD
RICHMOND TERR
LOCKSLEY RD
PARK RD
ROCKY HILL RD
RAND RD
YOUNG LN
PULPIT ROCK RD
HIGH BLUFF RD
CHARLES RD
HUMPHREYS RD
KATAHDIN
RD
ELMWOOD RD
MEADOW WAY
MCAULEY RD
TWO LIGHTS TERR
DEER
RUN RD
OT TAWA RD
HOB STONE RD
CHAMPION RD
SURFSIDE AV E
COTTAGE LN
CAPE WOODS DR
CHANNEL VIEW RD
SILVA DR
ENT 5
ENT 1
ENT 3
ENT 2
PARK CIR
PHANTOM FARM RD
JUNIPER LN
STEEPLEBUSH RD
RAM LIGHT LN
DENNISON DR
VERNON RD
GULL CREST DR
OAKVIEW
DR
SOUTHWELL
RD
SEA VIEW AVE
BAYBERRY
LN
LION'S FIELD
ACCESS RD
POPLAR
LN
RIDGE RD
WOODCOCK RD
CANTERBURY
WAY
OLDE
COLONY LN
WHEELER RD
LINDENWOOD
RD
WINDING WAY
GROVER RD
WOODS
KNOLL
RD
SWEET
FERN RD
TOWER DR
SOLOMON JORDAN RD
KILLDEER RD
ROCKY
KNOLL RD
SPRUCE LN
CAPT
ELLIOT RD
LYDON LN EAST
DEARBORN DR
BIRCH
KNOLLS
CRESCENT
VIEW AVE
CEDAR
LEDGE
RD
BAYVIEW RD
ROUNDABOUT LN
ROCKY POINT LN
OLD SEA
POINT RD
DEERFIELD LN
WOODCREST RD
PATRICIA DR
HOLMAN DR
FIELDSTONE
RD
HAWTHORN
RD
FRIAR LN
CRAGMOOR
RD
BECKY'S
COVE LN
GRANITE
RIDGE RD
ST.
ALBAN'S
LN
ALEXANDER DR
ISLAND VIEW RD
MASEFIELD TERR
GREAT
POND
TERR
HERMIT
THRUSH
RD
WENTWORTH RD
WINTERS LN
SMUGGLERS
COVE RD
VILLAGE LN
DAWE RD
OLD PROPRIETOR RD
PINE
POINT
RD
BERMAN
RD
BIRCHWOOD
RD
DYER LN
TRANSFER STATION RD
LIGHTHOUSE POINT RD
PEPPERGRASS RD
APPLE
TREE
LN
MEADOWVIEW
LN
BEVERLY
TERR
CARRIAGE
HILL
RD
GRAYSTONE
RD
OLD FARM LN
GATELEDGE
DR
SOUTH ST
CRESCENT RD
HEMLOCK
HILL RD
STIRRUP
RD
BAKER RD
MOUNTAIN VIEW RD
PLEASANT
VALLEY
WESTFIELD
RD
PEABBLE
POINT LN
MAIDEN COVE LN
PHEASANT
HILL RD
ROCK
WALL LN
CAPT STROUT CIR
ABBEY
LN
SALLI ANN LN
BRUCE
AVE
WINSLOW PL
TIDES
EDGE RD FAIRWAY
DR
ELIZABETH RD
RAM LIGHT LN
ERIE RD
WESTMINSTER TERR
GORDONS
LN
CHIMNEY
ROCK RD
GELDERT
LN
BIRCH RD
QUARTZ
KNOB
RD
CHESTERWOOD
RD
GLENDEN
RD
CHERRY
CIR
CARDINAL LN
MERRIMAC PL
HEATHERSTONE
LN
SHAW
FARM RD
S CURVE ST
OAK
KNOLL RD
CITY
VEW RD
WAVERLEY
RD
MAPLEWOOD RD
CONCORD PL
MONTGOMERY TERR
DRIFTWOOD LN
BOAT HOUSE LN
EVERGREEN
CIR
WILTON LN
PENWOOD
CIR
RESOLUTION PL
MOONSHADOW
L N
WINDWARD WAY
HUNTER PL
GARDEN LN
BRADFORD RD
WEDGEWOOD RD
FERNWOOD RD
SUMMIT
RD
STEPHENSON ST
WHALE
BACK WAY
WILDWOOD DR
OLD OCEAN
HOUSE RD
SCOTT
MANOR WAY
DYER RD
CHARLES E JORDAN RD
HERITAGE
COURT COVE VIEW
RUGOSA
WAY
KENYON LN
KEYES LN
DEEP BROOK RD
ANN
ARBOR DR
ABACO DR
SAWYER RD
HARRISON AVE
SHIPWRECK COVE RD
TWO LIGHTS RD
BEACH ROSE LN
RAM ISLAND
FARM RD
OVERLOOK
LN
IRONCLAD RD
SINGLES RD
WOOD RD
ALGONQUIN
RD EXT
COOT
LN
GAYFIELDS RD
ODYSSEY LN
FARM TRAIL
LITTLE
POND LN
PURPOODOCK
DR
LEIGHTON
FARM RD
AUTUMN
TIDES RD
PENNY LN
BIGELOW
WAY
EMERALD
WAY
ARLINGTON
LN
SEA BARN RD
CEDAR RD
EDGEWOOD RD
BLUEBERRY RD
RED OAK
DR
ROBERTS LN
POINT RD
DERMOT DR
THOMPSON RD
TANAGER LN
ROUTE 77
Prepared by the Planning Office 1/4/2016
Scale: 1" = 1000'
0 1,000 500 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000
Feet
2015
Autumn Tides
Business A
Growth Area
Northern
Peebbles Cove
Running Tide
South Shore
Town Center
Town of Cape Elizabeth
Sewer Service Areas
2015
Ü

1
CHAPTER 16
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
(Adopted effective November 5, 2016)
Article I. Purpose, Authority, Scope, Definitions 1
Sec. 16-1-1 Purpose 2
Sec. 16-1-2 Authority 2
Sec. 16-1-3 Scope 2
Sec. 16-1-4 Definitions 2
Article II. Review Procedures 7
Sec. 16-2-1. General Procedures 7
Public Notice 7
Review Escrow Account 8
Sec. 16-2-2. Pre-Application Process 8
Sec. 16-2-3. Review & Approval of Minor Subdivision Plans 8
Sec. 16-2-4. Review & Approval of Major Subdivision Plans 10
Sec. 16-2-5. Amendments to Previously Approved
Subdivision Plans 13
Sec. 16-2-6. Post Approval Requirements 14
Performance Guarantee 14
Sec. 16-2-7. Construction Administration 16
Article III. Standards 18
Sec. 16-3-1. Subdivision Review Standards 18
Sec. 16-3-2. Road Design & Construction Design 25
Road Classification Standards Table 31
Sec. 16-3-3. Design of Other Improvements 33
Sec. 16-3-4. Additional Standards 34
Sec. 16-3-5. Waivers 34
Sec. 16-3-6 Legal Provisions 34
Appendix A. Minor Subdivision Submission list 36
Appendix B. Major Subdivision Submission list 39
Appendix C. Road Tree List 45
Appendix D. Turnaround designs 48
Appendix E. Road Design Cross Sections 50
2
ARTICLE I. Purpose, Authority, Scope, Definitions.
Sec. 16-1-1. Purpose. This Ordinance is designed to promote the health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the Inhabitants of the Town of Cape Elizabeth by
encouraging and ensuring sound planning, the use of the environment under healthful
conditions, the imaginative and orderly use of land, compliance with the goals and
objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, and development that fits harmoniously into the
existing natural environment and rural character.
Sec. 16-1-2. Authority. This Ordinance shall apply to all land within the limits of the Town
of Cape Elizabeth, Cumberland County, Maine and shall be administered by the Planning
Board of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, hereinafter called “the Planning Board”, and the
Town’s designated staff.
Sec. 16-1-3 Scope.
(a) Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity proposing to sell, lease or convey,
or to offer or agree to sell, lease or convey, any land in a subdivision any portion of
which is within the limits of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, shall first submit such
subdivision for approval by the Planning Board in accordance with this Ordinance
and shall record in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds a plan thereof bearing
the approval of the Planning Board.
(b) No utility installations; no ditching, grading or construction of roads; no grading of
land or lots; and no construction of buildings shall be done on any part of the
proposed subdivision until a subdivision application has been submitted, reviewed
and finally approved as provided by this Ordinance.
Sec. 16-1-4 Definitions.
In general, words and terms used in this Ordinance shall have their customary dictionary
meanings, but the following words and terms as used in this Ordinance are defined as
follows:
“Applicant” - the record owner, or a person having an interest in the land either through
written option or contract.
“Access Road” - any road which includes (1) an eighteen (18) feet wide traveled way, (2)
deeded and actual rights of public emergency access, and (3) year-round maintenance,
including snow plowing of the road, the responsibility of which is documented in a binding
written agreement if the road is not located within a public right-of-way.
“Arterial” - a road which is a major link with other communities. This road typically
averages in excess of three thousand (3,000) trips per day with an average length of each trip
of more than one mile. Arterials accommodate residential, agricultural and most of the
Town’s commercial development. Direct access by residential development should be
3
discouraged, and commercial access should be combined with adjacent commercial uses
where feasible.
“AASHTO” - the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, an
organization that establishes transportation specifications.
“Building Envelope” - the area within a lot where the main and accessory buildings shall be
located.
“Cluster Development” - a type of subdivision development for single family detached
dwellings, multiplex dwellings, or a combination of both, where lot sizes, lot widths, and
building setbacks are reduced below the minimum requirements of this Ordinance and the
land gained thereby is set aside as open space.
“Collector” - a road that collects traffic from the most densely settled areas and typically
connects to an adjacent community. This road averages in excess of two thousand (2,000)
trips per day with an average length of each trip over more than one mile. Collectors are
located in areas with a dense, suburban pattern of development. The design of collectors
must provide heavy traffic flow capacity and protect sensitive scenic areas and
neighborhoods. Direct access by single driveway should be discouraged.
“Dead-end road” - a road with a single, common means of ingress and egress.
[Rev. eff. 7/13/94]
“Ditch” - a channel for conveying surface water outside the traveled way.
“Dwelling unit” - any part of a structure which, through sale or lease, is intended for human
habitation, including single-family and multi-family housing, condominiums, apartments
and time-share units.
“Easement”- a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or
for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. Examples of easements
include but are not limited to drainage, conservation, emergency access, pedestrian, utility,
road and open space easements.
“Emergency Access Lane”- a public or private paved road with a minimum width of
eighteen (18) feet which is not open to through vehicular traffic. This type of road may
provide secondary emergency access to an area served by a dead-end road. [Rev. eff.
6/12/91]
“Esplanade” - a landscaped strip of land located between a road and a sidewalk or between
two roads.
“Farmland” - a parcel consisting of five (5) or more acres of land that is (1) classified as
prime farmland, unique farmland or farmland of statewide or local importance by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service within the United States Department of
Agriculture; or (2) used for the production of agricultural products as defined in Title 7
M.R.S.A. Sec. 152, subsection 2.
4
“Feeder” - a road that connects local roads to other roads. This road is typically densely
developed and serves more than one-hundred (100) dwellings or approximately onethousand
(1,000) trips per day. Feeders primarily serve residential traffic where access by
single driveway is common.
“Local Road” - a road that provides direct access to adjacent residential land or the Town
center area. The local road is the most common road classification and carries a low volume
of trips in residential areas, although higher volumes are also common in the Town center
area. Local roads should be designed for slow speeds and frequent pedestrian travel.
“Lot” - an area of land in one ownership, regardless of the dates or sources of acquisition
thereof and regardless of the buildings and uses existing thereon, having definite boundaries
by recorded plan or deed and having an area of less than forty (40) acres.
“Manufactured Housing Unit” - structures, transportable in one or more sections, which
were constructed in a manufacturing facility and are transported to a building site and
designed to be used as dwellings when connected to the required utilities, including the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
“Manufactured Housing Park” - a parcel of land under unified ownership designed and/or
used to accommodate three or more manufactured housing units.
“Manufactured Housing Park Lot” - the area of land on which an individual home is
situated within a manufactured housing park and which is reserved for use by the occupants
of that home.
“MDOT” - the State of Maine Department of Transportation.
“M.R.S.A” - Maine Revised Statutes Annotated.
“MUTCD” - the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Device Standards.
“Multiplex Housing” - attached dwelling units, as defined in the Zoning Ordinance
(Chapter 19).
“Performance Guarantee” - any security that may be accepted by the Town to assure that
improvements required as part of an application for development will be completed in
compliance with the approved plans.
“Planner” - that person designated by the Town to assist the Planning Board in its
subdivision and site plan review.
“Planning Board Decision” - the Planning Board vote to approve or conditionally approve
the preliminary or final plan.
“Principal Structure” - any building other than one that is used for purposes wholly
incidental or accessory to the use of another building on the same premises.
“Private Road” - a road or way that provides access to more than one principal structure
and which is not owned by the Town.
“Resubdivision” - the replatting of all or part of the land included in a subdivision plan
already approved by the Planning Board.
“Right-of-way”- (1) a strip of land acquired by conveyance, reservation, dedication, forced
dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, sidewalk,
5
crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm
sewer, or other similar uses; (2) generally, the right of one to pass over the property of
another.
“Road” - a public or private way for vehicular traffic however designated, serving more
than one residential unit or more than one lot.
“Rural Connector” - a road that handles trips between different parts of Town and connects
rural residential development to arterials. This road typically carries less than (1,000) trips
per day with an average length of more than one (1) mile. Rural connectors are located in
primarily rural residential areas and the rural character should be maintained. Access by
residential development should preferably be by a local road, but may be from a single
driveway.
“Sight Distance” - see Section 16-3-2 (a) (1) of this Ordinance.
“Site Improvement” - all changes and construction required of a subdivision to be in
compliance with Planning Board approval and Town Standards.
"Spaghetti lot” - any lot in a proposed subdivision with shore frontage on a river, stream,
brook, great pond, or coastal wetland, as these features are defined in Title 38 M.R.S.A.
Section 480(B), with a lot depth to shore frontage ratio greater than 5 (five) to 1 (one).
“Standard Boundary Survey” - a map of a quantity of real estate prepared by a
professional land surveyor registered in the State of Maine and based on (1) adequate
research to support a professional opinion of boundary location, (2) field work including an
inspection of the real estate and (3) the preparation of a plan, drawn to scale and including
property boundary lines, easements and rights-of-way and existing structures, suitable for
recording.
“Structure” - anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or
attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground, including, but not limited
to, buildings, mobile homes, retaining walls, billboards, signs, piers and floats. It does not
include a wharf, fish weir or trap that may be licensed under Title 38 M.R.S.A. Sections
1021-1027. A new structure or structures includes any structures for which construction
begins on or after September 23, 1988. The area included in the expansion of an existing
structure is deemed to be a new structure for the purposes of the Subdivision Ordinance.
“Subdivision” - the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots within any
five (5) year period, which period begins after September 22, 1971, whether accomplished
by sale, lease, development, buildings or otherwise. The term “subdivision” also includes
the division of a new structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more
dwelling units within a five (5) year period, the construction or placement of three (3) or
more dwelling units on a single tract or parcel of and the division of an existing structure or
structures previously used for commercial or industrial use into three (3) or more dwelling
units within a five (5) year period.
A. In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into three (3) or more lots,
the first dividing of such tract or parcel is considered to create the first two (2) lots
and the next dividing of either of said first two lots, by whomever accomplished, is
considered to create a third lot, unless:
6
(1) Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots
for the subdivider’s own use as a single family residence for a period of at least
five (5) years immediately preceding the second division: or
(2) The division of the tract or parcel is otherwise exempt under subsection D below.
B. The dividing of a tract or parcel of land and the lot or lots so made, which dividing
or lots when made are not subject to the Ordinance, do not become subject to the
Ordinance by the subsequent dividing of that tract or parcel of land or any portion of
that tract or parcel of land. The municipal reviewing authority shall consider the
existence of the previously created lot or lots in reviewing a proposed subdivision
created by a subsequent dividing.
C. A lot of forty (40) or more acres shall not be counted as lots when the lot is located
entirely outside of the Shoreland Performance Overlay District.
D. Exceptions.
(1) A division accomplished by devise does not create a lot or lots for the purposes
of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of
the Ordinance.
(2) A division accomplished by condemnation does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the
objectives of the Ordinance.
(3) A division accomplished by order of court does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the
objectives of the Ordinance.
(4) A division accomplished by gift to a person related to the donor of an interest in
property held by the donor for a continuous period of five (5) years prior to the
division by gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition,
unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of the Ordinance. If
the real estate exempt under this definition is transferred within five (5) years to
another person not related to the donor of the exempt real estate as provided in
this paragraph, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the
purposes of the Ordinance. “Person related to the donor” means a spouse, parent,
grandparent, brother, sister, child or grandchild related by blood, marriage or
adoption. A gift under this definition can not be given for consideration that is
more than one-half (1/2) the assessed value of the real estate.
(5) A division accomplished by a gift to a municipality if that municipality accepts
the gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the
intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of the Ordinance.
(6) A division accomplished by the transfer of any interest in land to the owners of
land abutting that land does not create a separate lot does not create a lot or lots
for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid
the objectives of the Ordinance. If the real estate exempt under this paragraph is
transferred within five (5) years to another person without all of the merged land,
7
then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of the
Ordinance.
(7) The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been exempted
from the definition of subdivision under subsection D above, or subsequent
transfer of that entire lot by the original holder of the security interest or that
person’s successor in interest, does not create a lot for the purposes of this
definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of the
Ordinance.
E. The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots and upon each of
which lots permanent dwelling structures legally existed before September 23, 1971
is not a subdivision.
F. In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the provisions of the
Ordinance regarding the determination of the number of lots apply, including
exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land.
G. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Ordinance, leased dwelling units are not
subject to subdivision review if the municipal reviewing authority has determined
that the units are otherwise subject to Site Plan Review under the Zoning Ordinance.
“Major Subdivision” - a subdivision containing more than five (5) lots, or requiring
substantial extension of municipal facilities or any new public road.
“Minor Subdivision” - a subdivision containing not more than five (5) lots and is not
otherwise defined as a major subdivision.
“Through road” - a road with more than one means of ingress or egress. Both means of
ingress and egress must, at a minimum, meet the standards of an access road.
“Tract or parcel of land”- tract or parcel of land means all contiguous land in the same
ownership, except that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road are
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless the road was established by the
owner of land on both sides of the road after September 22, 1971.
“Town Engineer”- that person designated by the Town to provide engineering advice to the
Planning Board in its subdivision and site plan review.
“Traveled Way” - that portion of a right-of-way which is regularly used for vehicular
traffic.
Article II. Review Procedures
Sec. 16-2-1. General Procedures. In all stages of the subdivision review process, the
burden of proof shall be upon the applicant proposing the subdivision.
(a) Public Record. The Planning Board shall maintain a permanent record of all its
meetings, proceedings and correspondence. The Planning Board shall specify in writing its
decisions and findings of fact.
(b) Public Notice. When notice to abutters is required, the Planner shall cause notice to
be given by mail to the owners, as currently listed by the Town Tax Assessor, of all
8
properties within 500’ of the proposed project property line boundary. If the project abuts an
adjacent municipality, the Planner shall notify the adjacent municipality’s planning staff and
request that all pertinent property owners be notified of the project proposal. Such notice
shall include the date, time and location of the meeting and the location and general
description of the proposed development.
If a public hearing is scheduled, mailed notice shall be provided as described above. In
addition, the Planner shall cause notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to be
published at least two (2) times in a newspaper having general circulation in the Town of
Cape Elizabeth. The date of the first publication must be at least seven (7) days before the
public hearing.
(c) Review Escrow Account. In addition to the application fees set by the Town
Council, a Review Escrow Fee to defray the Town’s costs for application review by the
Town Engineer and/or other independent consulting services shall be provided. The fee
shall be recommended by the Town Engineer or consultant and approved by the Town
Manager upon initial review of the application and paid to the Town by the applicant prior
to the next meeting with the Planning Board. The fee shall be deposited in a Review Escrow
Account designated for that application. If the costs of application review by the Town
Engineer and/or other consulting services exceed the amount of the Review Escrow
Account, the applicant shall pay an additional fee to the Town that shall be recommended by
the Town Engineer or consultant and approved by the Town Manager based upon the status
of the application. Any balance in the account remaining after a final decision on the
application by the Planning Board and satisfaction of any approval conditions shall be
returned to the applicant unless there is an appeal or other legal action pending with respect
to the Planning Board’s approval. All interest from the Review Escrow Account shall accrue
to the account and shall be applied toward the Town’s cost in reviewing the application.
(d) Duration of Time. Unless otherwise specified, number of days shall be calculated as
calendar days.
Sec. 16-2-2. Pre-Application Process. Prior to submitting an application for subdivision
review, the applicant shall meet with the Planning Board at a workshop at least once to
discuss the proposal generally, acquaint the Planning Board with the nature of the proposal
and the location, topography and other attributes of its site, review potential submission
waivers and obtain preliminary classification of the proposal as either a minor or major
subdivision. The Planner shall arrange for public notice of the meeting in accordance with
Sec. 16-2-1(b) of this Ordinance.
Sec. 16-2-3. Review and Approval of Minor Subdivisions
(a) Procedures.
1. Formal Submission. The subdivision applicant or an agent duly authorized in writing,
shall submit to the Planner a subdivision application for consideration by the Planning
Board together with the fee therefore as prescribed by the Town Council, and fourteen
(14) complete copies of the proposed subdivision plans and materials. All plans and
materials shall be submitted at least eighteen (18) days prior to the Planning Board’s
next scheduled meeting. Prior to the first meeting with the Planning Board, the applicant
9
shall also establish a Review Escrow Account under the terms in Sec. 16-2-1(c) of this
Ordinance.
2. Preliminary Completeness. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a subdivision
application and accompanying materials, the Planner, in consultation with the Planning
Board Chair, shall make a preliminary determination as to completeness. If the
application is preliminarily determined to be incomplete, the Planner shall so notify the
applicant in writing and shall list in the written determination the materials that must be
submitted in order to make the application complete. If an applicant fails to submit a
complete application within four (4) months of the date of the Planner’s preliminary
written determination, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. When the Planner
makes the preliminary determination that an application is complete, the application
shall be scheduled for consideration at the next available Planning Board meeting. Once
scheduled, the Planner shall promptly notify the applicant of the time and place of such
meeting. No action taken by the Planner, either alone or in consultation with the
Planning Board Chair, with respect to reviewing a subdivision application, shall result in
an application being deemed pending for the purposes of Title 1 M.R.S.A. Sec. 302. The
Planner, either alone or in consultation with the Planning Board Chair, shall have no
authority to review the substance of a subdivision application to determine whether it
complies with the subdivision review criteria.
3. Public Notice. The Planner shall arrange for public notice of the meeting in accordance
with Sec. 16-2-1 (b) of this Ordinance.
4. Planning Board Completeness. At its first meeting for consideration of an application for
approval of a subdivision, the Planning Board shall determine whether the application is
complete or incomplete. Within seven (7) days of the first regular meeting, the Planning
Board shall provide to the applicant a dated letter acknowledging receipt of the
application and the Planning Board’s determination as to completeness. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning Board shall list in its written
determination the materials that must be submitted in order to make the application
complete. If an applicant fails to submit a complete application within four (4) months
of the Planning Board letter or within four (4) months of the written determination of the
Planner, the application shall be deemed withdrawn, unless said time limitation is
otherwise extended by the Planning Board for good cause. When the application is
deemed complete, the Planning Board shall begin review of the proposed subdivision.
5. Site Walk. One or more site walks may be scheduled by the Planning Board. The
applicant shall provide temporary markers of key subdivision elements, such as but not
limited to road centerlines and wetland boundaries, on the site prior to the site walk at
the request of the Planning Board.
6. Public Hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on a minor subdivision
application within thirty (30) days of the date that the application is determined to be
complete. Public notice shall be provided in accordance with Section 16-2-1(b) of this
Ordinance.
10
The Planning Board shall conduct the hearing as to assure full, but not repetitive, public
participation. The applicant shall be prepared to respond fully to questioning by the
public and the Planning Board. The Planning Board may, upon its own motion, extend
the hearing once for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days and to a date that shall be
announced.
7. Planning Board Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, or approve with
conditions, or disapprove the Subdivision Plan: (i) within sixty (60) days from the date
of the date that the application is determined to be complete, or (ii) within such other
time that may be mutually agreed upon by both the Planning Board and the applicant.
(b) Submission Requirements. Minor Subdivision Plan submissions shall conform to
the standards and requirements contained in Appendix A of this Ordinance.
Sec. 16-2-4. Review and Approval of Major Subdivision Plans.
(a) Preliminary Plan Procedures.
1. Formal Submission. The subdivision applicant, or an agent duly authorized in writing,
shall submit to the Planner a subdivision application for consideration by the Planning
Board together with the fee therefore as prescribed by the Town Council, and fourteen
(14) complete copies of the proposed preliminary subdivision plans and materials. All
plans and materials shall be submitted at least eighteen (18) calendar days prior to the
Planning Board’s next scheduled meeting. Prior to the first meeting with the Planning
Board, the applicant shall also establish a Review Escrow Account under the terms in
Sec. 16-2-1(c) of this Ordinance.
2 Preliminary Completeness. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a preliminary
subdivision application and accompanying materials, the Planner, in consultation with
the Planning Board Chair, shall make a preliminary determination as to completeness. If
the application is preliminarily determined to be incomplete, the Planner shall so notify
the applicant in writing and shall list in the written determination the materials that must
be submitted in order to make the application complete. If an applicant fails to submit a
complete application within four (4) months of the date of the Planner’s preliminary
determination, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. When the Planner makes the
preliminary determination that an application is complete, the application shall be
scheduled for consideration at the next available Planning Board Meeting. Once
scheduled, the Planner shall promptly notify the applicant of the time and place of such
meeting. No action taken by the Planner, either alone or in consultation with the
Planning Board Chair, with respect to reviewing a subdivision application, shall result in
an application being deemed pending for the purposes of Title 1 M.R.S.A. Section 302.
The Planner, either alone or in consultation with the Planning Board Chair, shall have no
authority to review the substance of a subdivision application to determine whether it
complies with the subdivision review criteria.
3. Public Notice. The Planner shall arrange for public notice of the meeting in accordance
with Sec. 16-2-1(b) of this Ordinance.
11
4. Planning Board Completeness. At its first meeting for consideration of an application for
preliminary approval of a subdivision, the Planning Board shall determine whether the
application is complete or incomplete. Within seven (7) days of the first regular meeting,
the Planning Board shall provide to the applicant a dated letter acknowledging receipt of
the application and the Planning Board’s determination of completeness. If the
application is determined to be incomplete, the Planning Board shall list in its written
determination the materials that must be submitted in order to make the application
complete. If an applicant fails to submit a complete application within four (4) months
of the Planning Board letter or within four (4) months of the written determination of the
Planner, the application shall be deemed withdrawn unless said time limitation is
otherwise extended by the Planning Board for good cause. When the application is
deemed complete, the Planning Board shall begin review of the proposed subdivision.
5. Site Walk. One or more site walks may be scheduled by the Planning Board. The
applicant shall provide temporary markers of key subdivision elements, such as but not
limited to road centerlines and wetland boundaries, on the site prior to the site walk at
the request of the Planning Board.
6. Public Hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on a major subdivision
application within thirty (30) days of the date that the preliminary subdivision
application is determined to be complete. Public notice shall be provided in accordance
with Sec. 16-2-1(b) of this Ordinance.
The Planning Board shall conduct the hearing as to assure full, but not repetitive, public
participation. The applicant shall be prepared to respond fully to questioning by the
public and the Planning Board. The Planning Board may, upon its own motion, extend
the hearing once for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days and to a date that shall be
announced.
7. Planning Board Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, or approve with
conditions, or disapprove the Preliminary Plan: (i) within thirty (30) days after the date
of the public hearing, or (ii) within such other time that may be mutually agreed upon by
both the Planning Board and the applicant. Preliminary Plan approval shall not
constitute approval of the Final Plan, but rather shall be deemed an expression of
approval of the approach submitted on the Preliminary Plan as a guide to preparation of
the Final Plan.
(b) Preliminary Plan Submission Requirements.
Preliminary Plan submissions shall conform to the standards and requirements contained in
Appendix B of this Ordinance.
(c) Final Plan Procedures.
1. Formal Submission. Within six (6) months following the Planning Board’s approval or
approval with conditions of an applicant’s Preliminary Plan, the applicant shall file with
the Planner for Planning Board consideration, a Final Plan application for the
subdivision with fourteen (14) copies of the materials herein prescribed. If such
12
application is not filed within such period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn
and shall no longer be considered a pending subdivision application, unless said time
limitation is otherwise extended by the Planning Board for good cause.
2. Final Subdivision Plan Preliminary Completeness. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt
of a final subdivision application and accompanying materials, the Planner in
consultation with the Planning Board Chair, shall make a preliminary determination of
completeness. If the application is preliminarily determined to be incomplete, the
Planner shall so notify the applicant in writing and shall in the written determination the
materials that must be submitted in order to make the application complete. If an
applicant fails to submit a complete application within four (4) month of the date of the
Planner’s preliminary written determination, the application shall be deemed withdrawn.
When the Planner makes the preliminary determination that an application is complete,
the application shall be scheduled for consideration at the next available Planning Board
meeting. Once scheduled, the Planner shall promptly notify the applicant of the time and
place of such meeting. No action taken by the Planner, either alone or in consultation
with the Planning Board Chair, with respect to reviewing a subdivision application, shall
result in an application being deemed pending for the purposes of Title 1 M.R.S.A. Sec.
302. The Planner, either alone or in consultation with the Planning Board Chair, shall
have no authority to review the substance of a subdivision application to determine
whether it complies with the subdivision review criteria.
3. Public Notice. Once a Planning Board meeting is scheduled, the Planner shall also cause
notice to be given per Sec. 16-2-1(b) of this Ordinance.
4. Planning Board Final Subdivision Plan Completeness. At its first meeting for
consideration of an application for final approval of a subdivision, the Planning Board
shall determine whether the application is complete or incomplete. Within seven (7)
days of the first regular meeting, the Planning Board shall provide to the applicant a
dated letter acknowledging receipt of the application and the Planning Board’s
determination of completeness. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the
Planning Board shall list in its written determination the materials that must be
submitted in order to make the application complete. If an applicant fails to submit a
complete application within four (4) months of the Planning Board letter or within four
(4) months of the written determination of the Planner, the application shall be deemed
withdrawn and shall no longer be considered a pending subdivision application, unless
said time limitations is otherwise extended by the Planning Board for good cause. When
the application is deemed complete, the Planning Board shall begin review of the
proposed subdivision.
5. Site walk. One or more site walks may be scheduled by the Planning Board. The
applicant shall provide temporary markers of key subdivision elements, such as but not
limited to road centerlines and wetland boundaries, on the site prior to the site walk at
the request of the Planning Board.
13
6. Public Hearing. The Planning Board may schedule a public hearing on the final
Subdivision plan if it considers any changes in the plan sufficient to warrant further
public comment. Public notice shall be given in accordance with Section 16-2-1 (b) of
this Ordinance.
If a public hearing is held, the Planning Board shall conduct the hearing as to assure full,
but not repetitive, public participation. The applicant shall be prepared to respond fully
to questioning by the public and the Planning Board. The Planning Board may, upon its
own motion, extend the hearing once for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days and to a
date which shall be announced.
7. Planning Board Decision. The Planning Board shall approve, or approve with conditions
or disapprove the Final Subdivision Plan: (i) within thirty (30) days of the date of the
public hearing; (ii) within sixty (60) days of the date that the application was determined
to be complete if no public hearing is held; or (iii) within such other time that may be
mutually agreed upon by both the Planning Board and the applicant.
(d) Final Plan Submission Requirements. Final Subdivision Plan submissions shall
conform to the standards and requirements contained in Appendix B of this Ordinance.
Sec. 16-2-5. Amendments to Previously Approved Subdivision Plans
(a) Scope. Any change in an approved final subdivision plan including but not limited to lot
lines, road layout, and location of structures and improvements must be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Board. De minimus changes to an approved subdivision plan
may be placed on the Planning Board Consent Agenda at the discretion of the Planner.
(b) De minimus Changes. De minimus changes shall not include (1) an increase in the
number of lots or units, (2) a change to a public or private right-of way or easement, (3)
a decrease in proposed buffering or landscaping, or (4) any issue involving a condition
placed on the Subdivision approval. Prior to placement on the Consent Agenda, the
applicant shall meet with the Planner to review the proposed changes and shall provide
eight (8) copies of the revised recording plat to the Planner at least eighteen (18) days
prior to the next regular Planning Board meeting. The decision of the Planner to not
place an item on the Consent Agenda may be appealed to the Planning Board upon
submission of fourteen (14) copies of the proposed change to the Planner eighteen (18)
days prior to the next Planning Board meeting.
(c) Procedure. A public hearing may be held concerning a subdivision amendment as
prescribed in Sec. 16-2-1(b) of this Ordinance. The Planning Board may request the
submission of information included in Appendix A or B and shall review the subdivision
amendment for compliance with the standards in Sec. 16-3-1 of this Ordinance. All
amended plans must make specific reference to the original plan and its recording
information. The Planning Board Decision shall be to approve, approve with conditions
or deny the subdivision amendment.
14
(d) Subdivision vacation. Once a subdivision has been recorded, a subdivision where no
lots have been sold or the entire subdivision is owned by one entity and no alteration to
commence the subdivision has occurred on the site, may be vacated in its entirety by a
vote of the Town Council at the request of the subdivision owner. Anything less than a
complete vacation of the subdivision must be submitted to the Planning Board as an
amendment. Approval by the Town Council to vacate the subdivision must be recorded
in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds.
Sec. 16-2-6. Post Approval Requirements.
(a) Satisfaction of Planning Board Conditions of Approval. Following the Planning
Board Decision, the subdivision plans and materials shall be revised by the applicant to
comply with any conditions placed on the approval by the Planning Board. Two (2) sets
of revised plans shall be submitted to the Planner. The Planner, and other town staff as
necessary, shall review all plans for compliance with the Planning Board conditions of
approval. The Planner shall determine whether the plans have been revised to comply
with the Planning Board approval. If the applicant fails to obtain confirmation from the
Planner that the plans are in compliance with the conditions placed on the approval, the
applicant may submit the revised subdivision plans to the Planning Board in accordance
with Sec. 16-2-3(a)(1) of this Ordinance for minor subdivisions or Sec. 16-2-4(c)(1) of
this Ordinance for major subdivisions.
(b) Plan Recording. Once the plans are determined to be in compliance with the Planning
Board approval, the recording plan shall be properly signed by a majority of the
Planning Board, and shall be recorded by the subdivider in the Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds. If the subdivision approval includes phasing of the subdivision, the
recording plan shall depict all phases of the subdivision. Any final plans not so recorded
within ninety (90) days following the date of Planning Board Decision shall become null
and void. The applicant may request, prior to the expiration date, that the Planning
Board grant an extension due to particular circumstances of the applicant which
extension shall not exceed an additional period of ninety (90) days. Once recorded, the
subdivider shall provide the Planner with three (3) paper copies of the subdivision plat
with the Planning Board signatures and the book and page recording information from
the Registry of Deeds.
(c) Performance Guarantee. There shall be no sale of lots, nor building permits issued,
nor site work commenced until a Performance Guarantee has been approved by and
posted with the Town of Cape Elizabeth Town Manager.
1. Form. The Performance Guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable letter of
credit or escrow account in favor of the Town. Such Performance Guarantee shall
be satisfactory to the Town Manager and to the Town Attorney as to the issuer,
substantive sufficiency, surety and manner of execution. All performance
guarantees shall contain a provision requiring the issuer to notify the Town
Manager in writing of the scheduled expiration date at least thirty (30) days and
not more than ninety (90) days in advance of its scheduled expiration date.
Extensions of the Performance Guarantee may be granted by the Town Manager
15
for up to three (3) years from the initial expiration date at the request of the
applicant for good cause.
2. Amount. The Performance Guarantee amount shall be based on a detailed estimate
prepared by the applicant, broken down by unit cost and quantity, and reviewed by
the Town Engineer. Costs included in the estimate shall include, but not be limited
to, completion of all roads, sewer, water, drainage, open space, landscaping,
lighting and other required improvements shown on the approved plans. The cost
estimate shall also include a contingency amount equal to ten (10) percent of the
Performance Guarantee estimate. When the Performance Guarantee estimate
exceeds two hundred fifty thousand ($250,000) dollars, the contingency amount
shall be calculated at a rate of five (5) percent for that portion of the Performance
Guarantee estimate in excess of two-hundred fifty thousand ($250,000) dollars.
3. Phasing. When the Planning Board has approved phasing of a subdivision, a
Performance Guarantee may be posted for one (1) or more phases. The amount,
terms and conditions of the Performance Guarantee shall correspond with the
phase or phases scheduled to be constructed. Construction activity shall only be
located and permitted in phases for which a Performance Guarantee has been
posted.
4. Reductions and Release. All requests for reduction or release of the Performance
Guarantee shall be submitted in writing to the Town Manager. Reduction requests
should only be submitted after significant construction has been accomplished.
Prior to approving a reduction or release of a Performance Guarantee, the Town
Manager shall request a report from the Town Engineer confirming the quality and
value of the construction completed. Any reduction or release shall preserve the
Town’s ability to require or complete construction that is consistent with the
approved plans and the Town’s construction standards and/or restore and stabilize
the site if construction will not be continued. There shall be no final release of any
Performance Guarantee until the record drawings have been received and approved
by the Town Engineer.
(d) Inspection Fee. In addition to the Performance Guarantee, the applicant shall pay an
inspection fee. When the Performance Guarantee equals five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) or less, the inspection fee amount shall be five percent (5%) of the amount of
the total performance guarantee, except that the minimum inspection fee amount shall be
one-thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500). When the Performance Guarantee exceeds
five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000), the inspection fee amount shall be two and
one-half percent (2.5%) of the cost of the total Performance Guarantee. The fee shall be
payable to the Town of Cape Elizabeth. The inspection fee shall be held by the Town to
defray the Town’s cost for inspection by the Town Engineer and Town staff. Any funds
not disbursed for this purpose shall be returned to the applicant upon release of the
Performance Guarantee. If the costs for inspection exceed the amount of the inspection
fee, the applicant shall pay an additional fee to the Town, which shall be recommended
16
by the Town Engineer and approved by the Town Manager based on the status of the
development.
(e) Record drawings. Upon completion of construction, the subdivider or, when a private
road is built, the owner shall present to the Town one (1) set of reproducible mylar, one
(1) hard copy, and digital files in a format used by the project engineer during project
design or other format approved by the Public Works Director suitable for import into
the Town Geographic Information System (GIS). The record drawings shall be based on
the field logs of the construction monitor and of a quality acceptable to the Town. The
record drawings shall include an engineer's seal, distances, angles and bearings for
complete and accurate determinations of locations on the ground, right-of-way
monuments and as set, as-built profiles of the centerlines of traveled ways, ledge
elevations encountered during construction and information on the locations, size,
materials and elevations of storm drains, sanitary sewers and other underground utility
lines, including but not limited to water, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable television.
Sec. 16-2-7. Construction Administration
(a) Commencement of Construction. At least ten (10) days prior to commencing
construction of required improvements, the subdivider shall request a pre-construction
meeting with the Town Manager. At the meeting, the subdivider shall submit plans for
construction of the subdivision and notify the Town Manager when construction of such
improvements will commence. The subdivider is also responsible for communicating
ongoing progress of construction so that the Town can cause inspections and so that
requirements shall be met during construction and to assure satisfactory completion of
all improvements and utilities required by the Planning Board. [Revised eff. 11/11/83;
Revised eff. 6/13/90]
(b) Notice of Inspection. To assure proper inspection of roads and other required
improvements, the Town Engineer should be given not less than twenty-four (24) hour
notice by the subdivider for inspections required at the following construction stages: (1)
before backfilling of any surface water, sanitary sewer, domestic water or other
underground lines or improvements, (2) at completion of road subgrades and after
installation of gravel surface, (3) at the commencement of paving, loaming, or other
final surface preparation, and (4) upon final completion.
(c) Inspection of Required Improvements. All required subdivision improvements for
which a Performance Guarantee are required shall be constructed under the observation
of a qualified construction monitor. The qualifications of the construction monitor shall
be subject to the review and approval of the Town. Construction monitoring costs shall
be borne by the subdivider. The construction monitor shall be on the site during all
periods of time when significant construction is taking place. Significant construction
shall include (1) embankments, (2) bedding and backfilling of all underground utilities
including water lines, unless the installation is supervised by the utility company, (3)
installation of storm drainage and associated structures, (4) installation of sanitary
17
sewers and associated structures, (5) roadway subbase material, (6) roadway base
material, (7) paving, (8) compaction testing, and (9) sewer and manhole testing. The
duties of the construction monitor shall also include (1) knowledge of product reports
and material submittals, (2) maintenance of a diary of construction progress, and (3)
implementation of remedial measures.
(d) Authority of Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall have access to the site at all
times to review the progress of the work and shall have the authority to review the field
logs maintained by the construction monitor. Any deficiencies noted by the Town
Engineer shall be brought to the attention of the construction monitor who shall see that
remedial measures are taken.
If the Town Engineer finds upon inspection of required improvements, including an
inspection to be done by the Town Engineer before expiration of the Performance
Guarantee, that any of such improvements are not constructed in accordance with plans
and specifications filed by the subdivider, or that in the Town Engineer’s judgment the
applicant will be unable to complete the required improvement within the period
specified in the Performance Guarantee, the Town Engineer shall then so notify the
subdivider and the Town Manager, who shall take all necessary steps to preserve the
rights of the Town under the Performance Guarantee, including authorization to the
Town Engineer to stop the construction of said improvements.
(e) Field Changes. If at any time before or during the construction of the required
improvements the subdivider demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer that
unforeseen conditions make it desirable to modify the design of such improvements, the
Town Engineer may, in consultation with the Public Works Director and Planner,
authorize modifications provided that they are within the spirit and intent of the
Planning Board approval and do not constitute waiver or substantial alteration of the
function of any improvements required by the Planning Board. The Town Engineer shall
issue any authorization under this section in writing, and shall transmit a copy of such
authorization to the Planner and Planning Board.
(f) Record drawings. Upon completion of construction, the subdivider shall present to the
Town one (1) set of reproducible mylar, one (1) hard copy, and one (1) electronic file of
record drawings indicating facilities as constructed. The record drawings shall be based
on the field logs of the construction monitor and of a quality acceptable to the Town.
The record drawings shall include an engineer's seal, distances, angles and bearings for
complete and accurate determinations of locations on the ground, right-of-way
monuments and as set, as-built profiles of the centerlines of traveled ways, ledge
elevations encountered during construction and information on the locations, size,
materials and elevations of storm drains, sanitary sewers and other underground utility
lines, including but not limited to water, electric, telephone, natural gas, cable television.
(g) Completion and Acceptance. Upon completion of the subdivision infrastructure, the
subdivider shall request that the Town Council accept proposed public improvements.
The request shall include confirmation from the Town Manager that the improvements
have been constructed consistent with the approved plans and town construction
standards and that any applicable deeds have been submitted in a form acceptable to the
18
Town Attorney and signed by the subdivider. The applicant shall be required to maintain
all improvements and to provide for snow removal on roads and sidewalks, until their
acceptance by the Town or the assumption of those responsibilities under such other
approved arrangements. Any applicable Storm water Maintenance Plan shall also be
recorded in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds.
Article III. Standards
Sec. 16-3-1. Subdivision Review Standards. A subdivision shall meet all of the following
standards of review, as determined by the Planning Board.
(a) Pollution
The proposed subdivision will not result in undue water pollution. Factors to consider
include:
1. The elevation of the land above sea level and its relation to the floodplains.
2. The nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste
disposal.
3. The slope of the land and its effect on effluents.
4. The availability of streams for disposal of effluents.
5. The applicable state and local health and water resource rules and regulations.
(b) Sufficient Potable Water
The proposed subdivision has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable
needs of the subdivision. If a public water supply will be used, the proposed subdivision
will not cause an unreasonable burden on the existing public water supply.
(c) Erosion
The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or a reduction in the
land’s capacity to hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition results.
(d) Traffic
1. Road congestion and safety. The proposed subdivision will not cause unreasonable
highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with respect to the use of the
highways or public roads existing or proposed, and if the proposed subdivision
requires driveways or entrances onto a state or state aid highway located outside the
urban compact area of an urban compact municipality as defined by Title 23,
M.R.S.A. Section 745, the Department of Transportation has provided
documentation indicating that the driveways or entrances conform to Title 23,
M.R.S.A Section 704 and any rules adopted under that section.
2. Comprehensive Plan. The proposed subdivision road(s) shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan as adopted in whole or in part by the Town Council.
19
3. Connectivity. The Planning Board may require provision for the projection of roads
or for access to adjoining property, whether subdivided or not. The Planning Board
shall require that access from the subdivision to previously existing or proposed
public ways include two means of such vehicular access, as described in Sec. 16-3-
2(5) of this Ordinance.
4. Safety. All roads within a subdivision and roads providing access to a subdivision
shall be designed so that they will provide safe vehicular and pedestrian travel and
traffic patterns.
5. Through traffic. The Planning Board may require that local roads be laid out so that
their use by through traffic will be discouraged.
6. Topography. Roads in the proposed subdivision shall be laid out in an attractive
manner, in order to enhance the livability and amenity of the subdivision. Insofar as
possible, roads shall conform to existing topography, and high cuts and fills shall be
avoided.
7. Block Length. Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet except
where a greater length suits the topography or character of the subdivision and does
not result in an awkward road pattern or detrimental effect to adjacent property.
8. Lot Access. Each property shall be provided with vehicular access to each lot by an
abutting public or private road. A private road shall be protected by a permanent
easement which shall conform to the Road Classification Standards Table and which
shall be shown on the plan.
9. Sidewalks/pedestrian connections. The Planning Board may require sidewalks
and/or curbing on either or both sides of any road, where they are or may be
necessary for maintenance and/or public safety, as determined by the Planning
Board.
Provision of pedestrian easements or other types of pedestrian accessways not less
than ten (10) feet wide may be recommended to the applicant, where a pedestrian
accessway would add to the Town’s Greenbelt System or where the Planning Board
deems it important for pedestrian enjoyment or to provide access to but not limited
to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, recreation areas, open space, trails, shore
frontage, and other facilities. Where feasible, the easements shall connect to existing
and proposed recreation trails.
10. Road Name. Road names shall not be used which will duplicate or may be confused
with the names of existing roads. Road names shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board and be in compliance with the Town of Cape Elizabeth Addressing
Ordinance, Chapter 22, as determined by the Police Chief.
20
11. Road Construction Standards. Proposed roads are designed in compliance with the
Road Construction and Design Standards, Sec. 16-3-2.
(e) Sewage Disposal
The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate sewage disposal and will not cause
an unreasonable burden on municipal services if they are utilized. All systems proposed
for the disposal of sewage for developments regulated by this Ordinance shall be in
compliance with the provisions of the Town of Cape Elizabeth Sewer Ordinance,
Chapter 15.
(f) Solid Waste Disposal
The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate disposal of solid waste. The
proposed subdivision will not cause an unreasonable burden on the municipality’s
ability to dispose of solid waste, if municipal services are to be utilized.
(g) Aesthetic, cultural and natural values
The proposed subdivision will not have an undue adverse effect on scenic or natural
areas, aesthetics, historic sites, significant wildlife habitat identified by the Department
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or the municipality, or rare and irreplaceable natural
areas or any public rights for physical or visual access to the shoreline.
1. Scenic. Consideration shall be given by the applicant and the Planning Board to the
impact of the proposed development on scenic vistas and view corridors to and from
significant natural features, historic sites, and important topographic features as
identified in the Town’s Comprehensive Plan. The Planning Board may consider the
impact of other design features such as building bulk, architectural style, building
placement and landscaping to encourage visual harmony.
2. Wildlife. The applicant shall make adequate provision for the protection of wildlife
habitat and fisheries areas, which may include but are not limited to maintenance of
wildlife travel lanes, and the preservation and buffering of wildlife habitat areas
from proposed development activities.
3. Natural features. The applicant, whenever practical, shall be required to preserve
natural features such as water courses or bodies, existing trees of ten (10) inches or
more in diameter (base height), open space, scenic points, historic spots, and unusual
or striking topographic features which, if preserved, would add to the attractiveness
of the subdivision.
4. Farmland. All farmland within the proposed subdivision shall be identified on maps
submitted as part of the application.
21
(h) Conformity with local ordinances
1. Comprehensive Plan. The proposed subdivision is consistent with applicable
provisions of the Comprehensive Plan.
2. Zoning Ordinance. The area and width of lots shall conform to the requirements of
the Zoning Ordinance. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
road lines.
3. Multiplex Housing. Multiplex housing and cluster developments shall be so
designed, sited and laid out as to minimize disturbance of existing topography and
ground cover, provide maximum usable natural or improved open space, reflect
imaginative use of the site, and be compatible with any surrounding land uses and
their character. The minimum lot size and density requirements for any proposed
multiplex housing or cluster development shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Addressing Ordinance. The street numbering of the individual residential dwelling
units and/or lots must be clearly visible on the plans and shall be done in compliance
with the Town of Cape Elizabeth Addressing Ordinance, Chapter 22. For any
development with more than one set of attached or multiplex dwelling units, signs
clearly identifying the house numbers in each set of dwelling units shall be required
to be placed along the road leading to each set of units and shall be subject to
approval of the Fire Chief and Police Chief.
(i) Financial and Technical Capability
The applicant shall demonstrate adequate technical and financial capability to complete
the project as proposed. In the case where the applicant asserts that public disclosure of
confidential financial information may prove detrimental to the applicant or to the
success of the subdivision, the Town Manager may review the financial records of the
applicant and recommend to the Planning Board that financial capability is adequate.
(j) Surface Waters
Whenever situated entirely or partially within the watershed of any pond or lake or
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any wetland, great pond or river as defined in
Title 38 M.R.S.A. Chapter 3, subchapter I, article 2-B, the proposed subdivision will not
adversely affect the quality of that body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of
that body of water. The Planning Board may determine that the proposed subdivision
will not adversely affect surface water quality if the subdivision has been designed to
comply with the Shoreland Performance Overlay District.
(k) Ground Water
The proposed subdivision will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities,
adversely affect the quality or quantity of ground water.
22
(l) Flood Areas
The Planning Board shall review all subdivision proposals to assure that: (1) they are
designed to minimize flood damage; (2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage; (3) adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards; and (4) the proposed subdivision otherwise meets the standards of the
Town of Cape Elizabeth Construction Code, Chapter 6, Floodplain Regulations.
(m) Wetlands
Any proposed alteration of wetlands shall adhere to the requirements and standards of
Section 19-6-9 and Section 19-8-3 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(n) Stormwater
The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate stormwater management.
For any subdivision involving more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
impervious surface, paving, clearing or vegetative alteration, the provisions and
improvements for the control of storm water runoff shall be governed by the provisions
of the Town of Cape Elizabeth Storm Water and Non-Storm Water Control Ordinance
Chapter 18, Article II and Post Construction Stormwater Management Ordinance,
Chapter 18, Article IV. In the case of any subdivision involving less than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet of such impervious surfaces, where a subdivision is traversed by a
stream, drainage way or other watercourse, or where the Planning Board with the advice
of the engineer feels that surface water drainage to be created by the subdivision should
be controlled for the protection of the subdivision and owners of property abutting it,
there shall be provided an easement or drainage right-of way conforming substantially
with the lines of such watercourse, and culverts, catch basins or other means of
channeling surface water within such subdivision and over the property of owner
abutting upon it of such nature, width and location as the Planning Board with the advice
of the Town Engineer, deems adequate.
(o) Lake Phosphorus concentration
The long term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will not unreasonably
increase a great pond’s phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and life
of the proposed subdivision. The Planning Board may consider compliance with the
Great Pond Watershed Overlay District, Sec. 19-6-12, Zoning Ordinance, as
demonstration of no unreasonable increase.
23
(p) Impact on adjoining municipality
For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries, the proposed
subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to the use of existing public ways in an adjoining municipality in which part of
the subdivision is located.
(q) Land subject to Liquidation Harvesting
The proposed subdivision is not located on land where timber has been harvested in
violation of rules adopted pursuant to Title 12 M.R.S.A. Section 8869, subsection 14 or
the violation occurred at least five (5) years before the subdivision application has been
submitted.
(r) Access to Direct Sunlight
Consideration shall be given by the applicant and the Planning Board to the sensitivity
of the proposed subdivision design for the purpose of protecting and assuring access to
direct sunlight. The Planning Board may, to protect and ensure access to direct sunlight
for solar energy systems, prohibit, restrict, or control development through methods such
as but not limited to restrictive covenants, height restrictions, and side yard and setback
requirements.
(s) Buffering
Plants or other types of vegetative cover shall be preserved or placed throughout and
around the perimeter of any proposed subdivision to provide for an adequate buffer,
reduction of noise and lights, separation between the subdivision abutting properties,
and enhancement of its appearance.
Off-road parking lots, storage areas, rubbish disposal areas, or similar improvements
exposed to public roads or to residential areas shall be screened by walls, earth berms,
fences, or vegetation, and shall be properly landscaped.
(t) Open Space Impact Fee
1. Purpose. In order to accommodate the expected needs of the subdivision for open
space and recreational areas without diminishing the community standard of public
open space, the applicant shall be required to donate land with legal public access or
otherwise conserved with a public benefit or a cash contribution in lieu of actual land
dedication, or a combination of the above, at the option of the Planning Board and
with the advice of the Conservation Commission. When a subdivision is designed in
compliance with Sec. 19-7-2, Open Space Zoning, the open space conserved shall be
deemed to satisfy the Open Space Impact Fee. (Effective November 14, 2015)
24
2. Community Standard. Public open space shall include the inventory of open space
for which there is legal public access, including:
i. Open space owned by the Town;
ii. Open space encumbered by an easement owned by the Town which allows
public access;
iii. Open space owned by the Cape Elizabeth Land Trust; and
iv. Open space encumbered by an easement owned by the Cape Elizabeth Land
Trust which allows public access. The Community Standard of public open
space shall be defined as the total acreage of open space divided by the Town’s
population, as of the most recent U.S. Census.
3. Land donation. The required land donation of open space shall be calculated by
multiplying the number of lots/units in the proposed subdivision by the average
number of persons per household as published in the most recent U.S. Census, and
then multiplying the resulting number by the Community Standard of public open
space. At least twenty percent (20%) of the land donated shall be land which is not a
Resource Protection Zone or buffer and has a slope not to exceed fifteen percent
(15%).
4. Fee. If the resulting land dedication would be too small to be useful, or
inappropriately located, the Planning Board may require the applicant to pay a fee in
lieu of all or part of the required land dedication. The fee shall be calculated by
multiplying the amount of acreage which otherwise would have been required to be
donated with the proposed subdivision (rounded to the nearest one-hundredth of an
acre) by the average fair market value of one acre of vacant land (rounded to the
nearest dollar) determined by the Town Assessor using accepted professional
valuation methods.
5. Administration. The type of land donated and land conveyance by fee ownership
deed or easement shall be consistent with the land included in the town inventory.
Open space impact fees shall be segregated from the Town’s general revenues and
expended only for the acquisition or improvement of public open space. The Town
shall refund to the applicant that portion of the collected open space impact fee that
is not expended within ten (10) years from the date of receipt. The Community
Standard of public open space, average fair market value of one (1) acre of vacant
land, and open space impact fee therein derived shall be published in the Fee
Schedule approved and periodically updated by the Town Council. The Fee
Schedule shall be available for inspection at the office of the Town Clerk. Any
required fee shall be paid prior to the commencement of construction of the
subdivision and/or issuance of a building permit.
(u) Utility Access.
All lots shall have access to water, electrical, and telephone and other utilities.
25
(v) Phasing.
If a subdivision is proposed for development in phases, no portion of the subdivision
may be left out of the phasing plan. Sequence of construction of subdivision phases shall
be determined. Each phase or, as applicable, sequence of phases shall preserve the
standards of review of Sec. 16-3-1 of this Ordinance, with emphasis on emergency
vehicle access. The Planning Board may impose such conditions as it deems necessary
to assure the orderly development of the subdivision to assure that all necessary
improvements are made for each separate phase.
Sec. 16-3-2. Road Design and Construction Standards The purposes of the subdivision
road standards are to minimize traffic safety hazards and the cost of municipal maintenance
and reconstruction, to ensure that roads are consistent with the Town’s rural character, to
promote a sense of community, and to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The
standards shall be flexible where an applicant can demonstrate that alternative approaches
will meet the above stated purposes. Roads within a subdivision shall be classified by the
Planning Board in accordance with their location and their present and contemplated usage.
A road which is likely to be upgraded in classification in the foreseeable future shall be laid
out to the standards of the potential future classification. The widths and grades for all
subdivision roads shall be determined in accordance with the Road Classification
Standards Table, subject to the following qualifications:
1. Where an existing road with right-of-way of less than fifty (50) feet is being extended,
the new right-of-way may be the same width as the existing road upon approval by the
Planning Board and Public Works Director.
2. Width of right-of-way may be forty (40) feet for a road shorter than three-hundred (300)
feet which ends in a cul-de-sac, upon approval by the Planning Board and Town
Engineer.
3. Notwithstanding the Road Classification Standards Table, dead-end roads in excess of
one thousand (1,000) feet in length must comply with Sec. 16-3-2 (a)(9) of this
Ordinance.
A. Road Design
1. Sight Distance
a. New Subdivision Road sight distance.
(1) Measurement. Sight distance shall be measured from a height 3.5 (three and
one half) feet above the traveled way, in each direction of the road to a height .5
(one-half) foot above the pavement.
(2) Standard. The road shall be designed to achieve a sight distance in the range
indicated on the Road Classification Standards Table. The maximum sight
26
distance range shall not be exceeded without reasonable justification which shall
be presented by the applicant.
b. Road Intersections.
(1) Measurement. The sight distance for a road entering onto a second road shall
be measured from a location fifteen (15) feet behind the edge of traveled way of
the side road or drive at an elevation of three and one half (3.5)feet above the
finished grade surface to a point four and one quarter (4.25) feet above the
pavement in the centerline of the travel lane approaching the intersection. Where
unavoidable obstructions are encountered at the fifteen (15) foot setback, the
location may be moved to a point no closer than ten (10) feet from the traveled
way. Isolated interruptions of minimal time duration in sight distance due to
obstructions, such as a single tree, shall not be included in the measurement of
sight distance.
(2) Standard. The road intersection shall be designed to achieve a sight distance
in the range indicated on the Road Classification Standards Table.
c. Single Family driveways. When the Planning Board requires that an individual
driveway be shown on the subdivision plan, the sight distance measurement and
standard shall meet the requirements in the Road Classification Standards
Table.
2. Road Geometry. New subdivision roads shall be designed to comply with the Road
Classification Standards Table and the following standards:
a. Horizontal Alignment. At all changes in alignment, road sidelines shall be
connected by horizontal curves. All changes in slope shall be connected with
vertical curves whose length shall be consistent with the Road Classification
Standards Table. When the degree of curvature exceeds two (2) degrees on
rural connector, collector, or arterial roads, the curves shall be super-elevated to
meet the criteria established by AASHTO, most current edition.
b. Intersection Design
(1) Roadway grades approaching an intersection shall not exceed three (3)
percent for a distance of fifty (50) feet from the edge of paving of the road
being entered.
(2) Road intersections shall be separated at least one hundred twenty-five (125)
feet whenever possible. A separation of less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet may be acceptable when a low volume of traffic allows for safe
traffic circulation.
27
(3) At intersections and common boundaries of subdivisions, roads shall be
continuous and in alignment with existing roads if possible. Roads shall be
laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no road
shall intersect any other road at less than a sixty (60) degree angle.
c. Traveled Way. The traveled way shall be designed consistent with the
Road Classification Standards Table. Every traveled way shall maintain a
constant width and shall be centered in its right-of-way. The Planning Board may
also shift the traveled way up to five (5) feet from the center to preserve existing
mature trees or minimize wetland alterations.
d. Radii. Radii of curves and lengths of tangents between curves shall be
consistent with the Road Classification Standards Table. At a minimum, road
radii shall provide adequate turning radius for a B-40 vehicle as defined by
AASHTO. To measure turning radius, the full width of pavement of both lanes
of traffic shall be included, exclusive of shoulder areas. Minimum turning radius
shall be required from both directions of the intersecting road.
e. Shoulders. The width of shoulders and surfacing shall be determined by
reference to the Road Classification Standards Table. The road lanes shall be
striped to provide a traveled way in compliance with the Road Classification
Standards Table.
3. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be five (5) feet wide and shall be separated from the
traveled way by a grassed esplanade in accordance with the Road Classification
Standards Table. When locating the sidewalk, a one (1) foot wide buffer strip shall
be preserved along the right-of-way between the back edge of the sidewalk and the
right-of-way. Sidewalks shall be required on one side of the road and
notwithstanding Sec. 16-3-5 of this Ordinance, shall not be waived by the Planning
Board. The design of a Rural Connector shall include a sidewalk path within ten (10)
feet of the outside edge of the right-of-way. The sidewalk path shall be field located
to avoid significant vegetation.
4. Curbing.
a. Installation. Curbing shall be installed at road intersections and have a radius of
at least twenty-five (25) feet, unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer.
Curbing may be required to aid in slope stabilization.
b. Material. Curbing shall consist of granite, extruded concrete or bituminous
concrete; design and choice of materials for curbing shall be based upon the
anticipated use of the road involved and shall be subject to the approval of the
Town Engineer and the Public Works Director. Granite curbing specifications
shall be five inch by seventeen (5 x 17) inch vertical plus or minus one (1) inch
vertical as required by the Public Works Director. Granite curbing installed at
intersection shall be set in concrete.
28
5. Drainage. All roads shall have an underground enclosed drainage system, and no
surface drainage shall be conveyed or diverted across a traveled way.
6. Road Signs. Road signs shall be approved by the Public Works Director and
installed in compliance with MUTCD (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Device)
standards .
7. Road Trees.
a. Adjacent to Road. Each road shall be designed to include, within the right-ofway,
at least one (1) tree for every fifty (50) feet of each side of road frontage.
Up to twenty (20) percent of road trees may be ornamental trees. All trees shall
comply with tree species and size standards further described in Appendix C
Road Tree List. Existing trees within the right-of-way which have been
preserved may be counted toward this requirement if the species, size,
preservation measures, and post-construction condition of the trees are approved
by the Tree Warden. Where an esplanade is included in the road design, road
trees required on that side of the street shall be planted in the esplanade. The
esplanade shall be filled with soil, such as common borrow, suitable for growing
trees. Where the esplanade provides insufficient soil volume to support a road
tree, structural soils may be used underneath the sidewalk to expand the tree
growth area. See also Appendix C, Road Tree List.
b. Cul-de-sac. Landscaping including trees and other plant materials shall be
required in the center island of a cul-de-sac.
8. Dead-End Roads.
a. Length. Dead-end roads shall not be longer than two thousand (2,000) feet in
length and shall not serve more than twenty (20) dwelling units. The maximum
length, the maximum number of dwelling units and the mandatory requirements
of dead-end roads shall not be waived by the Planning Board, notwithstanding
the waiver provision in Sec. 16-3-5 of this Ordinance.
b. Minimum Requirements. Any dead-end road in excess of one thousand (1,000)
feet in length shall meet mandatory requirements for the entire length of the
dead-end road. Mandatory requirements shall include (1) the placement of all
utilities underground, (2) the dedication to the Town of a fifty (50)foot wide
right-of-way, and (3) a minimum pavement width of twenty-two (22) feet.
c. Added Requirements. The Planning Board may require improvements such as
(1) the placement of sidewalks to Town specifications, (2) limited clearing of the
right of-way with the advice of the Town Tree Warden on the stability of
adjacent tree growth, (3) the provision of an emergency access lane with a
29
minimum width of eighteen (18) feet and (4) a minimum esplanade width of six
(6) feet for divided entrances.
d. Measurement. A dead-end road shall be measured from the end of the existing
or proposed dead-end road to the closest intersecting through road. The
measurement shall include proposed road(s) and existing road(s), public or
private, whether within or beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision. The
length of the road shall be measured from the center line of the closest through
road, along the center line of the dead-end road to the end of pavement or
traveled way. Divided entrances shall be allowed only if they provide direct
access to arterial roads as classified by the Town.
e. Termination. All dead-end roads shall end in a cul-de-sac or a T-shaped
turnaround and be designed according to the dimensions shown on Appendix D.
All cul-de-sacs shall be so designed that water will drain from all portions into a
storm water drainage system. The interior of all cul-de-sacs shall be neat and
orderly, and shall either be left in its natural condition or be graded, loamed and
seeded. Granite monuments shall be installed by the developer at the intersection
of each side of the road with the cul-de-sac and at the radius point of the cul-desac,
as shown in the cul-de-sac diagrams.
A T or L-shaped turnaround may be used and placed on the right side of the road.
All T-shaped turnarounds, whether temporary or permanent, shall be paved. No
parking is allowed in a turnaround. See also Appendix D, Turnaround Design.
9. Private Road. The first fifty (50) feet of a private road from the edge of the road shall
be paved. A private road shall be constructed in accordance with the right-of-way
width, gravel base, traveled way width and monumentation of a local road. The
Planning Board may require that a road be constructed to public road standards;
further the Planning Board shall require dedication of the roads as public rights-ofway
if there is potential for future development that could be accessed through the
proposed subdivision.
10. Monuments. A four (4) inch square granite monument shall be set at each point of
curvature and angle point on both sides of every road and at every property line
intersection. A surveyor’s pin shall be set at each property line corner. Except with
the permission of Public Works Director, all monumentation shall set flush with
existing grade. At road intersections and at locations where monuments on one road
line would fall within two hundred (200) feet of each other, the Public Works
Director may reduce this requirement provided that the reduced monumentation is
adequate for road line surveys. (Revised eff. 12/10/03)
30
B. Road Construction
1. Clearing
a. Prior to site alteration, a land surveyor registered in the State of Maine shall
mark the layout of the road and verify for the Town Engineer that the layout is in
conformance with the approved plans.
b. The construction area shall be selectively cleared of all trees, brush and
vegetation only as necessary for construction of the roadway, shoulder, utilities
and any drainage ways as approved by the Planning Board. Clearing provisions
shall be accomplished in accordance with the most recent revision of the
Standard Specifications of the Maine Department of Transportation, Section 201.
c. Limits of clearing shall be marked in the field and may be inspected by the Town
Engineer prior to further site preparation. In a Rural Connector, a ten (10) foot
wide strip shall be preserved at the edge of the right-of-way, where a sidewalk
path may be placed. The ten (10) foot wide strip shall be retained in a natural
state and serve as a buffer, although trimming may be allowed to preserve scenic
views.
2. Grading to Subgrade
The roadway shall be brought to subgrade through the process of excavation and/or
placement of fill. Such earthwork shall be accomplished in compliance with the
technical provisions of Section 203 of said MDOT Specifications. Blasted ledge,
which is, less than fourteen (14) inches in any dimension, may be used as fill up to a
level one foot and one-half (1.5) feet below subgrade, and shall be mixed with
sufficient finer material to make a firm, stable embankment. Revised eff. 12/10/03)
3. Base Gravel for Roadways & Sidewalks
a. Base Course. The gravel base course shall be a minimum of one and one-half
(1.5) feet in depth. When subgrade materials are marginal, the Town Engineer
may require additional base gravel. The lower one (1) foot of material shall
conform to the requirement of Section 703.06 (b). Types D or E of the said
MDOT Specifications, except that no particle of rock shall exceed three (3)
inches as determined by a three (3) inch square mesh sieve.
b. Upper Course. The upper six (6) inches of material shall conform to the
requirements of Section 703.06 (a). Types A and B of said MDOT Specifications
except that maximum particle size for Type B shall be three (3) inches.
c. Compaction. The base gravel shall be placed and compacted in accordance with
technical requirements of Section 304 of said MDOT Specifications. Initial
compaction tests shall be taken at a minimum interval of every fifty (50) linear
feet along the roadway for each lift of material placed, and then compaction tests
31
at a greater separation if initial tests pass. Retesting of any failed areas must be
conducted after remedial action has been accomplished. Additional compaction
tests may be required by the Public Works Director.
d. Sidewalk. Gravel for sidewalk base shall be eight (8) inches in depth and shall
meet the requirements of Section 703.06 (a) of said MDOT specifications, Types
A,B, or D, placed in one lift compacted to ninety-five (95) percent of optimum
density.
e. Esplanade. The base of the esplanade located between the road and the sidewalk
shall not be filled with gravel. The underlying material under the loam layer shall
be common borrow or a similar material conducive to tree growth. The
maximum grade of the esplanade cross-slope shall be two (2) percent.
4. Paving.
a. HMA. Paving shall be of Hot Mix Asphalt (HMA) meeting the requirements of
Section 401 and 403 of said MDOT Specifications. Placement of HMA shall
conform to MDOT Specifications (Section 401). Sidewalk HMA shall be placed
in two (2) one and one quarter (1.25) inch lifts using 9.5 mm mix. HMA
thickness shall be as follows:
Base Course
19 mm Mix
unless
otherwise
noted
Surface Course
12.5 mm Mix,
except local
roads which
shall be
9.5 mm
Surface Course
9.5 mm fine
Mix
Total
Arterial 2.5 inches 1.5 inches" -- 4 inches
Collector 2.5 inches 1.5 inches -- 4 inches
Rural Connector 2.5 inches 1.5 inches -- 4 inches
Feeder 2.5 inches 1.5 inches -- 4 inches
Local Roads 2.5 inches
of 19 mm
1.5 inches -- 4 inches
Sidewalks -- -- 2.5 inches 2.5 inches
b. Base Course. The HMA base course shall be 19 mm mix for all classes of roads,
except local roads and sidewalks which shall be 9.5 mm mix as defined in
Section 703.09 of said MDOT Specifications. Sidewalk paving shall be 9.5 mm
(fine) mix.
c. Placement. Placement of all HMA shall be in compliance with the technical
requirements of Section 401 of said MDOT Specifications.
d. Driveways. Driveway entrances shall include a paved apron starting at the edge
of road pavement and extending four (4) feet toward the property being served.
32
In locations where driveways are coincident with sidewalks, the paved apron
shall extend from the edge of the road pavement to four (4) feet beyond the back
of the sidewalk. Driveway aprons shall meet the criteria for local road paving.
e. Curb Platform. Where bituminous or extruded concrete curbing is to be placed,
the paving shall extend one (1) foot beyond the back of curb to serve as a curb
platform.
5. Curbing. Curbing shall be placed in accordance with Section 609 of said MDOT
Specifications. Bituminous concrete curbing shall meet the requirements of Section
712.36 of said MDOT Specifications. Extruded concrete curbing shall meet the
requirements of Section 712.03 of said MDOT specifications. The curb cross section
shall be of the low profile berm curb type and shall be placed on top of the HMA
base course.
6. Stone Fill, Riprap, Stone Ditch Protection. When required for erosion control, stone
fill, riprap and stone ditch protection shall be placed in accordance with Section 610
of said MDOT Specifications.
7. Sodding - Erosion Control Mesh. Where required to prevent erosion and when
indicated on the plans, sod shall be placed in accordance with the technical
requirements of Section 616 of said MDOT Specifications. When required to prevent
erosion and where indicated on the plans, erosion control mesh shall be placed in
accordance with the technical requirements of Section 613 of said MDOT
Specifications.
8. Seeding. All exposed slopes and areas not to be paved shall be seeded in accordance
with the technical requirements of Section 618 of said MDOT Specifications.
Seeding Method 1 shall be used. Mulch shall be applied to all seeded surfaces in
accordance with the technical requirements of Section 619 of said MDOT
Specifications.
Road Classification Standards Table
Right
of
Way
Traveled
Way
Minimum
Intersection
Sight
Distance
Width
of
Shoulder
Horizontal
Sight
Distance
Design
Speed Sidewalk Esplanade
Center
Line
Radius
ARTERIAL 52' 24' 200’ 5' 200-400 30-45 5' (1) 5' 300-
800
COLLECTOR 50' 24' 200’ 1' 200-250 30-35 5' (1) 6' 300-
400
33
RURAL
CONNECTOR
66' 24'
200’
4' 200-250 30-35 5' 7' 300-
400
FEEDER 50' 24'
150’
0' 150-200 25-30 5' 7' 150-
300
LOCAL 50' 22' 125’ 0' 125-150 20-25 5' 8' 125-
150
(1) Either sidewalk or bikeway. Width should increase for dual purpose
See also Appendix E, Road Profiles
Sec. 16-3-3. Design of Other Improvements
A. Storm and Surface Water Drainage
1. Storm water collection and transport systems shall comply with the Town of Cape
Elizabeth Stormwater and Non-Stormwater Control Ordinance, Chapter 18, Article
II and the Town of Cape Elizabeth Post Construction Stormwater Management
Ordinance, Chapter 18, Article IV.
2. Ditches, where permitted, on the approved plans shall have a slope of at least two (2)
percent and side slopes not exceeding three to one (3:1). Where required to prevent
erosion, ditches shall be riprapped, sodded, or otherwise protected.
3. Storm drain pipelines and culverts shall be installed in accordance with the technical
requirements of Section 603 of said MDOT Specifications. All pipes shall be
designed to withstand earth backfill plus H-20 wheel loadings. Trench backfill over
drain lines within the paved way shall be compacted to ninety-five (95) percent of
optimum density. Outside of paved areas backfill shall be compacted to ninety (90)
percent of optimum density.
4. When required to assure a stable subbase, rigid perforated underdrain pipe shall be
installed in accordance with the technical requirements of Section 605 of said
MDOT Specifications. Coiled underdrain pipe will not be permitted. (Revised eff.
12/10/03)
5. Manholes and catch basins on storm drain lines shall meet the technical requirements
of Section 604 of said MDOT Specifications. Shop drawings for the units desired for
use shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for approval prior to placement.
34
B. Underground Utility Lines
1. All sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances shall be constructed in accordance with
the requirements of the Town of Cape Elizabeth Sewer Ordinance, particularly Sec.
15-1-6 and 15-1-7.
2. Any road to be accepted shall be served by a water main if said road joins a road
containing a water main. No water main shall be less than eight (8) inches in
diameter unless the fire department and the Planning Board certify in writing that a
water main less than eight (8) inches in diameter will furnish adequate water service
for the road to be accepted and for any future extension of said road.
3. All underground utility mains shall be installed before the gravel surface is placed;
and, if possible utility service lines to individual lots shall be installed before gravel
surface is placed.
4. Backfill materials for all underground utilities shall be compacted to ninety-five (95)
percent of optimum density under paved areas and to ninety (90) percent of optimum
density under non-paved areas.
Sec. 16-3-4. Additional Standards
(a) Right-of-Way. The Planning Board with the advice of the Town Engineer may require
rights-of-way wider than those set forth in the Road Classification Standards Table, in
order to satisfy the purposes of this Ordinance.
(b) Reserved
(c) Sewers . Upon the advice of the Town Engineer, the Town Council may require an
applicant to construct storm or sanitary sewers at a greater depth or of larger diameter
than is required to serve the area being subdivided, when said greater depth or larger
diameter is deemed necessary to provide proper service for adjacent areas.
Sec. 16-3-5. Waivers. Where the Planning Board finds that undue hardship, practical
difficulties or restriction upon imaginative and otherwise desirable design may result from
strict compliance with this Ordinance, it may waive one or more of the requirements of this
Ordinance, in favor of a proposed alternative upon a showing that, as compared with strict
compliance, such alternative (1) will not create more hazardous traffic conditions or less
sanitary sewage disposal conditions than strict compliance, (2) will provide more varied and
imaginative subdivision layout and design, (3) will secure substantially the standards of road
design and construction required by this Chapter and the Zoning Ordinance, and (4) will not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan or this
Ordinance; provided that in granting such waiver the Planning Board may impose such
conditions as they deem necessary to secure the foregoing objectives.
Sec. 16-3-6. Legal Provisions
(a) Appeals. All appeals from decisions of the Planning Board under this Ordinance and the
Zoning Ordinance shall be taken within thirty (30) days following the date of any such
35
decision in accordance with the provisions of Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure. This procedure shall apply whether or not the appeal involves issues
requiring an interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Applicability of Road Requirements. The provisions of this Ordinance shall serve as a
guide to, but shall not be binding upon, any state, county or municipal body or authority,
which may lay out, alter, widen or improve any public way in accordance with the
applicable statutes. This Ordinance shall not apply to any roads within the Town for
which road profiles had been approved by the Town Engineer prior to March 13, 1968,
which were under actual construction as of March 12, 1968 and which had been
completed not later than October 14, 1968.
(c) Amendments to the Subdivision Ordinance. This Ordinance may be amended by the
Town Council following the procedure outlined in Sec. 19-4-9 of the Zoning Ordinance.
(d) Historical Interpretation. This Ordinance replaces the Subdivision Ordinance as
amended through 12-10-2003. Most of the prior ordinance provisions have not been
substantively changed and have been brought forward into this Ordinance. When that is
the case, the interpretation by the Town of the provision in the prior ordinance is carried
forward to this Ordinance.
36
Appendix A
Minor Subdivision Submission Requirements
A. General submission parameters.
An application for a Minor Subdivision shall consist of fourteen (14) sets of plans drawn to
a scale of no larger than forty (40) feet to the inch and supporting materials. The size of plan
sheets submitted to the Planning Board shall be no larger than twenty-four (24) x thirty-six
(36) inches, but may be smaller with the permission of the Planning Board. A digital copy
of the complete application shall also be made available upon request.
B. List of Submission items.
The application for approval of a Minor Subdivision shall include all the following
information. Information that must be shown on a plan is in bold type.
1. Right, Title or Interest. Evidence of right, title or interest in the site of the proposed
subdivision.
2. Name of Subdivision/Applicant. Proposed name of the subdivision, name and
address of record owner and applicant, names of adjoining property owners, date
of submission, north point, and graphic map scale.
3. Survey. A standard boundary survey of the site, giving complete descriptive data by
bearings and distances, made and certified by a licensed land surveyor; a copy of
the deed for the property to be developed, as well as copies of any easements,
restrictions or covenants; a plan showing the number of the lot, dimensions of area
and building envelope of each proposed lot; existing easements; building lines
pertaining to the proposed subdivision and to the adjacent properties; location
map, showing the relative location of the proposed project in relation to
surrounding neighborhoods or areas of Town; sufficient data to determine readily
the location, bearing and length of every lot line, and boundary line and to
reproduce such lines upon the ground. Where practical these should be tied to
reference points previously established
4. Water Pollution evaluation.
a. Topography. Contour lines at intervals of two (2) feet or at such intervals as the
Planning Board may require, based on United States Geological Survey datum,
referenced to mean sea level;
b. Surface drainage. Surface drainage patterns including drainage channels and
watershed areas; the slope of the land and its effect on effluents; the availability
and condition of streams used for disposal of effluents; an evaluation of applicable
state and local health and water resource rules and regulations.
c. Soils. A soils report identifying the soils boundaries and names in the proposed
development with the soils information superimposed upon the plot plan in
37
accordance with the USDA Soil Conservation Service National Cooperative Soil
Classification;
d. Air. Description of any air emissions not normally included in residential
construction and use activities.
5. Potable Water. Confirmation of a clean and adequate supply of water to serve the
subdivision; the location and size of any existing and proposed water mains on the
property and adjacent water lines that will provide water supply for the property
to be subdivided, as well as details showing connections to water systems; nearest
hydrant; Where public water is not to be provided, an alternative means of a clean
and adequate water supply shall be shown.
6. Erosion. A soil erosion and sediment control plan prepared and certified by a
professional geologist or professional engineer.
7. Traffic. Locations, widths and names of existing, filed or proposed roads, crosssections
of the proposed grading for roadways, sidewalks, etc. including width, type
of pavement, elevations and grades, preliminary designs of any bridges or culverts
which may be required, designed to comply with the Road Design and
Construction Standards, Sec. 16-3-2; a traffic study evaluating the capacity of adjacent
roads to safely accommodate the anticipated traffic generated by the proposed
subdivision, including an assessment of the likelihood of cut-through traffic, efforts to
provide for road connectivity, and applicability of the Maine Department of
Transportation regulations.
8. Sewage Disposal. All on site public or shared sewage facilities; a completed HHE 200
form or other subsurface wastewater design for every lot not served by public sewer; all
designs, specifications and details for a clustered private or public sewer system.
9. Solid Waste Disposal. Demonstration of adequate capacity for disposal of construction
and solid waste to be generated by the subdivision.
10. Aesthetic, cultural and natural information. Location of scenic, unique natural,
farmland, parkland, historic, and significant wildlife habitat areas located on or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision, as well as supporting documentation.
11. Local regulations. The boundaries and designations of zoning districts; applicable
space standard and setback provisions, and evaluation of the proposed
subdivision’s compliance with applicable provisions such as Open Space Zoning
(Sec. 19-7-2).
12. Financial and Technical Capability. Statement of Technical and Financial Capability,
including a list of the applicant’s development consultants, a description of all prior
development projects, and a letter of firm financial commitment from a bank or other
source of financing. In the case where the applicant asserts that public disclosure of
38
confidential financial information may prove detrimental to the applicant or the project,
the applicant may substitute a recommendation from the Town Manager that the
applicant has adequate financial capability to complete the project.
13. Surface Waters. Location of any portion of the subdivision in the Shoreland Zone;
identification of the normal high water line; assessment of how water quality will be
impacted by anticipated discharge from the subdivision.
14. Ground Water. An assessment of how the proposed subdivision will impact groundwater
resources.
15. Floodplain. Location of any portion of the subdivision in the floodplain; assessment
of how construction in the floodplain will comply with the Town of Cape Elizabeth
Construction Code, Chapter 6, Floodplain Ordinance.
16. Wetlands. The boundaries of all wetlands in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance; an assessment of how any alterations of wetlands will comply with The
Town of Cape Elizabeth Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 19 wetland regulations, Sec. 19-6-
9.
17. Stormwater/Phosporus. A surface drainage plan or stormwater management plan,
with profiles and cross sections drawn by a professional engineer, registered in the
State of Maine, showing preliminary design of all facilities and conveyances
necessary to meet the stormwater management standards as set forth in this
ordinance. Where the subdivision includes or abuts Great Pond, an assessment of
phosphorus loading amounts and impacts on Great Pond.
18. Liquidation Harvesting. Identification of any portion of the subdivision where
timber has been harvested in violation of Title 12, section 8869, subsection 14.
19. Landscaping. An inventory of existing vegetation to be preserved; methods of
preserving vegetation to be used during construction; a landscaping plan including
planting locations, plant types, quantities and size and time of planting; fencing
location, type and material and size.
20. Open Space. Designation on the plan of land to be permanently protected as open
space; calculation of open space provided to meet the Open Space Impact Fee (Sec.
16-3-1(t)); location of easements; fee interest or easement deeds of open space to be
conveyed to the Town or otherwise conserved;
21.Utilities. Evidence of the capacity to provide electrical and telephone facilities.
22. Phasing. A phasing plan showing the boundaries and name of each phase.
23. Related information. Any other data as determined by the Planning Board to ascertain
compliance with this Ordinance.
39
Appendix B
Major Subdivision Submission Requirements
Preliminary Review
A. General submission parameters
An application for preliminary review of a Major Subdivision shall consist of fourteen (14)
sets of plans drawn to a scale of no larger than forty (40) feet to the inch and supporting
materials. The size of the plan sheets submitted to the Planning Board shall be no larger than
twenty-four (24) x thirty-six (36) inches. A digital copy of the complete application shall
also be made available upon request.
B. List of submission items
The application for preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall include all the
following information. Information that must be shown on a plan is in bold type.
1. Right, Title or Interest. Evidence of right, title or interest in the site of the proposed
subdivision.
2. Name of Subdivision/Applicant. Proposed subdivision name; name and address of
record owner and applicant; names of adjoining property owners; date of plan
submission, north point and graphic map scale.
3. Survey. A standard boundary survey of the site giving complete descriptive data by
bearings and distances, made and certified by a licensed land surveyor; a copy of
the deed for the property to be developed, as well as copies of any easements,
restrictions or covenants; a plan showing the number of the lot, conceptual
dimensions of area and building envelope of each proposed lot sufficient to
demonstrate minimum compliance with zoning requirements; existing easements;
building lines pertaining to the proposed subdivision and to the adjacent
properties; location map, showing the relative location of the proposed project in
relation to surrounding neighborhoods or areas of Town; sufficient data to
determine readily the location, bearing and length of every lot line and boundary
line and to reproduce such lines upon the ground.
4. Water Pollution Evaluation.
a. Topography. Contour lines at intervals of two (2) feet or at such intervals as the
Planning Board may require, based on United States Geological Survey datum
and referred to mean sea level;
b. Surface drainage. Surface drainage patterns including drainage channels and
watershed areas; the slope of the land and its effect on effluents; the availability
and condition of streams used for disposal of effluents; an evaluation of applicable
state and local health and water resource rules and regulations.
40
c. Soils. A soils report identifying the soils boundaries and names in the proposed
development with the soils information superimposed upon the plot plan in
accordance with the USDA Soil Conservation Service National Cooperative Soil
Classification.
d. Air. Description of any air emissions not normally included in residential
construction and use activities.
5. Potable Water. Confirmation of a clean and adequate supply of water to serve the
subdivision; the location and size of any existing or proposed water mains on the
property and adjacent water lines that will provide water supply for the property
to be subdivided, as well as proposed connections to water systems; nearest
hydrant; where public water is not to be provided, an alternative means of a clean
and adequate supply shall be shown.
6. Erosion. A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared and certified by a
professional geologist or professional engineer.
7. Traffic. Location, widths and names of existing, filed and proposed roads; a traffic
study evaluating the capacity of adjacent roads to safely accommodate the anticipated
traffic generated by the proposed subdivision, including an assessment of the likelihood
of cut-through traffic, efforts to provide for road connectivity, and applicability of the
Maine Department of Transportation Regulations.
8. Sewage Disposal. All on site public or shared sewage facilities; a completed HHE 200
form or other subsurface wastewater design for every lot not served by public sewer.
9. Solid Waste Disposal. Demonstration of adequate capacity for disposal of construction
and solid waste to be generated by the subdivision.
10. Aesthetic, cultural and natural information. Location of scenic, unique natural,
farmland, parkland, historic and significant wildlife habitat areas located on or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision, as well as supporting documentation.
11. Local regulations. The boundaries and designations of zoning districts; applicable
space standard and setback provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and evaluation of
the proposed subdivision’s compliance with applicable provisions such as Open
Space Zoning (Sec. 19-7-2).
12. Financial and Technical Capability. Statement of Technical and Financial Capability,
including a list of the applicant’s development consultants, a description of all prior
development projects, and a letter of firm financial commitment from a bank or other
source of financing. In the case where the applicant asserts that public disclosure of
confidential financial information may prove detrimental to the applicant or the project,
the applicant may substitute a recommendation from the Town Manager that the
applicant has adequate financial capability to complete the project.
41
13. Surface Waters. Location of any portion of the subdivision in the Shoreland Zoning;
identification of the normal high water line; assessment of how water quality will be
impacted by anticipated discharge from the subdivision.
14. Ground Water. As assessment of how the proposed subdivision will impact groundwater
resources.
15. Floodplain. Location of any portion of the subdivision in the floodplain; assessment
of how construction in the floodplain will comply with the Town of Cape Elizabeth
Construction Code, Chapter 6, Floodplain Ordinance.
16. Wetlands. The boundaries of all wetlands in accordance with the Zoning
Ordinance; an assessment of how any alterations of wetlands will comply with the
Town of Cape Elizabeth Zoning Ordinance, Chapter 19, Sec. 19-6-9.
17. Stormwater/Phosporus. A conceptual surface drainage plan or stormwater management
plan, showing preliminary design of all facilities and conveyances necessary to meet the
stormwater management standards as set forth in this Ordinance. Where the subdivision
includes or abuts Great Pond, an assessment of phosphorus loading amounts and impacts
on Great Pond.
18. Liquidation Harvesting. Identification of any portion of the subdivision where
timber has been harvested in violation of Title 12, section 8869, subsection 14.
19. Landscaping. An inventory of existing vegetation to be preserved; methods of
preserving vegetation to be used during construction; a conceptual landscaping plan.
20. Open Space. Designation on the plan of the land to be permanently protected as
open space; calculation of the open space provided to meet the Open Space Impact
Fee (Sec. 16-3-1(t)); location of easements; fee interest or easement deeds of open
space to be conveyed to the Town or otherwise conserved.
21. Utilities. Evidence of the capacity to provide electrical and telephone facilities.
22. Phasing. A concept phasing plan, if the project will be phased.
23. Related Information. Any other data as determined by the Planning Board to ascertain
compliance with this Ordinance.
24. Community Impact Analysis. The Planning Board may require the applicant to conduct
a community impact analysis which will consist of the following demographic features.
a. Demographic Description. The analysis must identify the demographic market the
project intends to serve, including:
(1) type of family;
42
(2) average family size;
(3) number and ages of children; and
(4) anticipated time period to fill all units or lots.
Associated data, such as anticipated income levels, type of employment, and projected
housing costs may also be presented to support projections associated with the above
demographic description.
b. Community Impact Analysis. Utilizing the above demographic data, the applicant
shall conduct analyses of the following:
(1) Estimated impact of traffic systems, including the impact of projects trips on
flow characteristics and the impact of traffic on the immediate, existing road
structures;
(2) Estimated impact on the school system;
(3) Estimated impact on public safety providers;
(4) Estimated impact on the public works department, including solid waste
disposal;
(5) Estimated impact on existing storm water management systems including flow
and water quality;
(6) Estimated impact on the recreation resources and provision of methods to meet
proposed needs;
(7) Estimated impact on wildlife habitat areas;
(8) Impact on the stated goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; and
(9) Any other study deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.
Once these analyses have been completed, the applicant shall present this information and
impact assessments to the Planning Board for its review and comment.
Final Review
A. General submission parameters. Same as for Preliminary Review.
B. List of submission items
1. Preliminary Approval. All information required to be shown on the preliminary plans,
with all amendments required by the Planning Board and other reviewing agencies and
those suggested by the Planning Board and adopted by the applicant, and further
augmented as follows:
2. Survey. Final plan showing the number of the lot, final calculations of lot area,
property line dimensions and building envelope for each proposed lot.
3. Potable Water. The preliminary plan approved by the Planning Board for water
supply supplemented to include final design, details and specifications of
installation and connection to existing water mains.
43
4. Traffic. The preliminary plan approved by the Planning Board for road access and
traffic supplemented to include final design, details and specifications of proposed
roads, driveways as needed, and connections to existing roads.
5. Sewage Disposal. The preliminary plan approved by the Planning Board for public
or private cluster sewage system supplemented to include final design, details, and
specifications of proposed sanitary waste infrastructure and connections to public
sewer lines.
6. Local regulations. The preliminary plan approved by the Planning Board updated
to reflect any changes to how the project complies with local regulations.
7. Financial Capability. Performance guarantee estimate with detail of unit cost and
quantity for the subdivision, segmented into phases if the proposed subdivision will be
phased; draft performance guarantee document including issuing agent.
8. Stormwater/Erosion. The preliminary plan approved by the Planning Board for
stormwater management and erosion control supplemented to include final design,
details, and specifications of the proposed stormwater infrastructure and any
connections to existing stormwater facilities.
9. Landscaping. The preliminary plan approved by the Planning Board for
landscaping supplemented to include final design, details and specifications
including but not limited to a detailed planting plan showing vegetation to be
preserved, preservation plan, new planting locations, planting types, quantities and
size at time of planting, fencing location, type, size and materials.
10. Open Space. The preliminary plan approved by the Planning Board for open space
preservation supplemented by draft written conservation restrictions, easement deeds,
survey descriptions, and any other documentation.
11. State and Federal permits. Written evidence of the issuance of all permits, licenses and
approvals required for the subdivision from any federal, state or other local agency.
12. Conditional Municipal Approval. Written evidence of (i) the offer and conditional
municipal approval by the Town Council of all roads, sewer lines, drainage easements,
proposed public open space, recreation land, and other such common areas and facilities
proposed to be dedicated to the Town; or (ii) satisfactory agreements or other documents
showing the manner in which private roads, sewer lines and systems, drainage ways,
open space, recreation land, and other such common areas and facilities are to be
maintained. Written agreements of a dedication to a third party other than the Town
must also be submitted and deemed satisfactory by the Planning Board.
13. Phasing Plan. If the subdivision will be constructed in phases, the phasing plan shall
show the entire subdivision and every part of the subdivision shall be assigned to a
phase. The plan shall also identify the sequence of construction of phases and show
how utilities, emergency vehicle access, turnaround space and any other element of
the development that will be impacted by phasing will be accommodated for each
phase.
44
13. Recording Plat. A Subdivision Plat suitable for recording which includes a
prominent notation that there shall be no sale of lots, nor issuance of building
permits, nor site work commenced until the required performance guarantee has
been approved in accordance with Sec. 16-2-6(c) of this Ordinance.
45
APPENDIX C
Road Tree List
Introduction
The selection of tree species to plant along roadsides, sidewalks and parking lots, including
in islands and esplanades, is governed by the Town’s commitment to maintaining a
sustainable forest canopy. Sustainability requires managing for diversity at the genus level,
and to the extent possible, selecting tree species from genera that are considered less
susceptible to exotic tree pathogens. The Town’s goal is to work toward a forest canopy in
which no more than 5% of trees are from the same genus.
Prohibited Species
At the present time, trees species from the following genera are not approved for planting:
Acer (Maples), Betula (Birches), Fraxinus (Ashes), Quercus (Oaks), Populus (Aspens), and
Tsuga (Hemlocks).
Priority Species
The following tree species are from monotypic genera (ie. each genus has only one species),
and are thus considered highly resistant to exotic tree pests. These trees may not be
appropriate for many locations, but they should receive priority consideration when site
characteristics are appropriate. These tree species are recommended for planting to meet the
road tree requirements, subject to final approval by the Tree Warden based on site
characteristics. The list includes the scientific and common tree name, whether the tree is
native to Maine, expected height at maturity, and comments when applicable. All trees
must be planted with a minimum caliper of 2 inches.
Scientific Common Native Height
Comments
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsuratree N 60’
Eucommia ulmoides Hardy Rubber Tree N
Ginkgo biloba Maidenhair Tree N 60‘ Male trees only
Gymnocladus dioicus Kentucky Coffeetree N
Maackia amurensis Amur Maackia N 40’
Maclura pomifera Osage Orange N
Ptelea trifoliata Hoptree N 20’
Acceptable Species
The tree species listed below are acceptable for planting to meet the road tree requirements,
subject to final approval by the Tree Warden based on site characteristics. The list includes
the scientific and common tree name, whether the tree is native to Maine, expected height at
46
maturity, and comments when applicable. All trees must be planted with a minimum caliper
of 2 inches.
Scientific Common Native HeightComments
Aesculus hippocastanum Horsechestnut N 70’
Aesculus x carnea Red Horsechestnut N 40’
Carpinus betulus American Hornbeam Y 30’
Carpinus caroliniana European Hornbeam N 40’
Carya ovata Shagbark Hickory Y 80’
Cladrastus kentuckea Yellowwood N 60’
Corylus colunrna Turkish Filbert N 50’
Gleditsia triancanthos Honey Locust N 40 Var. inermis
Juglans nigra Black Walnut N 70’
Koelreuteria paniculata Panicled Goldenraintree N 30’
Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree N 70’
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum N 60‘ Spiny seed
pods
Magnolia spp. Magnolia N Various
Nyssa sylvatica Tupelo Y 60’
Ornamental spp. Pears, Crabapples, Y/N Various As approved by
Dogwoods, Cherries, tree Warden
tree form of Hydrangea
& Hibiscus, etc.
Ostrya virginiana Eastern Hophornbeam Y 30’
Oxydendrum arboreum Sourwood N 30’
Platanus x acerfolia London Plane N 75’
Platanus occidentalis American Sycamore Y 75’
Sorbus alnifolia Korean Mountain Ash N 35’
47
Stewartia pseudocamelia Japanese Stewartia N 30’
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac N 30’
Tilia americana American Basswood Y 70’
Tilia cordata Littleleaf Linden N 60‘ Cultivars only
Tilia tomentosa Silver Linden N 60’
Ulmus hybrids Accolade, Triumph N 50’
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese Elm N 50’
Zelkova serrata Zelkova N 50’
Other species E.g., Conifer spp. Y/N Various As approved by
Tree Warden
Cultivars and Hybrids
Cultivars and hybrids of the tree species listed above, unless specifically identified above,
require approval of the Tree Warden.
Esplanade and Islands
The key to planting sustainable trees in esplanades and islands is to ensure there is sufficient
soil volume available to support the expected size of maturity for the tree species selected.
Accordingly, any plan to plant trees species from the lists above in an esplanade or island
must be accompanied by an analysis of available soil volume, and reference to a soil volume
table or other guide showing the soil volume available is sufficient to support the tree
selected.
Site and Tree Characteristics
Tree species vary in their environmental needs and response to site characteristics. Just
because a tree species is listed above doesn’t mean it is the right tree for a particular
location. Site characteristics such as moisture, presence of roadside or aerial salts, soil pH,
and sun exposure must all be considered in selecting the right tree for the right location.
Tree characteristics such as expected height and crown spread at maturity, fruit dropping,
and presence of thorns, must also be considered for particular sites. Tree Warden approval
is required to help ensure that site and tree characteristics are appropriate for a desired
planting location.
48
Appendix D
Turnaround Designs
Page 1 of 2
49
Appendix D
Turnaround Designs,
Page 2 of 2
50
Appendix E
Road Cross Sections
Local
Road
51
Appendix E
Road Cross Sections
Feeder
Road
52
Appendix E
Road Cross Sections
Collector Road
53
Appendix E
Road Cross Sections
Rural Connector
54
Appendix E
Road Cross Sections
Arterial Road
1
CHAPTER 17
TOWN WAYS
(With amendments effective through 10/10/2012)
Article I Definitions 17-1
Sec. 17-1-1 Definitions 17-1
Article II. Entrances to Public Roads 17-2
Sec. 17-2-1. Entrance Permit Required 17-2
Sec. 17-2-2. Town Held Harmless 17-2
Sec. 17-2-3. Application 17-2
Sec. 17-2-4. Conditions of Permit 17-2
Sec. 17-2-5. Heavily-Used Entrances 17-3
Article III. Excavations and Utility Installation 17-3
Sec. 17-3-1. Street Opening Permit Required 17-4
Sec. 17-3-2. Excavation 17-5
Sec. 17-3-3. Protection of Public Property 17-5
Sec. 17-3-4 Pavement Breaking in Streets 17-5
Sec. 17-3-5 Pavement Breaking in Sidewalks 17-5
Sec. 17-3-6. Backfilling 17-5
Sec. 17-3-7 Inspections 17-5
Sec. 17-3-8. Restoration of Surface on Streets 17-6
Sec. 17-3-9. Proof of Insurance 17-6
Sec. 17-3-10. Excavations in Reconstructed or Repaved Streets 17-6
Sec. 17-3-11 Penalty 17-6
Article IV. Construction of Streets 17-7
Sec. 17-4-1. Compliance with Subdivision Requirements 17-7
Article V. Regulation of Heavy Loads 17-7
Sec. 17-5-1. Highway Load Limits 17-7
Sec. 17-5-2. Penalty 17-7
Article I. Definitions
Sec. 17-1-1. Definitions.
(a) The words "public way" shall mean the entire width between the right-of-way
boundaries of every public way, or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of traffic, except for
2
private roads and private ways. [Amended Eff. 1/07/09]
(b) The words "adequate sight distance" shall mean continuous and clear sight distance
that meets the minimum requirements of Sec. 17-2-4(b) of this ordinance. [Amended
Eff. 10/10/2012]
(c) “Permittee” shall mean a person who has obtained a permit as required by this
ordinance.
Article II. Entrances to Public Roads.
[Adopted eff. 12/2/63 under R. R. 1954, C. 90-A, Sec. 3, (R.S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151.
Sec. 17-2-1. Entrance Permit Required. No owner of property abutting upon any public
way within the Town shall construct, cause or permit to be constructed, altered or
relocated, any driveway, entrance, or approach or other improvement within the right-of
way of such road or extending from such road onto his property except in accordance
with an entrance permit issued upon his application to the Director of Public Works and
except for the bona fide purpose of securing access to his/her property and not for the
purpose of parking or servicing vehicles within such right-of-way. Decisions of the
Director of Public Works are appealable to the Zoning Board of Appeals. A permit fee
established by the Town Council shall be paid for each permit. [Amended Eff. 1/11/1995,
01/07/2009 and 10/10/12]
Sec. 17-2-2. Town Held Harmless. The applicant shall hold harmless the Town of Cape
Elizabeth and its duly authorized agents and employees against any action for personal
injury or property damage sustained by reason of the exercise of an Entrance Permit.
Sec. 17-2-3. Application. Application shall be made by filing with the Director of Public
Works together with the permit fee . The applicant shall furnish a copy of plans or
sketches showing the proposed entrance locations, width and arrangement; distance
between entrances; setback of building, gasoline pumps, etc., in relation to the center line
of the traveled way; length, size and location of existing pipes, culverts, catch basins or
manholes, curbing, curb and gutter, and/or sidewalks, the proposed location of new pipes,
culverts, catch basins or manholes, curbing, etc and all other information needed to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements in Sec. 17-2-4.. [Amended Eff. 1/07/2009
and 10/10/2012]
Sec. 17-2-4. Conditions of Permit. The location, design and construction of any entrance
permitted shall be in accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Access Management. The applicant shall demonstrate that the entrance is needed and
that no other reasonable alternative exists. For lots with frontage on more than one road,
access to a local classification road is preferable to access onto a higher classification
road. New entrances shall be located as far as possible from road intersections. [Amended
Eff. 10/10/2012]
3
(b) Sight Distance. All entrances shall be so located that vehicles approaching or using
the entrance will be able to obtain adequate sight distance that meets the minimum
requirements of 16-3-2 (a) (1) Road Classifications Standards Table. Measurements to
determine sight distance shall be made in the proposed entrance at a point ten feet (10’)
from the edge of pavement with the height of eye three and one-half feet (3.5’) above the
pavement. The sight distance computed from this point measuring along the roadway to a
point where an approaching object with a height of four and one-quarter feet (4.25’) is
first seen. [Amended Eff. 10/10/2012]
(c) Geometry. Driveway and Private Way entrance grades shall be as provided in Sec.
16-3- 2 (a) 10 of the Subdivision Ordinance. The entrance shall intersect the traveled
way at a horizontal angle as close as possible to 90 degrees, but in no case shall the
horizontal angle be less than 75 degrees. [Amended Eff. 10/10/2012]
(d) Number. Not more than two entrances (or exits) shall be allowed any parcel of
property the frontage of which is less than two hundred (200) feet. Additional entrances
(or exits) for parcels of property having a frontage in excess of two hundred (200) feet
shall be permitted only after showing of actual convenience and necessity. When frontage
is fifty (50) feet or less, only one combined entrance and exit is permitted, the width of
which shall not exceed thirty (30) feet.
(e) Sidewalk and Curbs. When sidewalk, curbing or curb and gutter is to be removed, it
shall be replaced at the owner's expense at the break points of the entrance. All curbing at
the side of entrance shall be tapered to meet finish driveway grade. [Amended Eff.
10/10/2012]
(f) Drainage. Drainage in road side ditches shall not be altered or impeded and suitable,
approved drainage structures shall be provided at all entrances if required by the Public
Works Director. Surfacing drainage shall be provided so that all surface water on the
areas adjacent to the road shall be carried away from the road. Culverts or other
provisions shall be made underneath the entrance or filled areas adjacent to the road
adequate to carry the water in the road side ditches, if required by physical conditions as
determined by the Public Works Director. [Amended Eff. 10/10/2012]
(g) Paving. The first ten (10) feet of the entrance extending from a Town Way shall be
paved in accordance with the paving requirement for local roads in Sec. 16-3-2(b) 4 of
the Subdivision Ordinance or other hardscape may be installed with the approval of the
Public Works Director . (Added eff. 12/10/2003 and 10/10/2012)
Sec. 17-2-5. Heavily-Used Entrances. Application for entrances to drive-in theaters,
shopping centers, ball parks or other large public gathering places may be granted only
after approval by the Planning Board based upon the applicable standards under Site Plan
Review, Sec 19-9. [Amended Eff. 1/11/1995 and 12/10/2003]
4
Article III. Excavation and Utility Installation
Sec. 17-3-1. Street Opening Permit Required.
No person or utility shall make any excavation in any public road way without first
obtaining a street opening permit from the Public Works Director or his/her designee. All
such excavations are governed by 23 M.R.S.A., Sec. 3352 et seq. and this Ordinance.
(a) Excavation Site Prior to any excavation, applicants shall pre-mark the proposed area
of excavation in white paint, in accordance with the applicable State of Maine and Dig-
Safe requirements. Limits of pre-marked sites shall be within a reasonable area for
purposes of the excavation. Excavators may identify pre-marked site, though it is not
required by the “Dig Safe” legislation. Identification shall be done using company or
utility initials, in letters no larger than six (6) inches in height. Identification shall be
placed in the area to be excavated so that the identification will be eliminated after the job
is completed. The Town of Cape Elizabeth is member of “Dig Safe”, Inc. and requires
that “Dig Safe, Inc.” be contacted for all excavations on any public road way within the
Town of Cape Elizabeth. [Amended Eff. 1/07/2009]
(b) Application A Street Opening Permit shall be issued only after a written application
on a form provided by the Town of Cape Elizabeth is submitted to the Public Works
Director or his/her designated agent. The completed application shall state applicant's
name, address, 24 hour emergency phone number and the purpose of the excavation.
Applicants shall provide a “Dig-Safe” confirmation number on the application that is
applicable to the proposed excavation site. The completed application shall also provide
the name of location to be excavated, the beginning date of the proposed work, the
completion date, the name of property owner for whom work is being done. The
application shall be accompanied by a valid certificate of insurance, as outlined in Sec.
17-3-9, unless one is already on file with the Department of Public Works. [Amended
Eff. 1/07/2009]
(c) Permit Upon receipt of completed street and sidewalk opening applications, an
opening permit will be issued. A fee established by the Town Council shall be paid for
each permit or renewal thereof. Street opening permits shall only be issued from April 1
to November 30, unless an emergency or special circumstance exist. An explanation shall
be given to the Public Works Director explaining the special situation or emergency prior
to the issuance of a permit during the months of December 1 through March 31. Any oral
explanation shall be followed up by a written explanation within two (2) working days.
(d) Work Zone Signage All excavations within any public way shall be posted and
identified with the appropriate work zone signage and/or devices that conform to the
latest edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). Traffic
control in the vicinity of all excavations affecting vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle traffic
shall be subject to final review and approval of the Director of Public Works, or his
designee. [Added Eff. 1/07/2009]
5
Sec. 17-3-2. Excavation Excavation work must be started no later than thirty (30)
working days from the date of issuance of the Street Opening Permit. After the expiration
of the thirty (30) day period, such street opening permit shall become null and void.
Notification shall be made to the Public Works Department on the actual day the work
will begin. No work shall be done under the permit on Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays,
unless approved by the Public Works Director. During all street excavations, one-way
traffic shall be maintained for emergency vehicles. Temporary exceptions may be made
only by the Fire Chief and/or the Director of Public Works only when another means of
access is available. [Amended Eff. 1/07/2009]
Sec. 17-3-3. Protection of Public Property. In the course of any excavation, individuals
and/or utilities shall not remove any trees or shrubs which exist in the street area without
first obtaining the consent of the Tree Warden and/or Director of Public Works.
[Amended Eff. 1/07/2009]
Sec. 17-3-4. Pavement Breaking in Streets. All excavations on paved street surfaces
shall be precut in a neat straight line with pavement breakers or saws. Cutouts of the
trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line. Pavement edges shall be
trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the center line of the trench. When
three (3) or more street openings sequence fifteen (15) feet or less, center to center,
between each adjacent opening, the individual and/or utility shall be charged for one (1)
opening measured from the first to the last.
Sec. 17-3-5. Pavement Breaking in Sidewalks. All parts of Section 17-3-4 shall also
apply to sidewalks in all cases except concrete sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be
saw cut. Use of pavement breakers will not be allowed. On concrete sidewalks, all cuts
shall be made from the nearest joint or score line on one side of the excavation to the
nearest joint or score line on the other side of the excavation.
Sec. 17-3-6. Backfilling. Fine material (free of lumps and stones no larger than four (4)
inches shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper
level of the substructure. Backfill material shall be placed and compacted in lifts of eight
(8) to twelve (12) inches and thoroughly compacted by mechanical compactors approved
by the Director of Public Works. Within eighteen (18) inches of the sub grade of the
pavement, backfill shall meet MDOT specification Type B and be left three (3) inches
below the surface. Within twenty-four (24) hours after the trench has been backfilled
three (3) inches of cold bituminous concrete shall be placed over the gravel and
compacted, or permanent repairs completed per Section 17-3-8.
[Amended Eff. 1/11/1995 and 01/07/2009]
Sec. 17-3-7. Inspections. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall make such
inspections as are necessary in the enforcement of this ordinance.
6
Sec. 17-3-8. Restoration of Surface in Public Ways. Permanent resurfacing of
excavations shall be made by the Town of Cape Elizabeth. The Town, at its option, may
allow the individual or utility to permanently resurface that portion of the street surface
damaged by the excavation, in which event, permanent resurfacing shall be done in a
manner and under the specifications of the Town of Cape Elizabeth's Subdivision
Ordinance for pavement thickness. If such permanent repairs are made to the satisfactory
completion of the Director of Public Works, or his/her designee, all charges for
resurfacing will be canceled.
The Director of Public Works, or his/her designee may require any trench to be coldplaned
and/or resurfaced due to settlement, defects in materials and workmanship related
such resurfacing within three (3) years of the original excavation, at the expense of the
permittee. [Amended Eff. 1/11/1995 and 01/07/2009]
Sec. 17-3-9. Proof of Insurance. Applicants for opening permits shall supply to the
Department of Public Works a certificate of insurance listing the Town of Cape Elizabeth
as an additionally named insured - $400,000 minimum. Coverage shall be for not less
than the following amounts:
a. General liability including comprehensive form, premises/operations, underground
explosion and collapse hazard, products/completed operations, contractual, independent
contractors, broad form property damage and personal injury.
1. $1,000,000 Bodily Injury and Property Damage Each Occurrence
2. $2,000,000 Bodily Injury and Property Damage Aggregate
3. $2,000,000 Personal Injury Aggregate
b. Automobile liability including any auto, hired autos and non-owned autos - $1,000,000
bodily injury and property damage combined.
c. Workers' Compensation and Employer’s Liability
1. $500,000 each accident
2. $500,000 Disease - Policy limit
3. $500,000 Disease - Each employee [Amended Eff. 01/07/2009]
Sec. 17-3-10. Excavations in Reconstructed or Repaved Roads. After a public road
has been reconstructed or repaved, no permit shall be granted to open such road for a
period of five (5) years unless an emergency condition exists or unless the necessity for
making such installation could not have been reasonably foreseen at the time of the
reconstruction or repaving. This section shall be void unless the Town shall have given
sixty (60) days notice by certified mail of the impending work to the owners of property
abutting the road and to all public utilities serving the road. [Amended Eff. 01/07/2009]
Sec. 17-3-11. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision
of this Article III shall upon conviction be fined for the use of the Town in a sum not less
7
than $500.00 and not more than $1,000.00. Each day of continued violation shall
constitute a new and separate offense. [Amended Eff. 1/11/1995 and 01/07/2009]
Article IV. Construction of Streets.
[Adopted eff. 11/12/76 under R.S. 1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 17-4-1. Compliance with Subdivision Requirements. Any way hereafter
constructed within the limits of the Town, including any way serving more than one
residential unit or serving two or more lots of land to which title is held in different
ownership, shall be designed and constructed so as to satisfy the requirements imposed
upon streets within subdivisions and shall be submitted for acceptance by the Town
unless the Planning Board, after considerations of future traffic and the provision of
municipal services over such street, its location with respect to the comprehensive plan
and the adequacy of construction proposed, approves the construction of such street to
lesser standards and with reasonable requirements as may be necessary to assure adequate
access by municipal emergency vehicles, maximum utility in relation to objectives of the
comprehensive plan, and continuing maintenance of such street. [Amended Eff.
01/07/2009]
Article V. Regulation of Heavy Loads.
Sec. 17-5-1. Heavy Load Limits. The Town Manager may, upon the recommendation of
the Director of Public Works, and after seven (7) days notice published once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the community, post registered gross vehicle weight
limits on any town public road. [Amended Eff. 01/07/2009]
Sec. 17-5-2. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate a posted weight
limit enacted under Sec. 17-5-1 shall, upon conviction, be fined, for the use of the Town,
a sum not less than $100.00 nor more than $250.00 for each 1,000 pounds of registered
gross vehicle weight over a posted weight limit. [Revised 11-11-1988 and 01/07/2009)
7
1
CHAPTER 18
CONSERVATION ORDINANCE
TOWN OF CAPE ELIZABETH, MAINE
Effective March 13, 2019
2
CHAPTER 18
CONSERVATION
Article I. Sprague Conservation Area 3
Sec. 18-1-1 Nighttime Closure of Town Ways 3
Sec. 18-1-2 Speed Limits for Vehicles 3
Sec. 18-1-3 Parking Prohibited; Traffic Direction 3
Sec. 18-1-4 Authority to Further Wildlife Management 3
Sec. 18-1-5 Violation, Penalty 4
Article II. Reserved
Article III. Tree Ordinance 4
Sec. 18-3-1 Purpose 4
Sec. 18-3-2 Definitions 4
Sec. 18-3-3 Tree Warden 5
Sec. 18-3-4 Duties of Tree Warden 5
Sec. 18-3-5 Tree Permits Required 6
Sec. 18-3-6 Tree Permits Procedures 6
Sec. 18-3-7 Abuse or Mutilation of Public Trees 7
Sec. 18-3-8 Interference with Tree Warden 7
Sec. 18-3-9 Penalties 7
Article IV. Reserved
Article V. Open Space Management 7
Sec. 18-5-1 Purpose 7
Sec. 18-5-2 Applicability
Sec. 18-5-3 Definitions 8
Sec. 18-5-4 Open Space Management Regulations 8
Sec. 18-5-5 Penalties 11
Article VI. Open Space Evaluation and Preservation Program 12
Sec. 18-6-1 Purpose 12
Sec. 18-6-2 Authority 12
Sec. 18-6-3 Program Component 12
Article VII. Disposition of Shoreland Access Real Estate 13
3
Article I. Sprague Conservation Area.
[Adopted eff. 5/8/1974 under R. S. 1964, T. 30, Sec.
1916 & Sec. 2151.]
Sec. 18-1-1. Nighttime Closure of Town Ways. Charles E. Jordan Road and that portion
of Fowler Road southwesterly from its intersection with Bowery Beach Road shall be closed
each day between the hours of sunset and sunrise to use by the general public, and by all
persons excepting those requiring access to residences from said roads, their agents and
guests, or requiring access to provide necessary governmental services; such closure shall be
indicated by appropriate signs and may be enforced by installation of an appropriate gate,
chain or other device, which signs, device and the necessity therefore shall be determined by
the Cape Elizabeth Conservation Committee after consultation with the Town Manager.
Sec. 18-1-2. Speed Limits for Vehicles. The Town Council shall submit for appropriate
State authorization such restriction of the speed for vehicles on Charles E. Jordan Road and
that portion of Fowler Road that lies southwesterly from its intersection with Bowery Beach
Road as the Cape Elizabeth Conservation Committee may recommend to the Town Council
as being necessary for the proper conservation of wildlife in the lands through which
such roads pass.
Sec. 18-1-3. Parking Prohibited; Traffic Direction. The parking of motor vehicles
along Charles E. Jordan Road and that portion of Fowler Road which lies southwesterly
from its intersection with Bowery Beach Road shall be limited to points designated by the
Cape Elizabeth Conservation Committee, which points may differentiate between occupied
standing vehicles and unattended vehicles and shall be fixed from time to time in order to
minimize possible obstruction of traffic, assure opportunities to view from such roads, and
otherwise enhance the development and proper management of wildlife and other natural
resources. The Conservation Committee may cause the erection from time to time of signs
designating and restricting such parking where appropriate, if it determines such signs to be
necessary to accomplish the foregoing purposes.
Sec. 18-1-4. Authority to Further Wildlife Management. The Cape Elizabeth
Conservation Committee is authorized and empowered to cooperate and negotiate with
Sprague Corporation, the State Department of Inland Fisheries and Game and other persons
or bodies interested in the enhancement and proper management of the wildlife resources
within lands abutting or adjacent to Charles E. Jordan Road and that portion of Fowler Road
which lies southwesterly of its intersection with Bowery Beach Road, in order (a) to
designate and set aside appropriate parking areas or turn-outs along said roads, (b) to obtain
appropriate conservation easements for the Town, (c) to further appropriate wildlife and
natural resources management practices in the areas adjacent to said roads, (d) to designate,
regulate and assist in administering wildlife viewing and feeding areas for use by the general
public within said lands; provided that final action for the benefit of or binding upon the
4
Town of Cape Elizabeth which may result from such negotiations by the Committee shall
be taken only after vote of the Town Council approving such specific action.
Sec. 18-1-5. Violation, Penalty. Any person who shall violate the closure of the
southwesterly portion of Fowler Road or of Charles E. Jordan Road as provided in Sec. 18-
1-1, or any parking restrictions established and posted under Sec. 18-1-3 of this Ordinance
shall, upon conviction therefore in the District Court, be punished by a fine not exceeding
One Hundred Dollars ($100) for each such violation, to be forfeited and paid over to the use
of the Town, and such fine shall not be less than Twenty-Five Dollars ($25) in the event of a
conviction for violation of Sec. 18-1-1 hereof and not less than Ten Dollars ($10) upon
conviction for violation of Sec. 18-1-3 hereof.
Article II. RESERVED (Effective November 5, 2016)
Article III. Tree Ordinance.
[Adopted eff. 10/25/1978 under R. S. 1964, T. 30,
Sec. 3901. Revised eff. 10/12/2010]
Sec. 18-3-1. Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public safety and
general welfare through the preservation and conservation of healthy trees in public areas of
the Town, the regulation of the planting, maintenance and removal of trees in public areas,
and the pruning and removal of trees on private property which endanger public safety.
Sec. 18-3-2. Definitions.
a. Property Owner shall mean the person owning real estate in question as shown by
the current tax maps on file in the office of the municipal assessor of the Town of
Cape Elizabeth, unless the contrary is shown.
b. Public Areas shall include all streets, treelawns, open space, forested lands,
greenbelt trails and grounds owned or controlled by the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
c. Public Trees shall include all trees growing or that have fallen in any public area and
that part of any tree overhanging a public area.
d. Street shall mean the entire width of every public way and every right of way in
which the general public has a right of use.
e. Treelawn shall mean that part of any street lying between the line of abutting private
property and that portion of the street improved for use by vehicular traffic, except
that area which may be covered by sidewalk or other paving.
f. Tree shall mean any woody plant having one or more erect stems, including shrubs
and woody vines, of any size if planted or set out under the authority of this
Ordinance, but otherwise only those trees which exceed 8 feet in height.
5
Sec. 18-3-3. Tree Warden. The Tree Warden shall be appointed in accordance with the
Administrative Code and shall have training or demonstrated experience in the arts and
sciences of municipal arboriculture, ornamental or landscape horticulture, urban forestry or
other closely related fields. In the absence of the Tree Warden, or during any vacancy in the
position, his functions shall be carried out by the Director of Public Works or a qualified
alternate appointed by the Town Manager.
Sec. 18-3-4. Duties of TreeWarden. The TreeWarden shall administer this Ordinance
and in doing so shall:
a. Regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of public trees in order to insure the
safety of the public and preserve the aesthetics of public areas.
b. Have the authority, subject to approval by the Town Council, to promulgate the rules
and regulations of the "International Arborist Society's Arboricultural Specifications
and Standards of Practice" governing the planting, maintenance, fertilization,
pruning, bracing and removal of trees in public areas, with such variations and
revisions as he deems advisable from time to time.
c. Have the authority to develop, formulate and update a Master Tree Plan subject to
the approval of the Town Council. The Master Tree Plan shall specify the species of
trees to be planted on such public areas within the Town as the Tree Warden deems
advisable, and after the effective date of any portion of the Master Tree Plan all
plantings by the Town or other persons within the public areas covered by said Plan
shall conform thereto. The Tree Warden shall consider all existing and future utility
and environmental factors when designating specific species for public areas within
the Plan.
d. Undertake such planting, maintenance and removal programs for public trees as the
Tree Warden deems appropriate with the Master Tree Plan.
e. Have the authority to grant permits for the planting, maintenance or removal of trees
within public areas of the Town, to impose reasonable conditions upon the work to
be performed under any such permit consistent with the intent of this Ordinance, and
to supervise and inspect work permitted and halt any work performed without a
permit where a permit is required or performed in violation of the terms of a permit.
f. Have the authority to have pruned or removed any trees or parts of trees on private
property which endanger the public safety, but only after notice to the property
owner and satisfaction of the following requirements:
The Tree Warden shall attempt to obtain agreement by the property owner to the
procedures which the Tree Warden recommends, and in the absence of such
agreement the Tree Warden shall undertake such work only upon the affirmative vote
of the Town Council following opportunity for the Tree Warden and property owner
to be heard before the Town Council; the cost of pruning or removal under this
provision shall be paid or reimbursed by the property owner unless otherwise agreed.
6
Sec. 18-3-5. Tree Permits Required. No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, prune,
remove or otherwise disturb any public tree, and no person shall excavate, ditch, tunnel,
trench, lay any pavement or construct any building or structure within a distance of 10 feet
from a public tree, or within the drip line of a public tree, whichever distance if greater,
without obtaining a permit from the Tree Warden for such work, except that in emergency
situations requiring immediate pruning or removal, the work may be done so long as the
Tree Warden is informed thereof within two business days. Any public tree planted without
such permit, or in violation of the terms of a permit, may be removed by the Tree Warden
unless such planting is otherwise consistent with the terms of this Ordinance, and the cost of
such removal shall be paid or reimbursed by the person responsible for such planting. Any
permit for the removal of a public tree shall require as a condition thereof that such tree be
replaced, where possible and appropriate, in the same general location or on abutting private
property, with a tree deemed comparable or appropriate by the TreeWarden.
Sec. 18-3-6. Tree Permit Procedures.
a. Requests for tree permits shall be made at the Department of Public Works, directed
to the Tree Warden, not less than two business days prior to the time of the work
proposed. The request shall be accompanied by such fee as the Town Council may
establish from time to time. The request shall be in such form and call for such
information as the Tree Warden may require in order to determine compliance with
this Ordinance and any regulations adopted thereunder, including the following:
1. Requests for planting trees shall describe the location proposed, the method of
planting, and the number, size, grade, species and variety of such trees;
2. Requests for tree maintenance work shall state the number, kinds and size of the
trees to be treated, the kind of treatment proposed and the composition of any
fertilizer or spray material to be applied.
3. Requests for the removal of any tree shall set forth the reason for the proposed
removal and the procedures to be used, and shall set forth the information
required under Paragraph 1 of this Section with respect to replacement trees to be
planted or the reasons why such replacement is not deemed possible or
appropriate; and
4. Requests for any excavation or construction work adjacent to a public tree shall
describe the location of the public trees involved, the nature of the work
proposed, and the structures, barriers and procedures to be used to protect such
public trees during the course of such work.
b. The Tree Warden shall issue the permit requested upon a finding that the activity
proposed will not endanger the public safety and is not inconsistent with an effective
Master Tree Plan, that any new trees to be planted are appropriate for the climate and
soils condition of the location proposed, that any spray material or fertilizers
proposed are lawful and appropriate, that the proposed procedures and workmanship
are adequate, and that the activity proposed is consistent with any regulations
adopted under this Ordinance. The activity proposed shall be carried out in
compliance with any regulations adopted in accordance with Sec. 18-3-4 (b), and in
compliance with any reasonable conditions imposed by the Tree Warden in order to
assure compliance with this Ordinance. Any permit granted shall contain a definite
7
expiration date by which the proposed activity shall be completed, provided that the
Tree Warden may extend said expiration date for good cause; notice of completion
shall be given to the Tree Warden for his inspection of the work within five days
following completion.
Sec. 18-3-7. Abuse or Mutilation of Public Trees. Unless specifically authorized by the
Tree Warden, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
public tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to any
public tree; allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to any public tree
to come in contact with it; set fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat
thereof will injure any portion of any public tree; deposit, place, store or maintain upon the
ground any stone, brick, sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free
passage of water, air, and fertilizer to the roots of any public tree. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit anyone from relocating or cutting a public tree that has fallen on a designated
Cape Elizabeth Greenbelt trail at their own risk. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this Sec. 18-3-7 shall be liable, in addition to any applicable penalty under this Ordinance,
to pay to the Town or reimburse the Town for any expense incurred in repairing any damage
caused to a public tree or the cost of replacing such damaged public tree in the event that
such damage cannot be repaired.
Sec. 18-3-8. Interference with Tree Warden. No person shall hinder, prevent, delay, or
interfere with the Tree Warden or any of his assistants while engaged in carrying out the
execution or enforcement of this Ordinance; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court
of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property
within the municipality.
Sec. 18-3-9. Penalties. The violation of any provision of this Tree Ordinance shall, in
addition to any civil penalties available to the Town therefore, constitute a misdemeanor and
be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1000.00 to be recovered upon complaint to the use to
the Town. Each day that any violation of this Tree Ordinance shall continue following
notification thereof by the TreeWarden shall constitute a separate offense.
Article IV. RESERVED (Effective November 5, 2016)
Article V. Open SpaceManagement [Adopted eff. 06/14/2012]
Sec. 18-5-1. Purpose. Open spaces managed by the Town of Cape Elizabeth are for the
benefit and enjoyment of all citizens and visitors. Town policy is to impose as few
restrictions on use of these properties as possible, consistent with the desire to promote user
safety in a natural environment, minimize conflicting uses, protect the natural features and
generally exercise proactive stewardship of a valuable and enduring town asset. This
ordinance establishes Town open space management rules to safeguard the essential
character of Cape Elizabeth public open spaces for public use now and in the future.
Sec. 18-5-2. Applicability. The provisions of this chapter apply to all open space (as
defined below) for which site-specific rules and/or management entities have not otherwise
been approved by the Town Council. Town owned open space exempted from the chapter
includes FortWilliams Park, Town athletic fields, Riverside Memorial Cemetery, and the
8
school campus. Town athletic fields shall mean any athletic field managed and/or scheduled
by the Cape Elizabeth School Department Athletic Director. School campus shall mean all
the groomed and improved portions of the school campus. Athletic fields and the school
campus does not include the natural areas adjacent to groomed and maintained athletic fields
and school campus.
Sec. 18-5-3. Definitions. The following terms shall have the meanings given herein. All
words not defined herein shall carry their customary and usual meanings.
Animal Trap: Any device that is made to catch undomesticated animals.
Encroachment: An alteration of open space by a private party without permission of the
Town of Cape Elizabeth. Encroachments may include, but are not limited to:
1. Placement of structures, buildings, fences, landscape objects, and play
equipment;
2. Placement of yard and leaf waste;
3. Placement of household trash;
4. Planting of trees and vegetation;
5. Removal of trees and vegetation;
6. Unauthorized clearing, mowing and landscaping.
Greenbelt: A network of public trails located on Town owned or easement held land. Most
greenbelt trails are marked with Town greenbelt trails signs and are included on the Town
Greenbelt Trails Map.
Open Space: Land owned in fee or held in easement by the Town of Cape Elizabeth where
public access is permitted and is included in the Town inventory of open space.
Sec. 18-5-4. Open SpaceManagement Regulations. The following regulations shall
govern the use of open space subject to this chapter.
a. Trail Closure. The Town Manager may close a trail on a temporary basis to
preserve trail surface stability, for trail maintenance or public safety.
Notification of a closed trail shall be posted on the Town website and at the
trail, when conditions permit, and shall be provided electronically to the
ConservationCommittee.
b. Hours of Operation. Open space subject to this chapter shall be open at all
hours for the enjoyment of the public. From the hours of sunset to sunrise,
trail users shall limit activities to the quiet enjoyment of trails and open space.
Snowmobiles may be operated in designated areas from sunrise until 8:00
p.m.
c. Encroachments. Encroachments are prohibited. Open space is held for the
benefit and enjoyment of public use, for its own use, and within the context of
local ordinances, deed restrictions, and usage easements which the Town has
purchased or been granted. The Town is responsible for protecting the public
interest in public property, now and for future generations, and has a fiduciary
responsibility to protect these assets.
9
When a possible encroachment occurs, the following process shall be used:
1. Identification of an encroachment. A potential encroachment on open
space may be reported to the Town Manager by any party.
2. Confirm encroachment. Following report of a potential encroachment,
the potential encroachment shall be inspected by the Town and, if
deemed necessary, a professional surveyor may be retained to confirm
the property boundary and prepare a sketch showing the extent of the
encroachment. When applicable, the deed for the open space shall be
reviewed for restrictions. If the Conservation Committee identifies a
possible encroachment, it may gather information as described above
and report its findings to the Town Manager.
3. Identification of party causing encroachment. The Town Manager
shall attempt to identify who has caused the encroachment and initiate
contact. If the responsible party cannot be determined, the Town may
take action to remedy the encroachment under subsection 4 below. If
the party can be identified, the Town Manager shall initiate contact
and seek voluntary cooperation to remove, repair, restore and/or
replace as necessary.
4. Remediation. If the Town Manager is unable to obtain voluntary
cooperation, all legal remedies available to a property owner may be
undertaken by the Town. Remedies may include but are not limited to
removal of structures, replanting of vegetation, installation of fencing
or other visually prominent boundary markers, and a recovery of any
costs incurred by the town. Appeal of the Town Manager’s
determination that an encroachment has occurred may be made to the
Town Council.
d. Vegetation Damage or Removal. No vegetation shall be removed on open
space without the permission of the Town, except for blockage of Town
trails. When vegetation blocks a trail marked with greenbelt trail signs,
vegetative barriers such as trees and branches may be removed, only where
the trail is located, without Town permission.
e. Tree Stand. No tree stand shall be erected on open space without the
permission of the Town Manager. Permission to erect a tree stand for the
purpose of hunting may be obtained in compliance with the following
requirements:
1. The tree stand must be installed in conformance with state law;
2. The tree stand must be installed a minimum of 100 yards from any
residential dwelling;
3. The tree stand must be installed a minimum of 10 yards from any
10
Town of Cape Elizabeth greenbelt trail marked with greenbelt signs;
and
4. The tree stand must include the name and contact information of the
owner on the tree stand.
f. Animal Traps. The Town of Cape Elizabeth determines that all open space is
located within one half (1/2) mile of the built-up section of the Town, as used
in the State of Maine Trapping Rules, and therefore only “cage-type live traps
and drowning sets” may be used in Cape Elizabeth. No traps may be set on
open space without the Town Manager’s permission. Licensed trappers may
be granted permission in order to remove animals causing damage to property
or for wildlife survey and research purposes.
g. Motorized vehicles. No motorized vehicles may operate on open space,
except as follows:
1. Snowmobiles may be operated on open space designated on the Uses
and Activities Chart in the Management of Greenbelt and Open Space
Plan;
2. Motorized vehicles performing construction and maintenance work
authorized by the Town; and
3. Emergency services vehicles.
h. Events. Group events on open space must obtain permission from the Town
prior to the event. For an event that is not publicly advertised and involving
the assembly of less than 50 persons, an application will be reviewed by the
Town Manager or Town Manager’s designee. For an event that is publicly
advertised and/or will include 50 or more attendees, an application will be
reviewed by the Conservation Committee. For an event with 150 or more
attendees, an application will be reviewed by the Conservation Committee,
which shall then make a recommendation to the Town Council. The Town
Council may make independent findings in approving or denying any request.
An application shall be made in writing and provide information for each of
the following items:
1. The name of the applicant, a contact person, contact information and
person supervising the event on-site;
2. A description of the event including the date and time of the activity, a
description of the group’s mission or purpose and experience in
holding events, purpose of the event and the anticipated number of
attendees;
3. Event parking, event tent or other on-site set-up, and need for utilities
such as sanitary waste disposal, electricity, amplified sound, power
generator, trash removal, etc;
11
4. Insurance or other liability arrangements.
The reviewing authority will consider the following in reviewing an event
application:
1. If an event has already been approved for the same open space on the
same day (Priority shall be given to Town of Cape Elizabeth, Cape
Elizabeth School Department, and Cape Elizabeth based organizations
events when applications are submitted at the same time for the same
open space);
2. If the event is in keeping with the desired recreational and cultural
uses of the open space;
3. If the event is compatible with the enjoyment of the open space by
non-event users;
4. If the event may expose the town to unreasonable safety related
liabilities;
5. Experience of the applicant in handling large crowds;
6. The number of vehicles anticipated, parking available and traffic
impacts;
7. The insurance coverage or liability arrangements of the applicant;
8. The need and availability of public safety personnel for event security;
9. Expected need and use of sanitary facilities, electrical service, refuse
disposal and recycling;
10. Use of outside vendors;
11. Advertising for the event;
12. Extent of wear to the open space;
13. Potential noise or other impacts on abutters; and
14. Other impacts unique to the open space or the event.
Sec. 18-5-5. Penalties. The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall, in addition
to any civil penalties available to the Town therefore, constitute a misdemeanor and be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 to be recovered upon complaint to the use to
the Town. Each day that any violation of this ordinance shall continue following notification
thereof by the Town Manager shall constitute a separate offense.
12
Article VI. Open Space Evaluation and Preservation Program
Sec. 18-6-1. Purpose. The purpose of the open space evaluation and preservation
program is to establish an ongoing, standardized effort for identifying, evaluating and
recommending additions to the Town’s inventory of preserved open spaces.
Sec. 18-6-2. Authority. The program shall be conducted by the Conservation
Committee with updates at each stage to the Town Manager.
Sec. 18-6-3. Program Components. The Conservation Committee shall periodically
conduct an evaluation and present a report to the Town Council. The evaluation shall
include the following components.
a. Identification and Evaluation. The Conservation Committee shall
periodically undertake a review of existing open space and
consider areas or specific parcels that may be desirable additions
to the Town open space system.
b. Open Space Evaluation Criteria. The Conservation Committee
shall focus on land that meets open space criteria adopted by the
Town Council. The evaluation process shall include a public
participation component that invites suggestions and input from
all members of the public and stakeholders. If specific parcels
held in private ownership are under consideration, the
Conservation Committee shall endeavor to meet with the property
owner prior to making a recommendation. In the absence of
criteria adopted by the Town Council, the following criteria shall
be used:
1. Agriculture – undeveloped lands used for agriculture.
2. Greenbelt trails and recreation areas – land identified in
the current Greenbelt Plan.
3. Wildlife habitat – undeveloped lands that provide a
habitat for wildlife as identified by the State of Maine
such as the Beginning with Habitat information and
field verified.
4. Other – significant scenic, cultural and/or unique
properties identified by the Town Council.
c. Recommendation. At the completion of its evaluation, the
Conservation Committee shall forward its open space
recommendations to the Town Council Recommendations shall
include a description of how the evaluation criteria have been met
and any other factors.
13
Article VII. Disposition of Shoreland Access Real Estate
Sec. 18-7-1. Any sale, release, transfer, conveyance or other disposition by the Town of
an interest in real estate (whether held in fee, via easement, as incipient rights of dedication,
or otherwise) providing direct or indirect access to shoreland areas and the retention of
which by the Town has been recommended by the Conservation Committee. Fort Williams
Park Committee, Comprehensive Plan Committee, Planning Board, or other duly
authorized committee appointed by the Town Council, shall not be sold, released,
transferred, conveyed or otherwise disposed of inconsistent with the recommendation of
such committee or board except by either a vote of at least seventy percent (70%) of the
Town Council members eligible to vote, or following submission to a public referendum
which approves such disposition by majority vote. It shall be within the discretion of a
majority of the Town Council to refer the matter to a public referendum.
Notwithstanding 1 M.R.S.A. §302, this provision shall apply to any proceeding involving
the disposition by the Town of an interest in real estate not fully consummated prior to
January 2, 2019. [Adopted Eff. 3/11/2019]
Chapter 19
Zoning Ordinance
Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine
Effective July 11, 2018
2
List of Adopted Ordinance Updates and Amendments 2000 –
SUBJECT DATE EFFECTIVE
Used Car Sales Amendment July 11, 2018
Agricultural Easement September 13, 2017
Technical Amendments – Zoning Ordinance November 5, 2016
Village Green Zoning Amendment March 9, 2016
Special Event Ordinance Provisions and Related Zoning Overlay Map December 4, 2015
Land Use Amendments November 14, 2015
Definition of Normal High Water Mark August 14, 2014
Building Permit Issuance Notification September 12, 2013
Day Camp July 10, 2013
Short Term Rental Amendment December 14, 2012
Agricultural Amendment June 10, 2010
BA District - Neighborhood scale commercial areas and BA Zoning Map
change July 8, 2009
Shoreland Zoning Amendments May 11, 2009
Bed & Breakfast March 9, 2009
Residential Windmills October 8, 2008
Wind Energy Systems August 14, 2008
Accommodate Eldercare Facilities May 9, 2007
Bisected Lots March 15, 2006
BB District Zoning and Zoning Map Amendment February 12, 2005
Golf course Zoning Amendment & Definitions RA and RB Districts February 12, 2003
Off Street Parking May 12, 2002
Nonconformance Outside of Shoreland and Resource Protection
Districts June 4, 2001
Establishing a Practical Difficulty Standard For Certain Variance
Requests August 10, 2000
Tower & Antenna Performance Standards and Tower Overlay District April 15, 2000
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. SCOPE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS .......................................................... 6
SEC. 19-1-1. SCOPE................................................................................................................................ 6
SEC. 19-1-2. PURPOSE........................................................................................................................... 6
SEC. 19-1-3. DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................... 6
ARTICLE II. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.............................................................. 30
SEC. 19-2-1. ZONING DISTRICTS....................................................................................................... 30
SEC. 19-2-2. ZONING MAP .................................................................................................................. 31
SEC. 19-2-3. CERTIFIED COPY OF ORDINANCE............................................................................. 31
SEC. 19-2-4. LOCATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ................................................................... 31
SEC. 19-2-5. LOCATION OF RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.................... 32
SEC. 19-2-6. LOTS IN TWO OR MORE DISTRICTS.......................................................................... 33
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT............................................... 33
SEC. 19-3-1. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER................................................................................. 33
SEC. 19-3-2. APPROVALS AND PERMITS REQUIRED.................................................................... 34
SEC. 19-3-3. BUILDING PERMITS ...................................................................................................... 36
SEC. 19-3-4. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.................................................................................. 39
SEC. 19-3-5. FEES.................................................................................................................................. 40
SEC. 19-3-6. VIOLATIONS................................................................................................................... 40
ARTICLE IV. NONCONFORMANCE.................................................................................... 41
SEC. 19-4-1. INTENT............................................................................................................................. 41
SEC. 19-4-2. GENERAL PROVISIONS ................................................................................................ 41
SEC. 19-4-3. NONCONFORMANCE WITH ALL ZONING DISTRICTS EXCEPT THE
SHORELAND AND RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS..................................... 42
A. Nonconforming Lots.................................................................................................................................. 42
B. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures.................................................................................................. 47
C. Nonconforming Uses ................................................................................................................................. 48
SEC. 19-4-4. NONCONFORMANCE WITHIN THE SHORELAND PERFORMANCE
OVERLAY DISTRICT.......................................................................................................51
A. Nonconforming Lots.................................................................................................................................. 50
B. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures.................................................................................................. 51
C. Nonconforming Uses ................................................................................................................................. 54
SEC. 19-4-5. NONCONFORMANCE WITHIN THE RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS ...... 55
A. Nonconforming Building Structures .......................................................................................................... 55
B. Nonconforming Uses ................................................................................................................................. 59
C. Replacement Structures ............................................................................................................................. 59
D. Septic Systems........................................................................................................................................... 59
E. Exemption.................................................................................................................................................. 59
4
ARTICLE V. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS..................................................................... 60
SEC. 19-5-1. APPOINTMENT AND COMPOSITION ........................................................................ 60
SEC. 19-5-2. POWERS AND DUTIES ................................................................................................. 60
SEC. 19-5-3. PROCEDURES ................................................................................................................ 63
SEC. 19-5-4. VARIANCES ................................................................................................................... 64
SEC. 19-5-5. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS..................................................................................... 65
ARTICLE VI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS........................................................................... 68
SEC. 19-6-1. RESIDENCE A DISTRICT (RA) .................................................................................... 68
SEC. 19-6-2. RESIDENCE B DISTRICT (RB)..................................................................................... 75
SEC. 19-6-3. RESIDENCE C DISTRICT (RC)..................................................................................... 81
SEC. 19-6-4. TOWN CENTER DISTRICT (TC) ................................................................................... 88
SEC. 19-6-5. BUSINESS DISTRICT A (BA).......................................................................................106
SEC. 19-6-6. BUISNESS DISTRICT B (BB) .......................................................................................133
SEC. 19-6-7. BUISNESS DISTRICT C (BC) .......................................................................................138
SEC. 19-6-8. FORT WILLIAMS PARK DISTRICT (FWP)................................................................141
SEC. 19-6-9. RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS
(RP1-CW, RP1-CW Buffer Overlay, RP2-WP, and RP3-F) ...........................................145
SEC. 19-6-10. TOWN FARM DISTRICT (TF).....................................................................................152
SEC. 19-6-11. SHORELAND PERFORMANCE OVERLAY DISTRICT...........................................154
SEC. 19-6-12. GREAT POND WATERSHED OVERLAY DISTRICT...............................................159
SEC. 19-6-13. TOWER OVERLAY DISTRICT ...................................................................................161
SEC. 19-6-14. SPECIAL EVENT FACILITY OVERLAY DISTRICT ................................................162
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL STANDARDS............................................................................. 164
SEC. 19-7-1. PURPOSE........................................................................................................................164
SEC. 19-7-2. OPEN SPACE ZONING.................................................................................................164
SEC. 19-7-3. TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS .................................................................176
SEC. 19-7-4. MANDATORY AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROVISIONS.........................................179
SEC. 19-7-5. CREATION OF ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT ......................................................182
SEC. 19-7-6. ELDERCARE FACILITY STANDARDS......................................................................184
SEC. 19-7-7. MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS .......................................................................185
SEC. 19-7-8. OFF-STREET PARKING ...............................................................................................191
SEC. 19-7-9. PRIVATE ACCESS PROVISIONS................................................................................197
A. Existing Private Road Standards.............................................................................................................. 197
B. New Private Road Standards ................................................................................................................... 198
C. Private Accessways.................................................................................................................................. 198
D. Private Accessway Procedures................................................................................................................. 198
SEC. 19-7-10. AFTER THE FACT REDUCTIONS.............................................................................203
SEC. 19-7-11. MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS ON A LOT ....................................................203
SEC. 19-7-12. CORNER CLEARANCES............................................................................................204
SEC. 19-7-13. SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING BISECTED LOTS....................................................204
SEC. 19-7-14. TEMPORARY ACTIVITIES AND EVENTS ..............................................................204
SEC. 19-7-15. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES ....................................................................................204
SEC. 19-7-16. CREATION OF A SHORT-CUT VIA DEVELOPED RESIDENTIAL STREET.......204
5
ARTICLE VIII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS .............................................................. 205
SEC. 19-8-1. RESERVED.....................................................................................................................205
SEC. 19-8-2. SHORELAND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS..........................................................205
SEC. 19-8-3. RESOURCE PROTECTION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS....................................226
SEC. 19-8-4. RESERVED.....................................................................................................................240
SEC. 19-8-5. EARTH MATERIALS REMOVAL STANDARDS.......................................................240
SEC. 19-8-6. ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES................................................244
SEC. 19-8-7. GREAT POND WATERSHED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS................................246
SEC. 19-8-8. HOME DAY CARE AND DAY CARE FACILITY STANDARDS..............................247
SEC. 19-8-9. BOAT REPAIR FACILITY STANDARDS ...................................................................250
SEC. 19-8-10. AGRICULTURAL STANDARDS ................................................................................250
SEC. 19-8-11. USE OF RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE OR OTHER
TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL UNIT...........................................................................247
SEC. 19-8-12. TOWER AND ANTENNA PERFORMANCE STANDARDS......................................251
SEC. 19-8-13. WIND ENERGY SYSTEM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS ....................................254
SEC. 19-8-14. SHORT TERM RENTAL STANDARDS.....................................................................255
SEC. 19-8-15. SPECIAL EVENT FACILITY STANDARDS .............................................................260
ARTICLE IX. SITE PLAN REVIEW.................................................................................... 262
SEC. 19-9-1. PURPOSE........................................................................................................................262
SEC. 19-9-2. APPLICABILITY............................................................................................................262
SEC. 19-9-3. REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY..................................................................263
SEC. 19-9-4. REVIEW PROCEDURES...............................................................................................264
SEC. 19-9-5. APPROVAL STANDARDS ...........................................................................................272
SEC. 19-9-6. AMENDMENTS .............................................................................................................280
SEC. 19-9-7. APEALS OF PLANNING BOARD ACTIONS..............................................................281
ARTICLE X. AMENDMENT/INTERPRETIVE PROVISIONS........................................ 281
SEC. 19-10-1. CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS..................................................................281
SEC. 19-10-2. SEVERABILITY...........................................................................................................281
SEC. 19-10-3. AMENDMENTS ...........................................................................................................281
Appendix A. Reserved
Appendix B. Street Classifications
Appendix C. Historic Resources
Great Pond Watershed Map
Tower Overlay District Map
Special Event Facility Overlay District Map
Zoning Map
6
CHAPTER 19
ZONING ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I. SCOPE, PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SEC. 19-1-1. SCOPE
This Ordinance shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Cape Elizabeth,
Maine”, and may be referred to by said designation.
No building or structure shall be erected, structurally altered, enlarged, repaired, moved,
rebuilt, or used, and no land shall be used, except in conformity with the provisions of
this Ordinance.
SEC. 19-1-2. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of Cape Elizabeth; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the
Town; to promote traffic safety; to provide safety from fire and other hazards; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of real estate; to promote a wholesome
home environment; to prevent housing development in unsanitary areas; to provide an
adequate street system; to promote the coordinated development of unbuilt areas; to
encourage the formation of community units; to provide an allotment of land area in new
development sufficient for all the requirements of community life; to conserve natural
and cultural resources; to provide for adequate public services; and to enhance the value
of property within the Town. The foregoing purposes shall be implemented by
establishment of the zoning districts adopted hereby and herein and by compliance with
all of the other provisions of this Ordinance. This Ordinance is intended to carry out and
be consistent with the Town’s Comprehensive Plan.
SEC. 19-1-3. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, words, and phrases shall have
the meanings given herein. All words not defined herein shall carry their customary and
usual meanings. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. Words
used in the singular shall include the plural. Where so indicated by the text, these
definitions also include substantive regulations. Where reference is made to Town or
State laws, ordinances, or regulations, each reference to a particular law, regulation, or
section shall include all amendments and successor sections.
7
Abattoir: A place used or intended for the slaughtering of poultry or livestock.
Accessory Building or Structure: A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is
clearly incidental and related to that of the principal building or use of the land and which
is located on the same lot as the principal building or use. Any accessory building or
structure that has plumbing shall not be used for overnight accommodation. For
residential uses, accessory buildings and structures shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. garage
2. gazebo
3. greenhouse
4. home workshop, as defined below
5. recreational facilities for the use of occupants of the residence, such as a
swimming pool or a tennis court, and related structures
6. Agricultural or aquacultural buildings or other structures (Effective June 10,
2010)
7. wharf, dock, landing, or boathouse
(Effective November 5, 2016)
Accessory Dwelling Unit: A single subordinate dwelling unit accessory to and wholly
contained within a principal building or structure and/or attached garage in which a
single-family dwelling unit is the principal use.
Accessory Use: A use that is incidental and subordinate to the principal use. The
principal use shall not become subordinate to accessory uses, when aggregated.
Adult Business: An establishment consisting of, including, or having the characteristics
of selling, renting, leasing, exhibiting, displaying or otherwise dealing in materials or
devices of any kind which appeal to prurient interest and/or which depict or describe
specified sexual activities and anatomical areas as described and reviewed in the case of
SJD, Inc. v. City of Houston, 837 F. 2d1268 (5th cir. 1988).
Affordable Housing: Lots/units which may be purchased for occupancy by buyers with
low and moderate incomes as established by the State Planning Office or the Greater
Portland Council of Governments.
Agriculture: The employment of land for the primary purpose of raising, harvesting, and
selling crops, or feeding (including grazing), breeding, managing, selling or producing
livestock, poultry, fur-bearing animals or honeybees, or by dairying and the sale of dairy
products, by any other horticultural, floricultural, or viticultural use, by animal
husbandry, or by any combination thereof. It also includes the employment of the land
for the primary purpose of stabling or training equines including, but not limited to,
providing riding lessons, training clinics and schooling shows. Agriculture does not
include forest management or timber harvesting activities and may be conducted by nonprofit
entities. (Effective June 10, 2010)
8
Agriculture related use: A use that is incidental and subordinate to the primary use of
agriculture, that complements the primary agricultural use and which will help sustain the
primary use of agriculture on the property. (Effective June 10, 2010)
Alternative Tower Structure: Mounting structures, such as, but not limited to, clock
towers, bell steeples, utility and light poles, and water towers, that conceal the presence
of antennas or towers and which are used primarily for purposes other than to support an
antenna. (Effective April 15, 2000)
Amateur Wireless Telecommunication facility: An amateur (ham) radio station
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, including equipment such as but
not limited to a tower or alternative tower structure supporting a single, radiating antenna
platform and other equipment, which are not marketed to the general public. (Effective
April 15, 2000)
Antenna: Any structure or device used for the purpose of collecting or radiating
electromagnetic waves; including, but not limited to, directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes, and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas, such as whip
antennas, which are located on the exterior of, or outside of, any building, or structure. A
single, radiating antenna platform, which includes one or more antennas, shall be
regulated as a single antenna. (Effective April 15, 2000)
Aquaculture: The growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or
marine plant or animal species.
Athletic Facility: A private or public facility including but not limited to stadiums,
playing fields for organized sports involving teams with coaches, uniforms, and an
established schedule, and gymnasiums that hosts sports events which accommodate
spectators, but not including private facilities accessory to a permitted residential or
commercial use.
Banking, Professional and Business Office: Offices for lawyers, engineers, architects,
landscape architects, land use planners, accountants, building contractors, doctors,
dentists, or other professionals similar to those listed above and banking, security and
commodity brokerage, real estate sales, travel agency, employment counseling,
insurances sales, advertising, mailing and stenographic services, and other services of a
similar nature.
Basal Area: A measure of the volume or density of a forest stand. It is the area of a
cross-section of a tree stem at four and a half (4 ½) feet above ground level and inclusive
of bark.
Bed and Breakfast: A use that must be operated in conjunction with the use of a
dwelling as a primary residence and that (1) provides up to nine (9) furnished bedrooms
for rent to guests for 1 or more nights and having a total length of stay not to exceed 14
consecutive days, (2) is operated by the family or person residing permanently in the
home; and (3) may serve 1 or more meals to guests only. (Effective March 9, 2009)
9
Board: The Zoning Board of Appeals constituted under Sec. 19-5-1, Appointment and
Composition of this Ordinance.
Boat Launching Facility: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of
watercraft, which may include an access ramp, docking area and parking spaces for
vehicles and trailers.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, and including
sheds and all attached structures such as porches, decks, balconies, carports and similar
structures for which a building permit is required.
Building Footprint: The area of a building measured from the exterior surface of the
exterior walls at grade level, exclusive of cantilevered portions of buildings and
temporary structures. Where a building is elevated above grade level, the building
footprint is the area the building would cover if it were located at ground level.
Campground: Any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more persons in
temporary living quarters including, but not limited to, tents, recreational camping
vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy: The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Canopy Tree: A tree of a species identified in Appendix C of the Subdivision
Ordinance. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Cluster Development: A residential subdivision that conforms to the standards of Sec.
19-7-2, Open Space Zoning.
Coastal Dunes: Sand deposits within a marine beach system above normal high tide,
including but not limited to beach berms, frontal dune ridges, back dune areas and other
sand areas deposited by wave or wind action. Coastal dunes may extend into wetland
areas.
Colocation: The location of more than one antenna on a Tower of Alternative Tower
Structure. (Effective April 15, 2000)
Commercial Wireless Telecommunication Services: Cellular, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to the
general public. (Effective April 15, 2000)
Conditional Use: The use of any building or land in a manner which is subject to express
conditions and limitations as to such use and which is expressly made subject to approval
by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
10
Congregate Housing: Housing that is designed to provide housing and congregate
housing services primarily for elderly households. Such a facility shall provide meals
and a supportive services program including housekeeping and chore assistance and case
management.
Continuing Care Retirement Community: A residential care facility that provides a
combination of congregate housing, residential care, and/or long-term care as defined
herein.
Cottage Industry Manufacturing: The manufacture and retail sale on the premises of
artifacts, works of art, ceramics, handmade pottery, hand-blown glass, furniture,
woodworking, woven or textile goods, and articles of a similar nature. The retail sales
area shall occupy a minimum of 25% of the area devoted to cottage industry
manufacturing. (Effective July 8, 2009)
Council: The Town Council of the Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.
Cross-sectional area: The cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel is
determined by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average
stream or tributary stream channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is
a straight line distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to the
normal high-water line on the opposite side of the channel. The average stream or
tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical distances from a straight line
between the normal high-water lines of the stream or tributary stream channel to the
bottom of the channel. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Day Camp: A program of care and instruction for no more than twelve (12) children, age
sixteen (16) or younger, at the operator’s residence, and may also include the operator’s
yard and off-site field trips. The program shall be limited to no more than six (6) hours a
day and limited to school vacation periods, and further limited to no more than four (4)
weeks per summer and no more than six (6) weeks in a calendar year. (Effective July 10,
2013)
Day Care Facility: A facility which provides a regular program of care and protection
during any part of the day for either (i) three (3) or more adults or seven (7) or more
children under the age of sixteen (16) in the operator’s residence or (ii) any number of
children or adults in a building other than the operator's residence.
DBH: The diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level. (Effective
October 15, 2009)
Deck: An open platform.
Densely Developed Area: An area developed with at least six (6) principal buildings
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the center of the subject structure or building.
11
Developed Residential Street: A local street providing vehicular access for five (5) or
more existing dwelling units, considered as of the time immediately prior to the proposed
construction of a through road creating a short-cut via such local street. (Effective June 23,
2006)
Disruption of Shoreline Integrity: The alteration of the physical shape, properties, or
condition of a shoreline at any location. A shoreline where shoreline integrity has been
disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil, an abnormal channel
or shoreline cross-section, and in the vase of flowing waters, a profile and character
altered from natural conditions. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Dock: Any structure, whether permanent or temporary, which acts as a landing place for
watercraft. This includes any combination of piers, docks, and floats.
Draining: As used in the context of resource protection districts, the lowering of the
water table below its natural level.
Dredging: Removing materials from below the Wetland Upland Edge.
Dwelling: A building containing one (1) or more dwelling units and used for human
habitation.
Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one (1) family at a time, and
containing cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities. An area configured for food
preparation may be considered cooking facilities even if appliances are not present. The
term shall include mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet
facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential
dwelling units. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Earthwork: One or more commercial operations involved in preparing or moving earth
for use in construction, including foundations, buildings, roads, utilities and landscaping
(Effective February 12, 2005)
Earthwork Contractor: A business that primarily and regularly conducts Earthwork and
performs one or more of the following activities in the course of and related to
conducting its Earthwork:
1. Processing, storing and stock piling minerals, wood, compost and other similar
materials for resale (processing may include screening, crushing, chipping,
recycling or blending multiple products);
2. Storing prefabricated materials associated with construction;
3. Parking, maintaining and fueling construction vehicles and equipment (fuel
storage shall be for the exclusive use of the business and not for resale);
12
4. Loading, unloading and transporting product used in conducting Earthwork;
5. Transporting and storing snow; and
6. Administrative activities. (Effective February 12, 2005)
Earthwork Contractor’s Yard: The portion of a lot used by an Earthwork Contractor
for conducting its business activities outside or within structures erected in accordance
with Town Ordinances. An Earthwork Contractor shall be deemed to use any portion of
a lot upon which the Earthwork Contractor conducts any of the activities enumerated in
items number 1 through 6 of the above definition of Earthwork contractor, other than
transporting materials across designated driveways. (Effective February 12, 2005)
Education and scientific research: Activities that provide instruction and/or involve
investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences and that require a natural
environment. (Effective November 13, 1999)
Eldercare Facility: A facility defined herein as a congregate housing, long-term care or
residential care facility, or a continuing care retirement community. All attached or
detached housing projects that do not fall within this definition shall be classified and
treated as multiplex housing or single-family housing under this Ordinance and the
Subdivision Ordinance.
Essential Services: Utility facilities including gas, electrical, communication, steam,
fuel, water or sewage transmission, collection, or distribution systems.
Excavating: As used in the context of resource protection districts, the removal of earth
materials below the existing ground surface.
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure,
including all extensions such as, but not limited to, attached structures such as decks,
garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use: The addition of weeks or months to a use’s operating season,
additional hours of operation, or the use of more floor area, ground area, or volume
devoted to a particular use.
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration. (Effective April 15, 2000)
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission. (Effective April 15, 2000)
Farm Market: A farm market that is operated for the purpose of selling raw or shelfstable
products produced from agricultural products grown on land within Cape
Elizabeth. A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the total display area devoted to retail
sales may be dedicated to related market products, which shall not preclude the display of
products outside of the building. For the purpose of calculating the area devoted to retail
13
sales of related market products, the amount of outside display area included in the
calculation of total retail display area shall not exceed the amount of retail display area
inside the building. This shall not restrict the total area devoted to outside display area,
which must also be immediately contiguous to the farm market building. The fifty
percent (50%) maximum shall be averaged annually. (Effective June 10, 2010)
Filling: Placing of any material which raises, either temporarily or permanently, the
ground elevation of an area.
Fish Market: A fish market that is operated primarily for the retail sale of raw
aquacultural products, most of which are caught or gathered by Cape Elizabeth residents.
A maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the total building floor area devoted to retail sales
at all fish markets, including those defined as a home business, may be dedicated to
related market products, whether such related market products are stored or displayed
inside or outside of the building.
Floor Area of a Structure: The sum of the contiguous horizontal areas of the floor(s) of
a structure enclosed by exterior walls, including unfinished areas within the exterior
walls, and attached garages, and excluding basement space, porches and decks. Area
calculation for compliance with the Shoreland Performance Overlay District shall include
porches and decks. Floor area shall be calculated by measurement of the outside
dimensions of the exterior walls. (Effective August 11, 1999)
Forest Management Activities: Timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation
activities, pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand
improvement, pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated
activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of
roads. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Forest Stand: A contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution,
composition, and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a
distinguishable unit. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding
wooden sills and post supports, including basements, slabs, frost walls, or other base
consisting of concrete, block, brick or similar material. (Effective October 15October15,
2009)
Functionally water-dependent uses: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or
inland waters and that can not be located away from these waters. The uses include, but
are not limited to commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding
recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and shellfish processing, fish storage and retail
and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock and port facilities, shipyards and
boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and channels, retaining walls,
industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of
cooling or processing water that can not reasonably be located or operated at an inland
14
site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to coastal or inland waters.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
Golf Course: A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf
and improved with tees, greens, fairways and hazards. A miniature golf facility is not a
golf course. (Effective February 12, 2003)
Golf Course Related Activities: Uses such as a tennis court, swimming pool, parking
lot, driving range, clubhouse, restaurant, or meeting hall and maintenance buildings (any
of which may be rented out for events) which is located on a lot under common
ownership with a lot where a golf course is located in the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
(Effective February 12, 2003, Revised effective December 10, 2003)
Governmental Telecommunication Facility: A tower and wireless telecommunication
services owned by local, state or federal government. (Effective April 15, 2000)
Ground cover: Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed
organic matter of the forest floor. (Effective October15, 2009)
Growing Season: As used in this Ordinance, the period from April 1 to November 1.
Harvest area: The area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the
cutting of trees, skidding, yarding, and associated road construction take place. The area
affected by a harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these activities,
excepting unharvested areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
Highest Astronomical Tide: The elevation of the highest predicted astronomical tide,
referenced to Mean Lower Low Water (MLLW) at Portland Head Light tide prediction
station. This prediction is based on an adjustment from the Portland tidal station. The
highest astronomical tide is based on the most recent National Tidal Datum Epoch
(NTDE) as determined from time to time by the National Ocean Service, an office within
the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
(Effective September 11, 2014)
Height, Building: The vertical distance from the average original grade to the top of the
highest roof beams of a flat roof, or to the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a
hip roof. When a building faces on more than one (1) street, the height shall be measured
from the average of the original grades at the center of the face of the building fronting
on each street. Where the original grade steeply slopes to the extent that the building face
along the road frontage will be located below the elevation of the road and within fifty
(50) feet of the edge of the road right-of-way, the building height shall be measured from
the average finished grade that allows the building first floor elevation facing the street to
be constructed up to two (2’) feet above the road elevation. Architecturally appropriate
building tops, such as but not limited to spires and clock towers, which are not occupied,
shall not be included in the measurement of the height of the building. (Effective December
10, 2003)
15
Height, Tower: The distance measured from average original grade to the highest point
on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. (Effective April 15,
2000)
Home Business: A business or professional use that is more intensive than a home
occupation and which is conducted within or from a dwelling unit by an occupant of the
dwelling unit. The use may also be conducted within an accessory structure which
existed as of April 1, 1998. The business or professional use shall be accessory to the
primary residential use. A home business shall comply with all of the following criteria:
(Effective August 11, 1999)
1. Not more than one (1) person who is not a resident of the dwelling unit shall be
involved or employed on the premises in the business or professional use;
2. The nature of the business or professional use shall not increase vehicular traffic
on the street by more than two percent (2%) of the current average annual daily
traffic (AADT) or 10 trips a day, whichever is larger; (Effective December 10, 2003)
3. The business or professional use shall not produce any odors, fumes, dust, glare,
noise, or electrical interference in excess of that produced by normal residential
use;
4. Any external alteration of the building or site, including the provision of parking
in accordance with Sec. 19-7-8, Off-Street Parking, shall not detract from the
residential character of the neighborhood;
5. The square footage occupied by the business or professional use shall occupy an
area no greater than twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of the structure (as
defined above) of the dwelling unit; (Effective August 11, 1999)
6. All signs shall comply with the Sign Ordinance; and
7. There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or materials.
Home Day Care: A facility which provides a regular program of care and protection in
the operator’s residence for up to six (6) children under the age of sixteen (16) or up to
two (2) adults for any part of the day.
Home Occupations: A business or professional use that is conducted within a dwelling
unit by an occupant of the dwelling unit. The use may also be conducted within an
accessory structure which existed as of April 1, 1998. The business or professional use
shall be accessory and incidental to the primary residential use. A home occupation shall
comply with all of the following criteria: (Effective August 11, 1999)
1. No one who is not a resident of the dwelling unit shall be involved or employed
in the business or professional use;
16
2. The nature of the business or professional use shall not require clients, or service
or delivery vehicles, to regularly visit the premises;
3. The business or professional use shall not produce any odors, fumes, dust, glare,
noise, or electrical interference in excess of that produced by normal residential
use;
4. There shall be no external alteration of the building or site that changes its
residential character including the creation of a separate “business” entrance;
5. The square footage occupied by the business or professional use shall occupy an
area no greater than twenty percent (20%) of the floor area of the structure (as
defined above) of the dwelling unit; (Effective August 11, 1999)
6. All signs shall comply with the Sign Ordinance; and
7. There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or materials.
Homestay: A use that is accessory and incidental to the primary use of a dwelling as a
residence and that (1) provides one or two furnished bedrooms for rent to guests for 1 or
more nights; (2) is operated by the family or person residing permanently in the home;
(3) may serve 1 or more meals to guests only, and (4) provides all parking on-site. A
maximum of one homestay is allowed per multifamily building. (Effective March 9, 2009)
Home Workshop or Workroom: A workshop, located within a principal building or
within an accessory building, which is used primarily by the occupants of the dwelling
unit for personal use and not a commercial use. (Effective August 11, 1999)
Hotel: A building used primarily for occupancy of individuals who are lodged with or
without meals, having ten (10) or more guest rooms, and intended to be rented principally
to transients on a short-term basis.
Hydric Soils: Soils as defined in U.S. Soil Conservation Service publication entitled
Hydric Soils of Southern Maine, Revised 12/3/86, as further revised, a copy of which is
available for review in the Town Office. (Formerly used names in parentheses.) These
soils shall include, but not be limited to the following:
1. Very poorly drained organic soils, including Chocorua, Ossipee, Rifle, Sebago,
Togus, Vassalboro and Waskish
2. Very poorly drained mineral soils, including Biddeford, Burnham, Gouldsboro
(Tidal Marsh), Halsey, Medomak (Saco), Peacham (Whitman),
Searsport (Scarboro), Washburn, and Whately
17
3. Poorly drained mineral soils, including Atherton, Aurelie, Brayton (Ridgebury),
Charles (Limerick), Easton, Fredon, Lyme, Monarda, Moosilauke
(Walpole), Naskeag, Naumberg (Au Gres), Roundabout, Rumney,
Scantic, and Swanton.
Impervious Area: The total area of a parcel that consists of buildings and associated
constructed facilities or areas, such as asphalt or concrete, and areas such as gravel roads
and unpaved parking areas that will be compacted through design or use to reduce their
permeability. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to rooftops,
walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage areas, concrete or asphalt paving,
gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and macadam or other surfaces which similarly
impede the natural infiltration of storm water. A natural or man-made waterbody is not
considered an impervious area, but is treated as an immediate runoff surface in curve
number calculations. (Effective November 5, 2016)
Increase in nonconformity of a structure: Any change in a structure or property which
causes further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity
such as, but not limited to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback
distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height or a structure. Property changes
or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no
further increase in the linear extent of the nonconformance of the existing structure shall
not be considered to increase the nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in
nonconformity of the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams
if the expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of
the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally
provided that the expansion extends no closer to the water body or wetland than the
closest portion of the existing structure from that water body or wetland. Included in this
allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures. (Effective December 10,
2003)
Individual Private Campsite: An area of land, not associated with a campground, but
which is developed for repeated camping by only one (1) group not exceed ten (10)
individuals and which involves site improvements which may include, but are not limited
to, gravel pads, parking areas, fire places, or tent platforms.
Informal Recreation: Activities for the enjoyment of open space for all ages and
interests, including but not limited to walking, picnicking, bird watching, kite flying,
cross country skiing, sledding, dog walking, Frisbee throwing, jogging, as well as quiet
reflection and enjoyment of the scenery, trees, shrubs, flowers, and nature trails.
Informal recreation does not include active team sports or motorized vehicles such as but
not limited to snowmobiles, but may include programs related to the history of the
district. (Effective November 13, 1999)
Institutional Use: A nonprofit, religious, or public use, such as a use by a church,
library, public or private school, or hospital, or a government-owned or operated
building, structure, or land used for public purpose, but not including essential services as
herein defined.
18
Junk Yard: A lot or part thereof, exposed to the elements, which is used for the storage
or sale of:
1. Second-hand products or materials, such as automobile parts, building supplies,
bottles, and papers
2. Automobiles, trucks, or other motor vehicles, two (2) or more of which have
remained for a period of six (6) consecutive months either unregistered
or without state inspection certificates affixed thereto.
Land Management Road: A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of
motorized vehicles and used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities,
including associated log yards, but not including skid trails or skid roads. (Effective October
15, 2009)
Light Manufacturing: Manufacturing involving the assembly or fabrication of products
made from previously processed materials.
Local Plumbing Inspector: The Code Enforcement Officer or other person designated
by the Town to oversee the installation of plumbing and on-site sewage disposal systems.
Long-Term Care Facility: Housing that provides a program of assisted living services
to deal with the activities and instrumental activities of daily living and nursing homes.
Lot: A parcel of land with ascertainable boundaries described in a recorded deed or
shown on an approved subdivision plan and meeting zoning requirements at the time it
was created.
Lot Area: Total area within the property lines of a lot excluding any part thereof lying
within the boundaries of any public or private existing or proposed street right-of-way.
Lot Coverage: The percentage of the total area of the lot that is covered by impervious
areas or surfaces.
Lot Width: The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at right
angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the front lot line. Minimum lot width
shall be measured through that part of the principal building where the lot is narrowest.
In no case, however, shall the width of the lot in the area from the front property line to
the principal building be less than the Minimum Lot Width. (Effective August 11, 1999)
Low Income: Family income which is between fifty percent (50%) and eighty percent
(80%) of median family income for the Portland Metropolitan Statistical Area as
established by the State Planning Office or the Greater Portland Council of Governments.
19
Mandatory Buffer: The Resource Protection 1-Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay District
where it is adjacent to RP1 Wetlands which have been rated moderate or high value for
wildlife by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife. (Effective August 11,
1999)
Manufactured Housing:
1. Those unites constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called “newer mobile
homes”, which the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance
with the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
standards, meaning structures, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, are fourteen (14) body feet or more in
width and are seven hundred fifty (750) or more square feet, and which
are build on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or
without permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities,
including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems
contained therein; except that the term shall include any structure which meets
all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements, and
with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification
required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the
National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Section 5401, et seq.; and,
2. Those units commonly called “modular homes”, which the manufacturer
certifies are constructed in compliance with the State’s Manufactured
Housing Act and regulations, meaning structures, transportable in one (1) or
more sections which are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are
designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required
utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein.
Manufactured Housing on Individual Lots: To qualify as manufactured housing that
can be placed on individual lots that are not part of a manufactured housing park, a
manufactured housing unit shall have the following characteristics:
1. It shall have a double pitched roof, with a minimum pitch of 3/12 covered with
asphalt or fiberglass composition shingles or other roofing shingles
made of other materials, but specifically excluding corrugated metal roofing
material;
2. The exterior walls shall have the appearance of traditional residential site-built
walls;
3. The house shall be anchored on a permanent full frost free wall foundation; and
4. Any hitch or tow bar together with axels and wheels shall be removed.
20
Manufactured Housing Unit: Structures, transportable in one (1) or more sections,
constructed in a manufacturing facility, transported to a building site and which are
designed to be used as dwellings when connected to the required utilities, including
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein.
Manufactured Housing Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership designed
and/or used to accommodate three (3) or more manufactured housing units.
Manufactured Housing Park Lot: The area of land on which an individual home is
situated within a manufactured housing park and which is reserved for use by the
occupants of that home.
Marina: A business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its
principal use, providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and
which may also provide accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and
construction, indoor and outdoor storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle
shops and marine fuel service facilities. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Marine Structure: Any non-habitable structure, whether permanent or temporary, build
on or over a water body, including but not limited to piers, docks, wharves, breakwaters,
culverts, jetties, groins, bridges, soil erosion retaining walls, bait sheds, and processing
facilities.
MDOT: The Maine Department of Transportation or its authorized representative or
agent.
Mineral exploration: Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the
nature or extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and
which include reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition. (Effective
October 15, 2009)
Miniature Golf: A tract of land laid out for playing miniature golf where all holes are
separated by barriers and the only clubs used on the course are putters. (Effective February
12, 2003)
Mixed Use Building: A building that includes both nonresidential and residential uses.
Moderate Income: Family income which is between eighty percent (80%) and one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of median family income for the Portland Metropolitan
Statistical Area as established by the State Planning Office or the Greater Portland
Council of Governments. (Effective November 5, 2016)
Motel: A building or group of attached or detached buildings containing guest rooms or
dwelling units, most of which have separate outside entrances and adjacent parking
spaces and are intended to be rented principally to transients on a short-term basis.
21
Multifamily: A building containing 2 or more dwelling units (excepting accessory
dwelling units), or a mixed use building containing 1 or more dwelling units. (Effective
February 12, 2005)
Multiplex Housing: Multiplex housing is housing containing two (2) or more attached
dwelling units. (Effective November 14, 2015)
Multipurpose Playing Field: The field located in Fort Williams Park as approved on
September 9, 1996, by the Town Council, without expansion.
No Other Feasible Alternative: In the case of a variance request, there is no other place
on the lot, taking into consideration the physical constraints of the property, or no other
location on the structure that the proposed construction could go without the need for a
variance or without causing the owner to create other compliance problems on the lot
because of the Zoning Ordinance, deed restrictions or conditions imposed by a lease or
contract. (Effective August 10, 2000)
Municipal use: Facilities which are owned or operated and/or activities conducted by the
Town of Cape Elizabeth for the benefit of the Town’s residents, including, but not limited
to municipal office buildings, public schools, public works garages and facilities, public
safety buildings, parks and playgrounds, solid vase disposal systems, sewerage facilities,
special events and utility infrastructure. For this definition, utility infrastructure shall
include but not be limited to wind energy systems. (Effective July 14, 2008)
Nature trail: A track made by passage or manmade efforts through a natural area.
(Effective November 13, 1999)
Net Residential Area: The net area of a parcel of land that constitutes “buildable land”
that can be used in determining the maximum allowable density of a site. The net
residential area shall be determined by subtracting the following from the gross area of
the site:
1. The portion of the site used for outside parking, streets, and site access. This
portion shall be deemed to be (i) fifteen percent (15%) of the gross area
or (ii) at the option of the applicant, the actual area devoted to streets, parking
lots, and access drives. In computing the area of streets or ways, the
full width oft the right-of-way shall be included.
2. Any isolated portion of the site that is cut off from the main portion of the site
by a road, existing land uses, or major stream or similar physical
feature such that it creates a major barrier to the common use or
development of the site.
3. Any portion of the site located within a floodway or coastal high hazard area as
shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Floodway Map.
22
4. Any portion of the site that is regularly inundated by water, including ponds,
streams oceans, and intertidal areas.
5. Any portion of the site that is unsuitable for development in its natural state
because of topography, drainage, or subsoil conditions. This shall include
the following:
a. land located within the RP1 – Critical Wetland District
b. any area of one (1) or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of
twenty-five percent (25%) or more
c. any area of exposed bedrock
6. Any portion of the site located within utility easements or rights-of-way. Any
interpretation of the portion of a site that may be included in calculating
the net residential area shall be made by the Planning Board.
Nonconforming Building: A nonconforming building or structure is one that does not
meet the space and/or bulk standards of the district in which it is located. It is allowed
solely because it was in lawful existence as of the effective date of this ordinance or as of
the effective date of any subsequent amendment which rendered the building
nonconforming.
Nonconforming Lot: A nonconforming lot is a single lot which as of the effective date
of this Ordinance or as of the effective date of any subsequent amendment does not meet
the minimum lot area, net lot area per dwelling unit, minimum street frontage, or other
similar lot requirements of the district in which it is located. It is allowed solely because
it was in lawful existence as of the effective date of this ordinance or as f the effective
date of a subsequent amendment which rendered the lot nonconforming.
Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming use is a use of premises that is not a permitted or
conditional use in the district in which it is located, but which is allowed to remain solely
because it was in lawful existence as of the effective date of this ordinance or as of the
effective date of any subsequent amendment which rendered the use nonconforming.
Normal High Water Line: Adjacent to inland waters, the normal high water line shall
be that line which is apparent from visible markings, changes in the character of soils due
to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which distinguishes
between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous
with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils
and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond
during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Adjacent to tidal waters, the normal high water line shall be the topographic line located
at the Highest Astronomical Tide, plus three (3) vertical feet upland. (Effective
September 11, 2014).
23
Not Open to Customers: The establishment’s doors shall be locked and all customers
shall have left the building by the time the business must be closed. (Effective July 8, 2009)
Nursing home: A facility in which nursing care and medical services are prescribed by
or performed under the general direction of persons licensed by the State of Maine and is
designed to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason
of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. For the
purposes of this Ordinance, “nursing home” shall include only those facilities that have
been certified by the State of Maine as meeting all licensing and operation regulations for
skilled care facilities as promulgated by the Department of Human Services pursuant to
the provisions of Maine law.
Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance.
Outdoor: In the open air, including activities located on patios, decks, porches, and
screened porches. (Effective July 8, 2009)
Park: A publicly owned facility providing active or passive recreational activities and/or
facilities.
Park Maintenance Area: That area within the Fort Williams Park District that extends
between the Park Maintenance Building, the Heavy Equipment Building, Building #326,
and the long storage garage behind Building #326.
Parking Lot: A lot or part thereof used for or designed for the parking of three (3) or
more vehicles in conjunction with a use other than a single family home. The parking lot
includes the parking spaces, aisles, and accessways.
Passive Recreation: Leisure activities, including but not limited to walking, picnicking,
and hiking that are of an informal nature, do not take place at prescribed sites or fields,
and usually do not require extensive equipment. Passive recreation does not involve
active team sports or the use of motorized vehicles.
Personal Services Shop: A site where personal services are delivered, including but not
limited to a barber or beauty salon, tailor shop, shoe repair shop, dressmaking, tanning
salon, dry cleaner, Laundromat, recreational facility, a studio for dance, art, music, and
photography, radio and television sales and repair shops and services of a similar nature.
Piggery: A building or portion thereof, or an enclosure, used or designed for the keeping
of more than five (5) pigs more than six (6) months old.
Pond: Any inland body of water which in its natural state has a surface area of one
thousand (1,000) square feet or more, and any body of water artificially formed or
increased which has a surface area of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more.
Porch: A roofed open area which may be screened that is attached to or part of a
building.
24
Practical Difficulty: An occasion where the strict application of the ordinance to a
property precludes the ability of the property owner to pursue a use permitted in the
zoning district in which the property is located and results in significant economic injury
to the property owner. (Effective August 10, 2000)
Predominantly: When used to modify a natural feature or resource such as soils or
vegetation, it shall mean that more than fifty percent (50%) of the feature on a site
consists of a particular type or category of the feature, i.e. hydric/non-hydric or wetland
vegetation/non-wetland vegetation.
Principal Building: Any building containing the primary or main use of the lot on which
it is located.
Private Accessway: A privately owned and maintained access road to a single lot that
does not meet minimum street frontage requirements of this Ordinance.
Recreational Camping Vehicle: A motor vehicle or an attachment to a motor vehicle
designed to be towed, and designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or
more persons, including but not limited to a pickup camper, travel trailer, tent trailer,
camp trailer, or motor home. In order to be considered as a recreational camping vehicle
and not a structure, the vehicle must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be
registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Recreational Facility: A facility designed, equipped and used for indoor athletics,
physical fitness training, health education, and/or community recreation activities.
Ancillary uses may include child care for users on the premises, vending machines,
physical fitness counseling, and education.
Related Market Products: Products for retail sale customarily related to and sold with
agricultural products at retail farm markets or aquacultural products at fish markets,
including but not limited to the following:
1. Prepared or processed food products
2. Packaged nonalcoholic beverages
3. Handicrafts
4. Christmas wreaths, Christmas trees and garlands
Repair garage: Any building, structure, improvements or land used for commercial
purposes to repair, rebuild, recondition or maintain automobile engines, motor vehicles,
trailers or similar vehicles.
Residential Care Facility: Housing that provides residents with a program of assisted
living services to deal with the activities and instrumental activities of daily living.
25
Residual basal area: The average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested
site. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Restaurant: An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and sold to
customers for consumption primarily on the premises. The sale of alcohol shall account
for less than 50% of total annual sales. (Effective July 8, 2009)
River: A free-flowing body of water including its associated flood plain wetlands from
the point at which the river provides drainage for a watershed of twenty-five (25) square
miles to its mouth.
Road: See definition of street.
Rooming or Boarding Home: A house or other residential structure that is maintained
wholly or partially for the purpose of boarding, for compensation, more than two (2)
residents in not more than nine (9) rooms and that does not provide a supportive services
program (see definition of supportive services program).
Salt Marsh: Areas of coastal wetland (most often along coastal bays) that support salt
tolerant species, and where the soil is irregularly inundated by tidal waters at average
high tide during the growing season. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Setback: The shortest distance from a building (or other point of measurement) to the
nearest lot line, side line of a street right-of-way, or normal high water line. Where
unknown, the width of a privately owned right-of-way shall be presumed to be twentyfive
(25) feet. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Setback Front: An open area extending the entire width of a lot from sideline to sideline
and extending in depth at a right angle from the street right-of-way to such depth as
specified. Such area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed by a building from the ground
upward. A lot having frontage on more than one (1) street shall be required to meet the
minimum front setback on each street.
Shore Frontage: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured
along the normal high water line or wetland upland edge. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Short-Cut: A through road that creates a shorter distance for vehicular travel between
any two points on arterial, collector, rural connector or feeder streets. The distance along
short-cut shall be measured along the centerline of the traveled way incorporating such
short-cut, from the centerline of the nearest intersection with an arterial, collector, rural
connector, or feeder street on one side of the short-cut to the centerline of the next nearest
intersection with an arterial, collector, rural connector or feeder street on the other side of
the short-cut. This short-cut distance shall be compared to the distance measured along
the centerline of the shortest existing traveled way between such same two points by any
other route. (Effective June 23, 2006)
26
Short Term Rental: The use of a dwelling offered for rent for transient occupancy by
tenants for a tenancy of less than 30 days, excluding motels, hotels and bed and
breakfasts. (Effective December 14, 2012)
Short Term Rental Guest: A visitor of a Short Term Rental tenant who will not be
sleeping overnight on the property, provided persons on the property after 11:00 PM local
time shall be deemed tenants and not Short term Rental Guests for the purposes of this
Ordinance. (Effective December 14, 2012)
Significant Economic Injury: Placing the applicant for a variance at a disadvantage in
the neighborhood by applying Zoning Ordinance standards, which would prevent the
applicant from having a structure or accessory structure comparable in size, location and
number to those of other lot owners in the immediate neighborhood, but in no case fewer
than 10 of the nearest property owners. (Effective August 10, 2000)
Skid Road or Skid Trail: A route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to
haul or drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of
which requires minimal excavation. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Slash: The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
Southern Section of Fort Williams Park: That area within the Fort Williams Park
District beginning at the southeasterly corner of the Portland Head Light Parking Lot and
then extending along the southerly edge of the parking lot to the main access road and
then along the southerly edge of the main access road to Humphrey Road and along the
southerly edge of Humphrey Road to the rear of Building #326 and then following a line
westerly from the rear of said building to Shore Road, then southerly along the Shore
Road boundary of Fort Williams Park to the Fort Williams Park southern boundary line,
then easterly along the Fort Williams Park southern boundary line, to the high water mark
of the Atlantic Ocean, then northerly along the high water mark to the southeasterly
corner of the Portland Head Light parking lot as shown on the Southern Section of Fort
Williams Park map.
Special event facility: A building or portion of a building, outdoor areas, and related
parking which is made available for consideration individuals or groups to accommodate
private functions including but not limited to banquets, weddings, anniversaries and other
similar events. Such use may include (1) kitchen facilities for the preparation or catering
of food, (2) the sale and/or serving of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption,
only during scheduled events and not open to the general public and (3) entertainment. A
special event facility may be operated in conjunction with other uses. Overnight
accommodations may be operated on a site that is also a special event facility, and are
subject to all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. (Effective December 4, 2015)
Standard Boundary Survey: A map of a quantity of real estate prepared by a
professional land surveyor registered in the State of Maine and based on (1) adequate
research to support a professional opinion of boundary location, (2) field work including
27
an inspection of the real estate and (3) the preparation of a plan, drawn to scale and
including property boundary lines, easements and rights-of-way and existing structures,
suitable for recording. (Effective February 8, 2013)
Stream: A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence
of two (2) perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States
Geological Survey 7.5-minute series topographic map, or if not available, a 15-minute
series topographic map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river or flows to
another water body or wetland within the shoreland area. (Effective October15, 2009)
Street: A public or private way or road, other than a private accessway as herein defined,
having a defined travel way with a paved, gravel, or exposed mineral soil surface that is
used on a regular basis to provide vehicular access. (NOTE: Streets are classified as
arterials, collectors, rural connectors, feeders, or local streets in Appendix B.)
Street Frontage: The distance as measured along the shared boundary of the lot and the
right of way of: (1) an abutting public street, (2) a street shown on an approved
subdivision plan for which the Town holds a valid Performance Guarantee, (3) a private
road that was in existence as of June 4, 1997, and that meets the requirements of Sec. 19-
7-9.A, Existing Private Road Standards, (4) a private road that meets the requirements of
Sec. 19-7-9.B, New Private Road Standards, or (5) a Private Accessway that was
approved by the Planning Board under Sec. 19-7-9.C. (Effective December 10, 2003)
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods
or property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed
location on or in the ground, exclusive of fences, stone walls, retaining walls, and roof
over hangs not exceeding two (2) feet from the vertical face of the structure siding. The
term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and satellite
dishes. (Effective November 5, 2016)
Structural Alteration: Any change involving the addition, removal or replacement of
supporting members of a building, such as posts, columns, plates, joist, girders, or
foundation walls.
Supportive Service Program: A program of services for the elderly that provides, at a
minimum: a central dining facility and meals program; a central recreation/activities
room and program; housekeeping services; regular transportation service; and personal
care assistance.
Tenant: An occupant of land or premises who occupies, uses, and enjoys real property
for a fixed time, usually through a lease arrangement with the property owner or with the
owner’s consent. When applied to a Short Term Rental, anyone sleeping overnight shall
be considered a tenant. (Effective December 14, 2012)
Through Road: A road with more than one point of ingress or egress from or to the
larger network of roads. A through road does not include a road approved by the
28
Planning Board with continuously maintained physical barriers to prevent motorized
vehicular traffic other than (i) emergency vehicles or public works vehicles while
providing service, or (ii) through traffic during a temporary emergency traffic diversion
by order of public safety authorities. (Effective June 23, 2006)
Timber Harvesting: The cutting and removal of trees exceeding fifty (50) cords of
timber in any calendar year from the growing site, except in the Shoreland Performance
Overlay Zone. Timber harvesting does not include the construction or creation of roads
nor the clearing of land for approved construction, nor the harvesting of Christmas trees.
(Effective June 10, 2010)
Tower: Any structure, whether free-standing or in association with a building or other
permanent structure, that is designed, constructed or used primarily for the purposes of
supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, and similar
structures. (Effective April 15, 2000)
Town: The Town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.
Tributary Stream: Means a channel between defined banks created by the action of
surface water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the
presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil,
parent material or bedrock; and which is connected hydrologically with other water
bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies forming because of
accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been
removed by human activity. This definition does not include the term “stream” as
defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only applies to that portion of the tributary
stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland. (Effective
October 15, 2009)
Trip: A single or one-direction vehicle movement with either the origin or the
destination (exiting or entering) inside a study site. For trip generation purposes, the total
number of trips for a land use over a given period of time is the total of all trips entering
plus all trips exiting a site during a designated time period. (Effective December 10, 2003)
Undesirable Change in the Character of the Neighborhood: The result of a variance
where the structure is larger or closer to the road or property lines than the average of the
nearest ten principle structures, or in the case of a variance request for an accessory
structure, the nearest ten accessory structures. (Effective August 10, 2000)
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this Zoning Ordinance. A variance
may be authorized by the Zoning Board of Appeals only for deviations in height, area,
and size of structures, or setbacks and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use
otherwise prohibited or a reduction in the required lot area and street frontage shall not be
allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of
nonconformities in the zoning district or in an adjoining zoning district.
29
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, ground cover, and other plants including without
limitation, trees both over and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above
ground level (DBH). Woody vegetation includes live trees, or woody, non-herbaceous
shrubs. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Village Green Development: The development or redevelopment of a lot or lots located
in the Town Center District which includes a village green designed to meet the standards
of Sec. 19-6-4(D)(3)(g)(4) (Town Center Design Standards, Village Green). (Effective
March 9, 2016)
Village Retail Shop: Retail shops including but not limited to locations for the sale of
appliances, antiques, apparel, auto parts, baked goods, books, building supplies, farm and
fish markets, flowers and plants, furniture, groceries, hardware, jewelry, lawn and garden
supplies, liquor, office supplies, pharmaceuticals, toys, works of art, and articles of a
similar nature.
Volume of a Structure: The contiguous volume of all floor area portions of a structure
enclosed by roof and fixed exterior walls as measured from the outside faces of these
walls and roof.
Water Body: Any great pond, river, stream or tidal area.
Wetlands: Land where saturation with water is the dominant factor determining the
nature of soil development and the types of plants and animal communities living in the
soil and on its surface. For the purpose of this Ordinance, different categories of
wetlands are identified in Sec. 19-6-9, Resource Protection Districts.
Wetland Buffer: A designated area bordering wetlands required to be left in their natural
state in order to protect wetlands from adjacent land uses.
Wetland Upland Edge: The boundary between (1) land with predominantly wetland or
aquatic vegetation and land with predominantly terrestrial vegetation; or (2) soil that is
predominantly hydric and soil that is predominantly non-hydric; or (3) in the case of
wetlands without aquatic vegetation or hydric soils, land that is saturated with water to
the surface or covered with shallow water and land wetland vegetation and wetland soils,
the highest boundary shall be used. In places where the upland edge cannot be accurately
determined (e.g., due to ledges or erosion), said upland edge shall be estimated from the
nearest locations where wetland vegetation or wetland soils occurs.
Wetland Vegetation: Those species that are typically adapted for life in saturated or
seasonally saturated soil condition. For the purpose of this ordinance, species identified
as Obligate (always found in wetlands under natural conditions with a frequency greater
than 99% but may persist in non-wetlands if planted or if a wetland has been transformed
into non-wetland) or Facultative Wetland (usually found in wetlands with a frequency of
67% to 99% but occasionally found in non-wetland areas) in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service publication entitled Wetland Plants of the Stat of Maine 1986, as revised, shall be
30
considered to be wetland vegetation. A copy of the publication is available for review in
the Town Office.
Wind Energy System: A structure or structures that may include a wind turbine, a tower,
footings, electrical infrastructure, and associated equipment and structures intended to
produce electrical power primarily for on-site consumption, or consumption by the Town
of Cape Elizabeth on an adjacent lot when more than one lot is held in common
ownership. (Effective October 8, 2008)
Wind-firm: The ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist wind-throw,
wind rocking, and major breakage. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Zoning Map: The map showing the locations of the various districts and overlay zones
as adopted by the Town Council, and certified by the Town Clerk as being the “official”
record of the boundary locations.
ARTICLE II. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
SEC. 19-2-1. ZONING DISTRICTS
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
nonconforming conditions legally in existence before the effective date of this Ordinance
and its amendments shall be allowed to continue subject to applicable requirements.
For the purpose of this Ordinance the Town is hereby divided into districts as follows:
Residence A District (RA)
Residence B District (RB)
Residence C District (RC)
Town Center District (TC)
Business District A (BA)
Business District B (BB)
Business District C (BC)
Fort Williams Park District (FWP)
Resource Protection Districts
Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetlands District (RP1-CW)
Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District (RP2-WP)
Resource Protection 3 – Floodplain District (RP3-F)
In addition, the following overlay districts are created:
Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay District (RP1-CW Buffer
Overlay)
Shoreland Performance Overlay District
Great Pond Watershed Overlay District
31
SEC. 19-2-2. ZONING MAP
The zoning districts are defined as shown on the official copy of the “Zoning Map of
Cape Elizabeth, Maine” as it may be amended from time to time. The Zoning Map shall
be certified by the attested signature of the Town Clerk and shall be drawn at a scale of
not less than one inch equals two thousand feet (1” = 2000’) and kept on file by the Town
Clerk. District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the symbols
for each district shall be placed on the map. The Zoning Map is hereby made a part of
this Ordinance.
SEC. 19-2-3. CERTIFIED COPY OF ORDINANCE
A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Town Clerk and shall be
accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at
reasonable cost at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of
this Ordinance shall be posted in the Town Hall.
SEC. 19-2-4. LOCATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The boundaries of the above districts are as shown on the Zoning Map. Where the
Zoning Map shows zoning district boundary lines as following public or private streets or
ways, the center lines of such streets or ways shall be the boundary lines. Where district
boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of existing property or lot lines
and the exact location of the boundaries of the district is not indicated by means of
figures, distances or otherwise described, the property or lot lines shall be the district
boundary lines. Where the district boundary lines are shown upon the map outside of
street lines and approximately parallel thereto, they shall be considered to be parallel to
such street lines. Figures on the map between the district boundary lines and the nearest
street lines indicate measurement between the same at right angles to the street lines
unless otherwise specified. In cases in which the location of boundaries is not defined by
detailed description at the time of enactment, such locations shall be determined by the
distances in feet, when given upon the map, or when distances are not given, by the scale
of the map.
Where uncertainty exists as to the location of any zoning district boundary, the property
owner so affected may request, in writing, that the Code Enforcement Officer make a
formal, written determination. The Code Enforcement Officer shall make a written
determination within five (5) working days of receiving a request. If the property owner
does not agree with the Code Enforcement Officer’s determination, the property owner
may appeal this decision to the Zoning Board of Appeals as an administrative appeal in
accordance with Sec. 19-5-2, Powers and Duties.
32
SEC. 19-2-5. LOCATION OF RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT
BOUNDARIES
Where uncertainty exists as to the location of a resource protection district boundary, the
following procedures shall be used to reach an official determination of the location:
A. Upon written request by a property owner, Town board or a municipal staff person,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall determine, in writing, the existence of wetland
areas and the location of resource protection and buffer district boundaries based on
the Zoning Map, this Ordinance, documents cited in this Ordinance and similar
materials, and a site visit. If a requesting property owner believes that an initial
determination by the Code Enforcement Officer is in error or if a reasonable doubt
exists regarding the existence, classification, or location of wetlands, the property
owner may submit information on soils and/or vegetation and request a meeting with
the Code Enforcement Officer to reconsider the determination. If the property owner
does not concur with the reconsidered determination, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall refer the issue to the Planning Board for its review and determination, to be
made with the advice of the Conservation Commission.
B. If an applicant disputes the determination of wetlands, the boundaries of resource
protection districts or buffer districts by the Code Enforcement Officer, or if the
Code Enforcement Officer concludes that the location of the boundary is in doubt,
the applicant shall submit the following information to the Planning Board, unless
otherwise waived by the Planning Board:
1. A site plan map showing the proposed use, structure or activity including a map
at a scale of one inch equals fifty feet (1”= 50’), including any
boundaries of Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Districts,
Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection Districts, Resource
Protection 3 – Floodplain District scaled from the Zoning Map, as well
as the outer limits of Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer
Overlays, if established;
2. A topographic map showing the location and slopes for all grades within the
site, by not greater than 1-foot contours;
3. A high intensity soils map as described in Sec. 19-8-3.A.2.c.6, Resource
Protection Permit Procedures, showing the Wetland Upland Edge for the
site as defined by wetland soils;
4. A description of the vegetative cover of the site, including dominant species and
the location of the Wetland Upland Edge for the site as defined by
wetland vegetation;
5. A description, supported by necessary documentation, explaining why the site is
not within a Resource Protection 1-Critical Wetland District, Resource
33
Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District, Resource Protection 3 –
Floodplain District or Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer
Overlay as defined herein; and
6. Additional information deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
C. In determining the existence and boundaries of particular wetland areas, district
boundaries and buffer areas, the Code Enforcement Officer, the Town Planner or the
Planning Board may request the Conservation Commission to inspect the site and
submit its recommendations in writing.
D. In evaluating wetland or floodplain boundaries, the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Planning Board or the Conservation Commission may consult with expert persons or
agencies.
E. in determining wetland boundaries, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board
may exclude areas beyond the point where the wetland area is less than one hundred
(100) feet in width for a distance of more than one hundred (100) feet.
F. In all cases, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to show that the site in
question is not within a Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District, Resource
Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District, Resource Protection 3 – Floodplain
District or designated Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay.
SEC. 19-2-6. LOTS IN TWO OR MORE DISTRICTS
Where a district boundary line as established in this Ordinance and as shown on the
Zoning Map divides a lot which existed at the time of enactment of this Ordinance, the
use and other requirements applying to the less restricted portion of such lot under this
Ordinance may be extended thirty (30) feet beyond the district boundary line into the lot
in the more restricted district. This section does not apply to Resource Protection 1 –
Critical Wetland Districts, Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District, Resource
Protection 3 – Floodplain Districts, Shoreland Overlay District, and Great Pond
Watershed Overlay District. (Effective August 11, 1999)
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 19-3-1. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Town shall interpret and enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance and shall require compliance with its requirements and restrictions. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall adopt procedures to facilitate the handling of all matters
and questions arising hereunder within the scope of the Code Enforcement Officer’s
authority and duties. Any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer denying a permit
34
shall be in writing, a copy of which shall be give to the applicant. Appeals from
decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be to the Zoning Board of Appeals in
accordance with the provisions of Sec. 19-5-2.A. Administrative Appeals.
SEC. 19-3-2. APPROVALS AND PERMITS REQUIRED
Activities involving the use of land, the construction, structural alteration, repair,
enlargement or relocation of a building or structure, or the demolition of a building or
structure may require approvals and/or permits under the requirements of this Ordinance.
No activity subject to an approval and/or permit shall commence until after the issuance
of all required approvals and permits. A person who is issued a permit pursuant to this
Ordinance within the Shoreland Performance Overlay District or any Resource Protection
District shall have a copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by the permit is
performed. (Effective October 15, 2009). The following activities require approvals or
permits:
A. Conditional Use Permit
No use of land, buildings, or structures identified as a conditional use in the district in
which it is located shall commence until after the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit
by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 19-5-5,
Conditional Use Permits. Where a conditional use shall also require Planning Board
review, the Planning Board shall be substituted for the Zoning Board of Appeals in
issuing a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 19-5-5,
Conditional Use Permits. Such conditional use review shall be conducted concurrently
with any other review required by the Planning Board. (Effective August 11, 1999)
B. Site Plan Approval
No activity which requires Site Plan Review under Sec. 19-9-2, Applicability, shall
commence until after site plan approval has been obtained from the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX, Site Plan Review. (Effective June 10, 201)
C. Building Permit
No construction, structural alteration, enlargement, or relocation of a building or structure
shall commence until after the issuance of a Building Permit by the Code Enforcement
Officer in accordance with Sec. 19-3-3, Building Permits.
No installation of an amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility
antenna which extends 15’ feet or more from the roof of a structure shall occur until after
the issuance of a Building Permit by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with
Sec. 19-3-3. No installation of a commercial wireless telecommunication antenna on an
35
alternative tower structure shall occur until after the issuance of a Building Permit by the
Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with Sec. 19-3-3, except that the Code
Enforcement Officer may refer the antenna installation application to the Planning Board
for review under Sec. 19-9, Site Plan Review and Sec. 19-8-12, Tower and Antenna
Performance Standards, if the antenna concealment is not complete. (Effective April 15,
2000)
No installation of a wind energy system shall occur until after the issuance of a Building
Permit by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with Sec. 19-3-3 and a
determination by the Code Enforcement Office that the performance standards in Sec. 19-
8-13. Wind Energy Systems, have been met. (Effective October 8, 2008)
D. Certificate of Occupancy
None of the following activities shall occur and no building, structure, or portion thereof
for which a building permit was issued shall be occupied until after the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with Sec. 19-3-
4, Certificate of Occupancy:
1. an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure
2. the establishment of a home occupation or home business
3. a change in the use of a nonconforming use
4. occupancy and use of vacant land except for the raising of crops, or change in
the use of land, except in the raising of crops
5. any change in the use of a building from one category of use as set forth in
Article VI to another category of use
6. any activity for which site plan approval is required by the Planning Board
E. Demolition Permit
No demolition of a building or structure or major portion thereof, shall commence until
after the issuance of a Demolition Permit by the Code Enforcement Officer. A permit for
the demolition of a locally historic structure within the Town Center District or a historic
resource identified in Sec. 19-8-6, Archaeological and Historic Resources, shall not be
issued until forty-five (45) days after notice has been provided to the Town Manager,
Code Enforcement Officer, and Maine Historic Preservation Commission and published
in a newspaper of general circulation within Cape Elizabeth. When only a portion of a
structure will be demolished, plans depicting the areas to be demolished and any
replacement new construction must be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer before
the 45-day waiting period commences. (Effective August 11, 1999)
36
F. Resource Protection Permit
No activity listed in Sec. 19-6-9, Resource Protection Districts, as being permitted only
upon the issuance of a Resource Protection Permit shall commence until after the
issuance of said permit by the Planning Board in accordance with Sec. 19-8-3, Resource
Protection Performance Standards.
G. Reserved
H. Earth Materials Permit
No removal of thirty (30) or more cubic yards of earth materials, including rock, sand,
gravel, topsoil, and similar materials within any twelve (12) month period shall
commence until after the issuance of an Earth Materials Permit by the Planning Board in
accordance with Sec. 19-8-5, Earth Materials Removal Standards.
I. Home Day Care Permit
No home day care shall commence or expand its operation until after the issuance of a
Home Day Care Permit by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with Sec. 19-8-8,
Home Day Care and Day Care Facility Standards.
J. Construction on an Existing Private Road
No building permit shall be issued for construction on a residential lot that uses an
existing private road to provide access to and street frontage for the lot until the Code
Enforcement Officer determines that the road provides adequate all-season emergency
access and legally binding maintenance arrangements are established in accordance with
Sec. 19-7-9.A., Existing Private Road Standards.
K. Construction Utilizing a Private Accessway
No lot shall be created as a developable parcel that does not have the required street
frontage for the district in which it is located unless the Planning Board has approved the
creation of a private accessway serving the lot in accordance with Sec. 19-7-9.C., Private
Accessways.
SEC. 19-3-3. BUILDING PERMITS
A. Permit Required
No building, structure, or part thereof shall be constructed, structurally altered, enlarged,
or moved until a Building Permit for such action has been issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The contractor, builder, and developer, as well as the property
owner shall be responsible for any and all permits. Site plan approval, in accordance
37
with the provisions of Article IX. Site Plan Review, may be required prior to the issuance
of a Building Permit for certain types of uses including commercial and multiplex
residential construction.
B. Compliance with this Ordinance
No Building Permit shall be issued until the proposed construction or alteration complies
with the provisions of this Ordinance or with a decision rendered by the Zoning Board of
Appeals and with any approvals of the Planning Board.
C. Applications for Permits
All applications for Building Permits shall be submitted in writing to the Code
Enforcement Office on forms provided for the purpose. The application shall be
accompanied by the following information:
1. A site plan drawn to an indicated scale and showing the location and dimensions
of all buildings to be erected, the sewage disposal system, driveways and
turnarounds, and abutting lot and street lines. The site plan shall accurately
represent the relationship between any proposed building or structure or addition
to an existing building and all property lines to demonstrate compliance with the
setback requirements of this Ordinance. The applicant shall provide a Standard
Boundary Survey if any of the following apply:
a. The Code Enforcement Officer concludes that there is doubt as to the
location of a property line on the ground;
b. The Code Enforcement Officer cannot confirm that all setback requirements
are met from the information provided; or
c. The building permit is requested for a building, building addition or
structure valued at over $10,000 and located less than five feet (5’) from the
minimum setback distance.
The Code Enforcement Office shall have the discretion to require a standard
boundary survey quality plan of only the property line(s) within the area of
the proposed construction instead of a standard boundary survey of the entire
property boundary. (Effective February 8, 2013)
3. Approval by the Local Plumbing Inspector of any private sewage disposal
system proposal for the building, together with the plans for the approved
system.
4. Information required to determine compliance with the terms and conditions for
building and development in flood hazard areas as set forth under
38
Chapter 6, Article VI, Floodplain Management Ordinance if the building
is located within a flood hazard area.
5. All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show
evidence of right, title, or interest in the property or by an agent of the
owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder,
certifying that the information in the application is complete and correct.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
6. Such other information as the Code Enforcement Officer may require to
determine compliance with this Ordinance or the Building Code.
D. Action on Applications
1. Within seven (7) working days of the filing of an application for a Building
Permit involving a single family residence of fifteen (15) working days for
permits involving other uses, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
approve, deny, or refer such application to the appropriate body. The decision
of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be in writing citing the provisions
of the Ordinance that apply and communicated directly to the applicant.
One copy of the decision shall be filed in the Code Enforcement Officer’s
office. If the proposed activity requires site plan review in accordance
with Article IX, Site Plan Review, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
refer the applicant to the Town Planner. If a Conditional Use permit is
required, the Code Enforcement Officer shall refer the applicant to the
Zoning Board of Appeals and provide a copy of the decision to the
Board.
2. A public notice shall be mailed upon issuance of any building permit that
includes any of the following items. A public notice shall not be required if
the building permit is for construction pursuant to a Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Appeals approval.
a. Any expansion of a structure or new structure located within ten (10) feet of
the minimum setback; and
b. Any expansion of a structure or new structure within 125’ of the normal
high water line;
E. Plumbing Permit Required
No Building Permit shall be issued for any structure or use involving the construction,
installation, or alteration of plumbing facilities unless a valid plumbing permit has been
secured by the applicant.
39
F. Revision of Proposed Work
A new or revised building permit is required if any substantial changes are made in the
size, use, or construction of the structure of building after issuance of the permit.
G. Building Permit Expiration
A Building Permit secured under the provisions of this Ordinance shall become invalid if
the authorized work is not commenced within six months after issuance of the permit, or
if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the
time of commencing the work. If the work is not completed within eighteen (18) months
after the date on which the permit is granted and the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that completion is not being diligently pursued, then the Code Enforcement
Officer may deem the Building Permit expired. (Effective August 11, 1999)
H. Required Records
Applications for permits with their accompanying plans and building permits shall be
maintained as a permanent record by the Code Enforcement Officer.
SEC. 19-3-4. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
None of the following activities shall occur and no building, structure, or portion thereof
for which a building permit was issued shall be occupied until after the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy by the Code Enforcement Officer.
1. An increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure.
2. The establishment of a home occupation or home business.
3. A change in the use of a nonconforming use.
4. Occupancy and use of vacant land except for the raising of crops, or change in
the use of land, except in the raising of crops.
5. Any change in the use of a building from one category of use as set forth in
Article VI to another category of use.
6. Any activity for which site plan approval is required by the Planning Board.
A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued if the Code Enforcement Officer finds that
the project is not in compliance with this Ordinance or with any applicable approvals or
permits.
40
In case of use and occupancy of any building or part thereof, during a period of
construction or alteration, the Code Enforcement Office may issue a temporary certificate
for periods not exceeding six (6) months. A temporary certificate may be issued for a
project that received site plan approval only if a financial guarantee meeting the
requirements of Sec. 16-2-4(c)(7)(A) of the Subdivision Ordinance is in place for all
uncompleted site improvements, including landscaping.
SEC. 19-3-5. FEES
The Town Council shall establish fees for all permits. A copy of the fee schedule shall be
available from the Code Enforcement Officer.
If any work requiring a permit is commenced without first obtaining such permit, and if
all requirements for the issuance of such permit can be met, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue such permit upon the filing of a late application accompanied by the
required late fee for the same. (Effective December 10, 2003)
If work is commenced because of an emergency and an application for a permit is filed
within two (2) business days of the commencement of said work, the Code Enforcement
Officer may waive the late fee.
SEC. 19-3-6. VIOLATIONS
A. Notice
If, upon investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer determines that activities are or
have occurred that are in violation of this Ordinance or any permits or approvals granted
for a project, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give written notice to the owner and/or
occupant of the premises. The notice shall specify the nature of the violation, actions
necessary to abate the violation, and the time frame within which these actions shall
occur. In addition, the notice shall advise the party of the right to appeal the Code
Enforcement Officer’s decision and/or to seek a variance from the Zoning Boar of
Appeals, if appropriate.
B. Enforcement Action
If, after such notice and demand, the violation has not been abated within the time
provided, the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Town Council shall institute
appropriate action in the name of the Town to prevent, correct, restrain, or abate the
violation(s) of this Ordinance.
C. Penalties
41
Any owner or occupant of, or any person or entity having control or the use of, or any
person or entity engaged in the construction, alteration or repair of or receiving a permit
for, any building or land of part thereof, found to violate any of the provisions of this
Ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable as provided in 30-A, M.R.S.A. §4452, except as otherwise provided by State
law. Each day such violation is permitted to exist after written notification thereof by the
Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute a separate offense.
In the event of a wetland violation, the Town shall have the power to order complete
restoration of the wetland area involved or creation of new wetlands, by the person or
agent responsible for the violation. If such responsible person or agent does not complete
such restoration or creation within the time specified in the order, the Town shall have the
authority to restore the affected wetlands to the prior condition wherever possible and the
person or agent responsible for the original violation shall be held liable to the Town for
the costs associated with wetland restoration or creation, including the fees of consultants
retained by the Town to design or oversee the corrective actions.
D. Shoreland Zoning Enforcement Reporting
Within the Shoreland Performance Overlay District and the Resource Protection
Districts, the Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential
transactions of the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied,
variances granted or denied, renovation actions, renovation of permits, appeals, court
actions, violations investigated violations found, and fees collected. On a biennial basis,
a summary of this record shall be submitted to the Director of Land and Water Quality
within the Department of Environmental Protection. (Effective October 15, 2009)
ARTICLE IV. NONCONFORMANCE
SEC. 19-4-1. INTENT
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that
nonconforming conditions that were created by the adoption of this Ordinance shall be
allowed to continue, subject to the requirements of this Article. Except as otherwise
provided, a non-conforming condition shall not be permitted to become more nonconforming.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
SEC. 19-4-2. GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Transfer of Ownership
Nonconforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and the new owner may
continue the nonconforming use or continue to use the nonconforming structure or lot,
subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
42
B. Repair and Maintenance
This Ordinance allows the normal upkeep and maintenance of nonconforming uses and
structures including repairs or renovations that do not involve expansion of the
nonconforming use or structure. Such other changes in a nonconforming use or structure
as may be required by federal, state, or local building and safety codes are allowed so
long as such changes comply with all other provisions of Article IV. Nonconformance.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
C. Reduction in Lot Size
Except as expressly provided in this Article or for a taking by eminent domain or a
conveyance in lieu thereof, no lot shall be reduced in size by conveyance of a portion
thereof unless (1) the remaining land meets the minimum lot size required for the zoning
district in which that land is located, and (2) the land to be conveyed either meets the
minimum lot size requirement or will be conveyed to the owner of abutting property, the
Town, or to a conservation organization in conjunction with covenants or similar
restrictions that prohibit its development.
SEC. 19-4-3. NONCONFORMANCEWITH ALL ZONING
DISTRICTS EXCEPT THE SHORELAND AND
RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS (Effective November 5, 2016)
The following provisions shall govern the use and modification of nonconforming lots,
structures, and uses in all areas of the Town that do not comply with Zoning District
requirements, except for the Shoreland Performance Overlay District or a Resource
Protection District. Nonconformities within the Shoreland Performance Overlay District
shall be governed by the provisions of Sec. 19-4-4. Nonconformance Within the
Shoreland Protection Overlay District, and nonconformities in the Resource Protection
Districts (RP1-CW, RP1-CW Buffer Overlay, RP2-WP and RP3-F) shall be governed by
the provisions of Sec. 19-4-5, Nonconformance Within the Resource Protection Districts.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
A. Nonconforming Lots
The following provisions shall govern the development of lots that are nonconforming
because they do not meet the minimum lot area, net lot area per dwelling unit, minimum
street frontage, or similar requirement of the district within which they are located. Lots
that do not meet the minimum street frontage requirement shall also comply with Sec. 19-
7-9, Private Access Provisions, before a building permit can be issued. (Effective November
14, 2015)
1. Vacant Nonconforming Lots
43
a. Buildability. Vacant nonconforming lots may be built upon in conformance
with the provisions of the district in which they are located even though the
lots do not meet the minimum lot area, net lot area per dwelling unit,
street frontage, or similar requirements as long as the requirements of the
chart below are met. (Effective August 11, 1999 and revised affective July 4, 2001)
One Owner One Owner One Owner
Individual Lots
May Be Built On
Non-Conforming
Lot
Non-Conforming
Lot
Non-Conforming
Lot
One Owner
Conforming Lot
Proposed
undersized lot is
NOT buildable
One Owner
Non-Conforming
Lot Propose
Proposed
Undersized Lot
b. Space and Bulk Standards. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a building
permit and related permits and approvals for a principal structure and related
accessory buildings and structures that do not comply with the setbacks and
other Space and Bulk Standards that would otherwise be required in the district
in which it is located as long as the following standards are met: (Effective August
11, 1999)
RA District RC District TC District
Front setback for principal
structure
-- local roads 25' As required by
Sec. 19-6-3.E
As required by
Sec. 19-6-4.D
44
-- other roads As required by
Sec. 19-6-1.E
As required by
Sec. 19-6-3.E
As required by
Sec. 19-6-4.D
Side setback 25' 10'
As required by
Sec. 19-6-4.D
Rear setback 20' 15'
As required by
Sec. 19-6-4.D
Minimum lot area 10,000 sq.ft. 10,000 sq. ft.
As required by
Sec. 19-6-4.D
-- with public sewerage
-- with on-site sewage disposal 20,000. sq.ft. * 20,000 sq.ft. *
Maximum building coverage
-- with public sewerage 25% 25% N/A
-- with on-site sewage disposal 20% 20% N/A
* Or otherwise meet the requirements of Chapter 15, Sewer Ordinance, the State
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and have received a waiver of the state
minimum lot size requirement pursuant to 12 M.S.R.A. Section 4807-B. The
issuance of a minimum lot size waiver by the Department of Human Services in
connection with a lot created prior to January 1, 1970, shall be deemed valid.
Provided however, in no event shall a building permit issue for a lot which
contains less than 10,000 sq. ft. (Effective July 4, 2001)
c. Variance. If a principal structure cannot be sited on a lot in conformance with
these setback requirements, the owner may seek a variance from the setback
requirements from the Zoning Board of Appeals (see Sec. 19-5-2.B,
Variances).
2. Developed Nonconforming Lots
a. Single Lots. A single nonconforming lot that is improved with a principal
building or structure may continue to be used. Any existing principal or
accessory building or structure may be modified, enlarged, or relocated or a new
building or structure constructed even though it does not conform to the setback
requirements of the district in which it is located provided that such
modification, construction, or relocation conforms to the standards, except
minimum lot size, set forth in Sec. 19-4-3.A.I.a. above. (Effective July 4, 2001)
One Owner One Owner One Owner
Nonconforming Lot Nonconforming Lot Nonconforming Lot Lots may be
conveyed; Buildings
may be enlarged per
45
limitations on
Nonconformance
chart
One Owner
One Owner One Owner Conforming Lot Proposed
Nonconforming Lot Nonconforming Lot Proposed undersized
Undersized Lot lot not
buildable
b. Contiguous Developed Lots: Two or more contiguous, developed
nonconforming lots or parcels in common ownership as of June 4, 1997,
may be conveyed separately of together, even if all or some of the lots do
not meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, if a principal use
or structure exists on each lot, provided that the nonconforming lots comply
with the State Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and the Town Sewage
Ordinance. (Effective July 4, 2001)
Common Ownership of Lots
Nonconforming Lot Nonconforming Lot Nonconforming Lot Lots may be
separately
conveyed
Partially Developed Contiguous Lots: If a vacant conforming lot abuts a developed
nonconforming lot held in the same ownership, the two lots may be separated and owned
independently. If a vacant nonconforming lot abuts a developed conforming lot in the
same ownership, the two lots may be separated and owned independently If a developed
nonconforming lot abuts an undeveloped nonconforming lot held in the same ownership,
the lots may be separated and owned independently. (Effective July 4, 2001)
46
Common Ownership
Conforming Lot
Nonconforming Lot Lots may be
separately
conveyed
Common Ownership
Conforming Lot
Nonconforming Lot Lots may be
separately
conveyed
Common Ownership
Nonconforming Lot Nonconforming Lot Lots may be
separately
conveyed
47
B. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures
1. Continuation
Any lawfully constructed building or structure which is made nonconforming by
reason of the enactment of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto may be
continued, even though such building or structure does not conform with
the provisions of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto. Ordinary
maintenance and repair may be done on such nonconforming structure, and such
structural alterations may be made which are necessary to maintain the
building or structure in good condition.
2. Relocation
A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel
on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation
conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and provided that if the use is
not connected to the public sewerage system, the applicant demonstrates that
the present subsurface sewage disposal system meets the requirements of
State law and the Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, or that a new system
can be installed in compliance with the law and said rules. In no case shall a
structure be relocated so as to increase its nonconformity.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest
practical extent, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the size of the
lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other
structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location of the
septic system (if any) and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, the
impact on views, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to
accomplish the relocation.
3. Reconstruction or Replacement
Any nonconforming structure which is located closer than the required setback
from the property line and which is, or is proposed to be, removed, or
damaged or destroyed may be reconstructed or replaced provided that a
permit is obtained within one (1) year of the date of said damage, destruction, or
removal, and the building or structure will be located within the original
building footprint, will not increase the number of square feet of floor area,
and will not create or expand any nonconformities. Reconstruction of a
48
nonconforming structure not in compliance with these limitations may be
permitted provided that such reconstruction is in compliance with the setback
requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no
case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its
nonconformity.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any, in
addition to the criteria in Sec. 19-4-3.B.2., Relocation.
4. Enlargement
Any nonconforming structure which is located closer than the required setback
from the property line may be enlarged as long as the area being enlarged
meets the setback requirements, and will not create or expand any
nonconformities. Enlargement of a nonconforming structure not in
compliance with these limitations may be permitted provided that such
enlargement is in compliance with the setback requirement to the greatest
practical extent as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with
the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be enlarged so as to
increase its nonconformity.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any, in
addition to the criteria in Sec. 19-4-3.B.2., Relocation. (Effective November 5,
2016)
C. Nonconforming Uses
1. Continuation
Any lawful use of any building, structure or land, which is made nonconforming
by reason of the enactment of this Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, may be
continued even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance or any amendment thereto.
2. Change of Nonconforming Use
A lawful nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a use
permitted in the district in which the use is located, or to a less
objectionable and less detrimental nonconforming use as determined by the
Zoning Board of Appeals according to the following standards:
49
a. The proposed use shall not increase the hours of operation;
b. The proposed use shall not create hazardous or increased traffic conditions;
c. The proposed use shall not create unsanitary conditions by reason of sewage
disposal, emissions to the air, or other aspects of its design or operation; and
d. The proposed use shall not adversely affect the value of adjacent properties.
3. Enlargement
A nonconforming use of a building or structure shall not be extended, nor shall a
nonconforming use of part of a building or structure be extended to other parts
of the building or structure, unless in the opinion of the Zoning Board of
Appeals: (i) those parts were manifestly arranged or designed for such use
prior to the enactment of this Ordinance or any amendment making such use
nonconforming, (ii) such extension of a nonconforming use is solely for
the purpose of bringing the use into compliance with health, safety, or access
codes, or to correct a condition that may not technically be in violation but
which is determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals to constitute a health,
safety, or access problem, or (iii) the change expands the total floor area
devoted to the nonconforming use by less than 25% over the lifetime of the
structure and the Zoning Board of Appeals fins that the increase meets the
Conditional Use Standards of Sec. 19-5-5.D. Standards for Conditional Use
Approval. The expansion shall be limited to the minimum necessary to
accomplish that purpose. Applications for enlargement of a nonconforming
use shall be handled in accordance with the procedures of Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional
Use Permits.
4. Extension of Nonconforming Use of Land
A lawful nonconforming use existing on premises outside of a building or
structure shall not be extended to or allowed to occupy any other part or parts of
such premises.
5. Abandonment
The lawful nonconforming use of any building, structure, lot of land, or portions
thereof which has been abandoned, shall have been terminated and shall not
thereafter be resumed. A lawful nonconforming use shall be deemed
abandoned if any one of the following events occurs:
a. the lawful nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use;
b. the lawful nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of twelve
(12) consecutive months;
50
c. the lawful nonconforming us is changed to a prohibited use in violation of
this Ordinance; or
d. the lawful nonconforming use has been lawfully changed to another
nonconforming use in compliance with this Ordinance.
SEC. 19-4-4. NONCONFORMANCE WITHIN THE SHORELAND
PERFORMANCE OVERLAY DISTRICT
The following provisions shall govern nonconformance with provisions of the Shoreland
Performance Overlay District. Nonconforming conditions in existence before the
effective date of this district, or amendments thereto, shall be allowed to continue, subject
to the requirements set forth in this section. (Effective November 5, 2016)
A. Nonconforming Lots
1. Single Vacant, Nonconforming Lots
A nonconforming lot of record as of the effective date of this overlay district or
amendment thereto may be build upon, provided that such lot is in separate
ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and
that all provisions of this overlay district except lot area, lot width and shore frontage
can be met. Variances relating to setback or other requirements not involving
lot area, lot width or shore frontage may be obtained from the Zoning Board
of Appeals. (Effective October 15, 2009)
2. Contiguous Build Lots
If (i) two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in common ownership at the
time of adoption of this overlay district, (ii) all or part of the lots do not
meet the dimensional requirements of this overlay district, and (iii) a principal
use or structure exists on each lot, then the nonconforming lots may be
conveyed separately provided that said conveyance complies with the State
Minimum Lost Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D, the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and Chapter 15, Sewer
Ordinance. (Effective October 15, 2009)
If two or more principal uses or structures exist on a single lot of record on the
effective date of this overlay district, each may be sold as a separate lot
provided that the above referenced law and rules and ordinance are complied
with. When such lots are divided, each lot thus created must conform as nearly as
51
possible to the dimensional requirements of this overlay district. (Effective October
15, 2009)
3. Contiguous Lots – Vacant or Partially Built
If (i) to or more contiguous lots or parcels are in common ownership at the time
of amendment of this overlay district, (ii) any of these lots do not
individually meet the dimensional requirement of this overlay district or
subsequent amendments, and (iii) one or more of the lots is vacant or
contains no principal structure, then the nonconforming lots may be conveyed
separately as long as said conveyances comply with the State Minimum Lot
Size Law, State Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rule, and Chapter 15,
Sewer Ordinance.
B. Nonconforming Buildings and Structures
1. A nonconforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, provided that such addition or
expansion does not increase the nonconformity of the structure, and is in
accordance with subparagraphs (a) and (b) below. (Effective October 15, 2009)
a. After January 1, 1989, if any portion of a structure does not meet the
required setback from the normal high-water line of a water body or
tributary stream or the upland edge of a wetland, that portion of the
structure shall not be expanded in floor area or volume by more than 30%
during the lifetime of the structure. If a replacement structure conforms
with the requirements of Sec. 19-4-4.B.(3), Reconstruction or
Replacement, and is less than the required setback from a water body,
tributary stream or wetland, the replacement structure may not be
expanded if the original structure existing on January 1, 1989 had been
expanded by 30% in floor area and volume since that date. Whenever a
new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a nonconforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed
such that the setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals, utilizing the criteria specified
in Sec. 19-4-4.B.2, Relocation. If the completed foundation does not
extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the structure, except for
expansion in conformity with this subsection a, and the foundation does
not cause the structure to be elevated by more than three (3) additional
feet, as measured from the uphill side of the structure (from original ground
level to the bottom of the first floor sill), it shall not be considered to be an
expansion of the structure. (Effective October 15, 2009)
b. Non structure, which fails to meet the required setback from the normal
high-waterline of a water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of
52
a wetland, shall be expanded toward the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. (Effective October 15, 2009)
2. Relocation
A nonconforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the
parcel on which the structure is located provided that the site of the
relocation conforms to all setback requirements to the greatest practical
extent as determined by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and, provided
that, if the use is not connected to the public sewerage system, the
applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage disposal
system meets the requirements of State Law, the State Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules, and Chapter 15, Article II, Private Sewage
Disposal Ordinance, or that a new system can be installed in compliance
with the law and said rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated so as
to increase its nonconformity.
In determining whether a relocation meets the setback to the greatest
practical extent, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the size of the
lot, the slope of the land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of
other structures on the property and on adjacent properties, the location
of the septic system (if any) and other on-site soils suitable for septic
systems, the impact on views, and the type and amount of vegetation to be
removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is necessary to remove
vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order to relocate a
structure, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall require replanting of
native vegetation to compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition,
the area from which the relocated structure was removed must be
replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
a. Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at
least one native tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If
more than five trees are planted, no one species of tree shall make
up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced trees
must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that
were removed. Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and
ground cover, that are removed or destroyed in order to relocate a
structure must be re-established. An area at least the same size as the
area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged,
or removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The
vegetation and/or ground cover must consist of similar native
vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed, destroyed or
removed.
b. Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel, the original
location of the structure shall be replanted with vegetation which
53
may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or a combination thereof.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
3. Reconstruction or Replacement
Any nonconforming structure which fails to meet the required setback from a
water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is damaged or destroyed
regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value of the
structure before such damage, destruction, or removal may be reconstructed
or replaced provided that a building permit is obtained within one (1) year of
the date of said damage or destruction. The reconstruction or replacement shall be
in compliance with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback
requirement to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in accordance with the purposes of this district. The Zoning
Board of Appeals may request guidance from the Conservation Commission
prior to its decision. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as
to increase its nonconformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is
located in an area that is less than the required setback, it shall not be any
larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Sec. 19-4-
4.B.(1) above, as determined by the non-conforming floor area and volume of
the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount
of floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or
reconstructed beyond the required setback area, no portion of the relocated
or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at less than the
setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to remove
vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with Sec. 19-4-4.B(2) above. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Any nonconforming structure which is located less than the required setback
from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by
50% or less of the market value or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of
the market value of the structure, excluding normal maintenance and repair,
may be reconstructed in place if a building permit is obtained from the Code
Enforcement Officer within one year of such damage, destruction or
removal. (Effective October 15, 2009)
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the
setback to the greatest practical extent, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider, in addition to the criteria in Sec. 19-4-4.B.2, Relocation, the
physical condition and type of foundation, if any. (Effective October 15, 2009)
4. Change of Use of a Nonconforming Structure
The use of a nonconforming structure may not be changed to another use unless
the Planning Board, after receiving written application for a change of use
in the Shoreland Performance Overlay District, determines that the proposed new
54
use will have no greater adverse impact on the water body, tributary stream or
wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources, than the
existing use. In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the
Planning Board shall require written documentation from the applicant
regarding the probable effects on public health and safety, erosion and
sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover, visual
and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, flood plain
management and archeological and historic resources. The Planning Board
may request guidance from the Conservation Commission prior to making its
decision. (Effective October 15, 2009)
5. Nonconforming Accessory Structures
On a nonconforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists,
and it is not possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required
water body, tributary stream or wetland setbacks, the code enforcement
officer may issue a permit to place a single accessory structure, with no
utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment.
Such accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor
eight (8) feet in height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or
tributary stream as practical and shall meet all other applicable standards,
including lot coverage and vegetation clearing limitations. In no case shall the
structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary stream than the principal
structure. (Effective October 15, 2009)
C. Nonconforming Uses
1. Expansion
Expansions of nonconforming uses are prohibited, except that nonconforming
residential uses may be expanded within existing residential structures or
within expansions of such structures as permitted in Sec. 19-4-4-.B.1,
Expansion, after obtaining a permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
2. Resumption Prohibited
If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of more than one year, or is
superseded by a conforming use, the lot, building, or structure may not
again be devoted to a nonconforming use. This provision shall not apply to
the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the structure
has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five
(5) year period.
3. Change of Use
55
An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use
provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject
property and the adjacent properties and resources than the former use, as
determined by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater impact
shall be made according to criteria listed in Sec. 19-4-4.B.4, Change of Use
a Nonconforming Structure.
SEC. 19-4-5. NONCONFORMANCE WITHIN THE RESOURCE PROTECTION
DISTRICTS
A use, structure or activity that was lawful before May 9, 1990, and made nonconforming
by the Resource Protection provisions or any amendment thereto, may be continued
subject to the provisions of this section. Determinations of building status shall be
regulated by the Town Assessor’s property card as of April 1, 1990. No building
footprint expansion of a nonconforming structure shall be allowed if any variance is
required under the Zoning Ordinance. An expansion shall include any increase in floor
area or volume of a structure or the construction or expansion of a porch or deck. For the
purposes of this section, the sum of the horizontal area shall constitute the floor area of a
deck or porch.
A. Nonconforming Building Structures
A nonconforming structure may be altered, added to or expanded only if the following
standards are met, but these standards do not restrict the conversion of basement or cellar
space, as defined by the Building Code, into finished area, provided such conversion is
consistent with the Floodplain Management Ordinance. No exterior structural alteration
or addition to any nonconforming structure over the life of the structure shall expand
beyond the limitations set forth below:
1. Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District
In case of any structure located in the Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland
District, no expansion shall be permitted which expands: (i) the structure’s
floor area or volume by more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its size at
the time it became a nonconforming structure, or (ii) the existing building
footprint.
2. Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay and Resource
Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District
In the case of any structure located in a Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland
Buffer Overlay and within one hundred (100) feet of the Resource Protection 1 –
Critical Wetland upland edge or in a Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection
District, no expansion shall be permitted which expands the structure’s floor
56
area or volume by more than twenty-five percent (25%) of its size at the
time it became a nonconforming structure. An expansion of the existing
building footprint may be permitted to accommodate up to a twenty-five percent
(25%) expansion of floor area or volume, provided that all of the requirements
of this section are met. A building footprint shall not be expanded to be closer
than the shortest nonconforming setback distance from the wetland upland edge
(see figure A). In no event shall any expansion be within twenty-five (25)
feet of the wetland upland edge (see Figure B). Sketches A and B illustrate the
requirements of this section.
3. Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay greater than one
hundred (100) feet from the Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Upland
Edge
In the case of an existing main building which is located in the Resource
Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay and more than one hundred
(100) feet from the Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland upland edge, the
main building may be expanded a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet
from the building footprint existing at the time it became a nonconforming
structure, provided that all of the requirements of this section are met. No
expansion shall be permitted which expand the floor area or volume by more
than twenty-five percent (25%) of its size at the time the structure became
nonconforming. However, a single story building that (a) is connected to public
sewer and (b) is not a single family home, may increase its volume of floor
area by no more than eighty percent (80%) of its pre-expansion volume or floor
area, so long as there is no expansion of the building footprint as it existed as of
March 16, 2007. No part of the expansion may be constructed within one
hundred (100) feet of the Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland upland
edge. (Effective May 9, 2007)
In the case of structures other than the main building, no expansion shall be
permitted which expands the structure’s floor area or volume by more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of its size at the time it became a nonconforming
structure. An expansion of the existing building footprint may be permitted to
accommodate up to a twenty-five percent (25%) expansion of the floor area
or volume, provided that all of the requirements of this section are met. No
part of the expansion may be constructed within one hundred (100) feet of the
Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland upland edge. (Effective August 11, 1999)
4. Deck in the Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay and
Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District
Expansion of construction of a deck or patio shall be calculated and included as
a footprint expansion. No deck or patio shall be permitted which is located
closer than the shortest existing nonconforming setback distance or a distance of
one hundred (100) feet, whichever is less, from the wetland upland edge. In no
57
case shall a deck be constructed which is within twenty-five (25) feet of the
wetland edge. Decks allowed under this section shall require a building permit.
58
59
5. Variance
If an expansion of an existing main building is proposed which exceeds the
above restrictions and is not located in the Resource Protection 1 – Critical
Wetland, the Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance for the proposed
expansion in accordance with the procedures and standards in Sec. 19-5-2.B,
Variances. No variance shall be granted to expand the existing building
footprint and the floor area or volume expansion shall not exceed forty
percent (40%) of the main building size at the time it became a nonconforming
structure.
B. Nonconforming Uses
If a nonconforming use is discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, no
resumption shall be allowed unless it is expressly permitted under Sec. 19-6-9.B,
Permitted Uses, or Sec. 19-6-9.C, Uses Permitted with a Resource Protection Permit.
Agricultural uses shall be exempt from this subsection.
C. Replacement Structures
If any nonconforming structure or use is destroyed or substantially damaged by fire,
explosion or other act of nature, it may be rebuild provided the building permit is
obtained within one year of the destruction. Any expansion of a replacement structure
shall comply with the standards of Sec. 19-4-5.A, Expansion of Nonconforming
Structures, and Sec. 19-4-5.B, Nonconforming Uses.
D. Septic Systems
Requests for expansion or replacement of septic systems located within established
Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlays shall be reviewed by the Code
Enforcement Officer and approved only if in conformance with the State Plumbing Code.
E. Exemption
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Ordinance to the contrary, a principal building or
structure (and any building addition or accessory buildings) may be erected upon a lot
which is part of a subdivision approved by the Planning Board after December 22, 1976,
proved that:
1. Such construction and use either will not occur within a Resource Protection 1 –
Critical Wetland District excluding any Resource Protection 1 – Critical
Wetland Buffer Overlays or which has a valid Resource Protection Permit
that was issued by the Planning Board applying the provisions in effect prior to
May 10, 1990; and
60
2. Such construction has a valid building permit in place as of May 10, 2000.
(Effective August 11, 1999)
ARTICLE V. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SEC. 19-5-1. APPOINTMENT AND COMPOSITION
There is hereby established the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board shall consist of
seven (7) members, appointed by the Town Council to serve without compensation for
staggered three (3) year terms expiring on January 1 or until their successors have been
duly appointed. The Board shall elect a Chair and a Secretary from its own membership,
both to be elected for one (1) year. The Board shall make such rules as it deems
necessary to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance and govern the conduct of its
public hearings.
SEC. 19-5-2. POWERS AND DUTIES
The Board shall have the following exclusive powers and duties to be exercised only
upon written appeal by a party aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer
or other municipal official or board:
A. Administrative Appeals
To determine whether the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer is in conformity
with the provisions of this Ordinance, to modify such decision to conform with such
provisions, and to interpret the meaning of the Ordinance in all cases of uncertainty. The
Board shall hear the administrative appeals on a do novo basis. The Board shall base its
decision on the materials presented to or used by the Code Enforcement Officer (if any),
as well as any new evidence or testimony presented at the hearing before the Board. The
Board shall resolve appeals by deciding the matters afresh, undertaking its own
independent analysis of evidence and the law and reaching its own decision. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
B. Variances (Effective August 10, 2000)
1. All Districts except the Shoreland Performance Overlay District
To grant variances from the terms of this Ordinance provided that (i) there is no
substantial departure from the intent of the Ordinance, and (ii) a literal
enforcement of the Ordinance would cause a practical difficulty as defined
by 30-A-A.M.R.S.A. Sec. 4353, 4-C. Variance from dimensional standards,
and when the following conditions exist:
a. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property
and not to the general conditions of the neighborhood;
b. The granting of a variance will not produce an undesirable change in the
character of the neighborhood and will not unreasonably detrimentally
61
affect the use or market value of abutting properties; In determining
whether a variance would have an unreasonable detrimental effect on
the use or market value of abutting properties, the Zoning Board shall
consider if the variance would have the effect of blocking an
established view, posing a fire safety hazard, casting a shadow on an
adjoining lot, reducing the appraise value of an adjoining property by
10% or more of eliminating the privacy of an adjoining property without
an effort to mitigate the lost privacy;
c. The practical difficulty is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a
prior owner;
d. No other feasible alternative to a variance is available to the petitioner;
e. The granting of a variance will not unreasonably adversely affect the natural
environment; and
f. The property is not located in whole or in part within shoreland areas as
described in Title 38, Section 435.
Notwithstanding the definition of “dimensional standards” in 30 M.R.S.A. Sec.
4353, 4-C, no variance shall be granted:
a. to permit a use or structure otherwise prohibited,
b. to reduce the required lot area or street frontage, or
c. to either reduce a setback to less than 10’ or the shortest nonconforming
setback distance created by the existing building.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance for the purpose of making
that property accessible to an applicant with a disability who is living on the
property without a finding that a strict application of the ordinance to the
applicant and the applicant’s property would cause practical difficulty. The
Board shall restrict any variance granted for the purpose of making that
property accessible to an applicant with a disability who is living on the
property, solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of
structures necessary for access to or egress from the property by the applicant
with the disability. The Board may impose conditions on the variance,
including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that
the applicant with the disability lives on the property.
2. Shoreland Performance Overlay District (Effective August 10, 2000)
To grant variances from the terms of this Ordinance provided that (i) there is no
substantial departure from the intent of the Ordinance, and (ii) a literal
enforcement of the Ordinance would cause undue hardship as defined by
62
30-A M.R.S.A. §4353, Zoning Adjustment. The term “undue hardship” as
used in this section means:
a. The land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
b. The need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property
and not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. The granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
locality; and
d. The hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior
owner.
Notwithstanding the definition of “dimensional standards” in 30 M.R.S.A.
§4353, 4-C, no variance shall be granted:
a. to permit a use or structure otherwise prohibited,
b. or to reduce the required lot area or street frontage, or
c. to either reduce a setback to less than 10’ or the shortest nonconforming
setback distance created by the existing building.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a variance for the purpose of making that
dwelling accessible to an applicant with a disability who is living in the dwelling without
a finding that a strict application of the ordinance to the applicant and the applicant’s
property would cause undue hardship. The Board shall restrict any variance granted for
the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to an applicant with a disability who is
living in the dwelling, solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of
structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the applicant with the
disability. The Board may impose conditions on the variance, including limiting the
variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that the applicant with the
disability lives on the property. (Effective October 15, 2009)
C. Conditional Use Permits
To consider requests for the issuance of permits for any of the conditional uses of land or
buildings permitted in the various districts, in accordance with the procedures and
standards of Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional Use Permits.
D. Setback Reductions
To consider requests for reduction of the setback requirements in accordance with the
procedures and standards of Sec. 19-7-10, Reduction in Setbacks.
63
E. Sewer Appeals
To consider written appeals by a party aggrieved by a decision of any public official or
agent of the Town under Chapter 15, Sewer Ordinance, to consider and act upon requests
for special permits under Sec. 15-1-8(c) of the Sewage Ordinance, and to interpret any
provision of Chapter 15 in cases of uncertainty.
SEC. 19-5-3. PROCEDURES
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or other municipal
official, where applicable, may appeal such decision to the Board within thirty (30) days
following the date of such decision by filing a notice of appeal with the Code
Enforcement Officer. Notices of appeal and applications for permits for conditional uses
of land or buildings shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer upon forms
approved by the Board setting forth the grounds for the appeal or application,
accompanied by a fee in an amount prescribed by the Town Council and such other
information as the Board may require.
A. Establishment and Notice of Meeting Date
Upon receipt of any notice of administrative, variance, or sewer appeal, application for
conditional use, or application for a setback reduction, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall forthwith notify the Chair of the Board, who shall establish the date of the meeting
at which the application will be considered based upon the submission deadlines for the
regular meetings of the Board. The Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice of such
public hearing in accordance with Sec. 16-2-1(b) of the Subdivision Ordinance, except
that a legal notice shall be published once in a newspaper. (Effective November 14, 2015)
B. Notification to the Department of Environmental Protection
A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information
supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days
prior to action by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the
Commissioner prior to the action by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made part of
the record and shall be taken into consideration by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. Conduct of Hearing
The code Enforcement Officer, unless excused, shall attend all hearings on appeals and
applications and shall present to the Board all plans, photographs or other factual
materials which are relevant to the proceeding. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, including a record of the final disposition of all matters together with the
64
reasons therefore. The Director of Public Works, unless excused, shall attend meetings at
which sewer appeals are discussed.
D. Decision Procedures
A written notice of the Board’s decision on each appeal or application, with the reasons
therefore, shall be issued to the appellant or applicant and to the Code Enforcement
Officer within thirty (30) days following the date of the hearing thereon. The Board may
grant a variance only with an affirmative vote of four 94) members of the Board. The
Board shall state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a statement of facts
found and conclusions reached by the Board. Any decision requiring action by the Code
Enforcement Officer, or when applicable by the Director of Public Works, shall expressly
direct such action. The Board shall cause written notice of its decision to be provided to
the applicant within seven (7) days of the Board’s decision. The appellant or applicant
and any property owner with standing may seek judicial review of the decision by the
Board in accordance with the Laws of the State of Maine. (Effective October 15, 2009)
E. Renewed Proceedings
After a decision has been made by the Board, a new appeal or application of similar
import shall not be considered by the Board until one (1) year has elapsed following the
date of such decision. The Board may consider a new appeal or application within this
one-year period if it determines that owing to a mistake of law or misunderstanding of
fact an injustice was done, or that a change has taken place in some essential aspect of the
case sufficient to warrant reconsideration. Any such new appeal or application shall be
processed as a new request subject to the procedures set out above.
SEC. 19-5-4. VARIANCES
A. Criteria for Approval
The Board may grant a variance from the provisions of this Ordinance only if it finds that
literal enforcement of the Ordinance will cause a practical difficulty as defined in Sec.
19-5-2.B, Powers and Duties. (Effective August 10, 2000)
B. Conditions
The Board may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. The
applicant shall comply with all conditions imposed.
C. Notification to the Department of Environmental Protection
A copy of each variance granted by the Board from the provisions of Sec. 19-6-9,
Resource Protection Districts, or from the provisions of Sec. 19-6-11, Shoreland
Performance Overlay District, shall be submitted by the Code Enforcement Officer to the
65
Department of Environmental Protection within seven (7) days of the decision. (Effective
October 15, 2009)
D. Recording of Variances
No rights shall accrue to the recipient of any variance unless the applicant records a
certificate of variance in conformity with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4353, Zoning Adjustment in
the Cumberland County Registry of deeds within ninety (90) days of final approval of the
variance and provides a copy of the recorded certificate to the Code Enforcement Officer
within ten (10) days of the recording.
E. Expiration of Variance
Notwithstanding the recording of a certificate of variance, the applicant’s legal rights set
forth in a variance shall expire if the construction or alteration involved is not
substantially completed within one (1) year from the date on which the Zoning Board of
Appeals voted to grant the variances. The Board may grant one (1) extension for up to
one (1) additional year upon written request of the applicant. This variance expiration
provision shall be effective for all variances approved after January 1, 1989.
SEC. 19-5-5. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
The purpose of this section is to establish the procedures and standards to enable the
Town to review applications for conditional use permits.
A. Conditional Use Approval Required
A building, structure, or parcel of land may be used for a conditional use if:
1. The use is specifically listed as a conditional use in the district, and
2. Conditional use approval is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. Administrative Procedures
1. Prior to submitting a formal application for conditional use approval, the
applicant should meet with the Code Enforcement Officer to informally discuss
the proposed application and the review process. The purpose of this
informational meeting is to allow the applicant to understand the process
and clarify any questions before submitting a formal application.
2. An application for conditional use approval shall be made to the Code
Enforcement Officer on forms provided for that purpose.
3. The application form shall be accompanied by the supporting materials set forth
in Sec. 19-5-5.C, Application Requirements, and an application fee.
66
4. The application shall be processed in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Sec. 19-5-3, Procedures.
C. Application Requirements
The applicant’s submissions shall include the following:
1. A completed and signed application form
2. The appropriate fee
3. The location of the proposed use, including Assessor’s tax map and lot number,
and a location map
4. A description of the exact nature of the proposed use, including but not limited
to the type of use, square footage involved, hours of operation, types and
amount of any pollutants to be generated, and types and amount of traffic expected
to be generated
5. A scale drawing, including existing and proposed buildings, important natural
features, driveways, parking areas, pedestrian ways, streets and other rightsof-
way, and location of signs and outdoor lighting
6. Information demonstrating that the application complies with the standards of
approval of Sec. 19-5-5.C, Standards for Conditional Use Approval
This information must be provided or a waiver sought before the application will be
considered by the Board. The Board may waive any of these submission requirements at
it initial consideration of the application upon written request of the applicant. In
waiving any submission requirement, the Board shall find that such waived information
is not needed to determine conformance with the standards of approval due to the scale or
nature of the proposed activity.
The Board may also request, at the initial consideration of the application, that additional
information be provided to determine compliance with the standards of approval. The
applicant shall have the burden of providing the information upon which the Board will
base its findings and decision.
D. Standards for Conditional Use Approval
The Board shall, after review of required materials, authorize issuance of a conditional
use permit, upon a showing that:
1. Any conditions prescribed for such conditional use will be satisfied;
67
2. The proposed use will not create hazardous traffic conditions when added to
existing and foreseeable traffic in it vicinity;
3. The proposed use will not create unsanitary conditions by reason of sewage
disposal, emissions to the air, or other aspects of its design or operation;
4. The proposed use will not adversely affect the value of adjacent properties;
5. The proposed site plan and layout are compatible with adjacent property uses
and with the Comprehensive Plan; and
6. The design and external appearance of any proposed building will constitute an
attractive and compatible addition to its neighborhood, although it need not
have a similar design, appearance or architecture.
Upon a finding by the Board that all of these standards have been met, the Board shall
authorize the issuance of a permit for such conditional use, but may impose such
conditions upon the use as it deems necessary in order to assure that the foregoing
objectives will be attained.
E. Conditions of Approval
The Board may attach conditions to its approval of a conditional use. These conditions
may include, but are not limited to, such requirements as:
1. off-site street improvements
2. access restrictions
3. hours of use
4. buffering and screening
5. utility improvements
6. performance guarantees
F. Duration of a Conditional Use Approval
1. Provided all conditions and standards of approval are met, a conditional use
shall be a continuing grant of permission for as long as the property is used for
such purposes. The conditional use shall expire if the owner:
a. physically alters the property and/or structure so it can no longer be used for
the conditional use, or
b. ceases to use the property for the approved conditional use for one (1) year
or more, or
68
c. fails to initiate the operation or conduct of the conditional use within one (1)
year of the date of the Board’s vote to grant said approval.
2. A conditional use may be expanded in area or function only with the granting of
a new conditional use approval by the Board.
G. Scope of Approval
All permits or approvals shall include, as an express condition, a written statement to the
effect that the permit or approval is granted subject to all elements of the final plans and
specifications submitted by the applicant and to all representations, oral or written, made
by or on behalf of the applicant in support of the application.
ARTICLE VI. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
SEC. 19-6-1. RESIDENCE A DISTRICT (RA)
A. Purpose
The Residence A District includes lands that are outside of the built-up areas of Cape
Elizabeth, lands to which public sewer lines are not expected to be extended in the near
future, and large tracts suitable for farming, woodland production, and wildlife habitat.
The purpose of this district is to allow residential development that is compatible with the
character, scenic value, and traditional uses of rural lands and that does not impose an
undue burden on the provision of municipal services.
B. Permitted Uses
1. The following uses are permitted in the Residence A District:
a. Any use permitted in Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetlands District, or in
Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District, or in Resource
Protection 3 – Floodplain District, as shown on Table 19-6-9.
b. Agriculture, provided that no animal or fowl shall be raised for commercial
purposes or any lot containing less than one hundred thousand (100,000) square
feet.
c. Keeping of livestock, such as a horse, cow, pig, goat, sheep, or similar animal
provided that such activity occurs only on a lot containing at least one
hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
d. Removal of topsoil, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-5, Earth Materials
Removal Standards.
e. Timber harvesting.
2. The following residential uses:
69
a. Single family dwelling.
b. Manufactured housing on an individual lot.
c. Multiplex housing.
d. Eldercare facility, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-7-6, Eldercare Facility
Standards.
3. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Home day care.
b. Farm and fish market, with a maximum floor area of two thousand (2,000)
square feet for retail sales of products.
c. Boat repair facility, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-9, Boat Repair Facility
Standards.
d. Golf Course and Golf Course Related Activities (Effective February 12, 2003)
e. Wind energy system (Effective October 8, 2008)
f. Bed and Breakfast, where the operator of the Bed and Breakfast owns the
structure and maintains it as his/her primary residence. (Effective March 9, 2009)
g. Short Term Rental. (Effective December 14, 2012)
h. Day Camp. (Effective July 10, 2013)
4. The following accessory uses:
a. Accessory building, structure or use.
b. Outside athletic facility accessory to permitted use.
c. Home occupation.
d. Homestay. (Effective March 9, 2009)
e. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility antenna. (Effective
April 15, 2000)
f. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility tower (Effective
April 15, 2000)
g. Commercial wireless telecommunication service antenna which is attached to an
alternative tower structure in a manner which conceals the presence of an
antenna. (Effective April 15, 2000)
h. Agriculture related use. (Effective June 10, 2010)
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted only upon approval by the Zoning Board as a
conditional use, in accordance with Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional Use Permits:
1. The Following resource-related uses:
a. Extraction of sand, gravel, rock and similar earth materials, except topsoil
(see permitted uses), subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-5, Earth
Materials Removal Standards.
70
2. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Cemetery
b. Day care facility
c. Fraternal or social institution
d. Institution of an educational, religious, or philanthropic nature, including
school, hospital, church, municipal use, or similar facility
e. Playground or park
3. The following accessory uses:
a. Home business
b. Accessory dwelling unit
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses are prohibited
within this district.
E. Standards
1. Performance standards
a. The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. Standards relating to permitted and conditional uses in the Residence A
District include:
Sec. 19-7-5 Creation of an Accessory Dwelling Unit
Sec. 19-7-6 Eldercare Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-5 Earth Materials Removal Standards
Sec. 19-8-7 Great Pond Watershed Performance Standards
Sec. 19-8-8 Home Day Care and Day Care Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-9 Boat Repair Facility Standards
Sec.19-8-14 Short Term Rental Standards (Effective December 14, 2012)
2. The following Space and Bulk Standards shall apply:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
(1) Boat repair facility for commercial
purposes 200,000 sq. ft. (4.6 acres)
(2) Multiplex housing 10 acres
(3) Eldercare facilities 10 acres
71
(4) Golf Course (Effective February 12, 2003) 150 acres
(Effective February 12, 2003)
(5) Wind energy systems
(Effective October 8, 2008) 20,000 sq. ft.
(6) Other uses 80,000 sq. ft.
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PER AREA
(1) Multiplex housing 1 unit per 66,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
(2) In subdivisions 1 unit per 80,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
(3) In subdivisions that conform to
Sec. 19-7-2, Open Space Zoning
1 unit per 66,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
(4) In eldercare facilities
1 unit per 6,000 sq. ft. or 1 bed per 3,500
sq. ft. of net residential area, whichever is
less
(5) Other housing 1 unit per 80,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF BED AND BREAKFAST ROOMS
(Effective March 9, 2009)
Bed and Breakfast Guest Room
(Effective March 9, 2009) 1 room per 20,000 sq. ft. of gross lot area
MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE
(1) Bed and Breakfast 125 ft. on Shore Road or Route 77
(2) All uses 125 ft.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
(1) All uses unless otherwise specified
a. Side yards setback
30 ft.
The side yard setback may be reduced in
accordance with Sec. 19-4-3.A.2,
Developed Nonconforming Lots.
(Effective August 11, 1999)
b. Rear yard setback
30 ft.
The rear yard setback may be reduced in
accordance with Sec. 19-4-3.A.2,
Developed Nonconforming Lots.
(Effective August 11, 1999)
72
c. Front yard setback
The front yard setbacks set forth below
may be reduced, only on roads which are
not classified arterial, to the average
setback of the two principal structures
fronting on the same road in closest
proximity to the site of the proposed
structure, but any structure must be at
least 20 feet from the right-of-way.
-- Arterial street 50 ft.
-- Collector, rural connector, and
feeder streets 40 ft.
-- Local and private streets 30 ft.
(2) Eldercare facilities
(Effective November 14, 2015)
a. From property line 75 ft.
(3) Accessory structures with floor area
not greater than 100 square feet and
a height not greater than 8-1/2 feet
from average grade
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 5 ft.
(4) Reserved
(Effective June 10, 2010)
(5) Antennas extending from 15' to 25'
measured from the highest point of
the alternative tower structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(6) Towers which are freestanding, and
towers which are attached or
braced against a structure and
exceed 15' in height measured from
the highest point of the roof of the
structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
73
b. Front yard setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna or the distance from the
street right of way to the front of the
existing structure plus 5', whichever is
more (Effective April 15, 2000)
(7) Open Space Zoning Subdivisions
(See Sec. 19-7-2)
a. Side yard setback 20 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 20 ft.
c. Front yard setback 20 ft.
(8) Deck with a height of less than ten
(10) feet above average grade
a. Side yard setback 15 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 15 ft.
(9) Accessory building having less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet
of floor area
a. Side yard setback 15 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 15 ft.
(10)Outdoor recreational facilities such
as swimming pools, tennis courts,
and basketball courts that are
accessory to a single family
residential use
a. Side yard setback 15 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 15 ft.
(Effective December 10, 2003)
(11) Wind energy system
110% of the distance from the ground to
the center of the turbine
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(12) Antenna attached to a structure
25' measured from the highest point of the
roof of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
74
(13) Freestanding amateur or
governmental wireless
telecommunication tower
50' measured from average original grade
(Effective April 15, 2000)
MAXIMUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(1) All uses to center of turbine 100'
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
(Effective August 11, 1999)
(1) All uses 40 ft.
MAXIMUM BUILDING FOOTPRINT
(1) All uses
None, except nonconforming lots shall
comply with the building footprint
standards contained in Sec. 19-4-3,
Nonconformity Outside of Shoreland and
Resource Protection Areas.
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
(1) All uses 35 ft.
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of any
building permit, plumbing permit, or other permit:
1. Multiplex housing and eldercare facilities. As part of Site Plan Review for
multiplex housing, Sec. 19-7-2 (E), Multiplex Housing Standards, shall also
apply. (Effective November 14, 2015)
2. Nonresidential uses listed in Sec. 19-6-1.B.3, except home day cares, wind
energy systems, short term rentals and day camps which shall not require site
plan review (Effective December 4, 2015), (Effective November 5, 2016)
3. Nonresidential uses listed Sec. 19-6-1.C.2.
4. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2. Applicability, as requiring site
plan review.
75
SEC. 19-6-2. RESIDENCE B DISTRICT (RB)
A. Purpose
The Residence B District is differentiated from the Residence A District in that
subdivisions and multiplex housing in Residence B are required to be laid out according
to the principles of open space zoning, as described in Sec. 19-7-2, Open Space Zoning.
The Residence B District includes lands outside of the build-up parts of Town where the
Comprehensive Plan indicates growth can and should be accommodated as a result of
soils suitable for individual or common septic systems or the extension of public sewer
lines. The purpose of this district is to allow a significant portion of the Town’s
anticipated residential growth to occur in these areas, in a manner that preserves the
character of rural lands, promotes healthy neighborhoods, offers flexibility in design, and
minimizes the costs of municipal services. (Effective November 14, 2015)
B. Permitted Use
The following uses are permitted in the Residence B District:
1. The following resource-related uses:
a. Any use permitted in Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetlands District, or
in Resource Protection 2 - Wetland Protection District, or in Resource
Protection 3 – Floodplain District, as shown on Table 19-6-9.
b. Agriculture provided that no animal or fowl shall be raised for commercial
purposes on any lot containing less than one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet.
c. Keeping of livestock, such as a horse, cow, pig, goat, sheep, or similar
animal, provided that such activity occurs only on a lot containing at least
one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet.
d. Removal of topsoil, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-5.
e. Earth Materials Removal Standards.
f. Timber harvesting.
2. The following residential uses:
a. Single family dwelling
b. Manufactured housing on an individual lot
c. Multiplex housing
d. Eldercare facility, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-7-6, Eldercare
Facility Standards.
3. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Home day care
76
b. Farm and fish market, with a maximum floor area of two thousand (2,000)
square feet for retail sales of products
c. Golf Course Related Activities, excluding restaurants, clubhouses and
meeting halls (Effective February 12, 2003)
d. Wind energy system (Effective October 8, 2008)
e. Short Term Rental (Effective December 14, 2012)
f. Day Camp (Effective July 10, 2013)
4. The following accessory uses:
a. Accessory building, structure or use
b. Outside athletic facility accessory to permitted use
c. Home occupation
d. The renting of not more than two (2) rooms within a single family dwelling
provided that there is no physical alteration of the building and no
change in the external appearance of the structure.
e. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
f. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility tower
(Effective April 15, 2000)
g. Commercial wireless telecommunication service antenna which is attached
to an alternative tower structure in a manner which conceals the
presence of an antenna. (Effective April 15, 2000)
h. Agriculture related use (Effective June 10, 2010)
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted only upon approval by the Zoning Board as a
conditional use, in accordance with Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional Use Permits:
1. The following resource-related uses:
a. Extraction of sand, gravel, rock and similar earth materials, except topsoil
(see permitted uses), subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-5, Earth
Materials Removal Standards.
2. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Cemetery
b. Day care facility
c. Fraternal of social institution
d. Institution of an educational, religious, or philanthropic nature, including
school, hospital, church, municipal use, or similar facility
e. Playground or park
3. The following accessory uses:
77
a. Home business
b. Accessory dwelling unit
D. Prohibited uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses are prohibited
within this district.
E. Standards
1. Performance standards
a. The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. Standards relating to permitted and conditional uses in the Residence B
District include:
Sec. 19-7-5 Creation of an Accessory Dwelling Unit
Sec. 19-7-6 Eldercare Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-5 Earth Materials Removal Standards
Sec. 19-8-8 Home Day Care and Day Care Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-14 Short Term Rental Standards (Effective December 14, 2012)
2. The following Space and Bulk Standards shall apply:
a. Lots that are part of residential development approved by the Planning
Board after June 4, 1997, shall comply with the terms of Sec. 19-7-2, Open
Space Zoning, except that residential development for which completed
applications have been submitted to the Planning Board prior to June 4,
1997, shall be subject to the regulations in effect at the time of their
submission. (Effective November 14, 2015)
b. For all other lots, the following Space and Bulk Standards shall apply:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
(1) Eldercare facilities 5 acres
(2) Wind energy systems 20,000 sq. ft.
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(3) Other uses 80,000 sq. ft.
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PER AREA
(1) In eldercare facilities 1 unit per 3,500 sq. ft. or 1 bed per 2,500 sq.
ft. of net residential area, whichever is less
78
(2) Other uses 1 unit per 80,000 sq.ft. of gross lot area
MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE
(1) All uses 125 ft.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
(1) All uses unless otherwise specified
a. Side yard setback
30 ft.
The side yard setback may be reduced in
accordance with Sec. 19-4-3.A.2,
Developed Nonconforming Lots.
(Effective August 11, 1999)
b. Rear yard setback
30 ft.
The rear yard setback may be reduced in
accordance with Sec. 19-4-3.A.2,
Developed Nonconforming Lots.
(Effective August 11, 1999)
c. Front yard setback
The front yard setbacks set forth below may
be reduced, only on roads which are not
classified arterial, to the average setback of
the two principal structures fronting on the
same road in closest proximity to the site of
the proposed structure, but any structure
must be at least 20 feet from the right-ofway.
- Arterial street 50 ft.
- Collector, rural connector, and feeder
streets 40 ft.
- Local and private street 30 ft.
d. Limit on parking within the front yard
A nonresidential use shall not locate its
required off-street parking within the front
yard setback.
(2) Eldercare facilities
(Effective November 14, 2015)
a. From property line 75 ft.
79
(3) Accessory structures with floor area
not greater than 100 square feet and
a height not greater than 8-1/2 feet
from average grade
a. Rear yard setback 5 ft.
(4) Reserved
(Effective June 10, 2010)
(5) Antennas extending from 15' to 25'
measured from the highest point of
the alternative tower structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top of
the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(6) Towers which are freestanding, and
towers which are attached or braced
against a structure and exceed 15' in
height measured from the highest
point of the roof of the structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top of
the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
b. Front yard setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top of
the antenna or the distance from the street
right of way to the front of the existing
structure plus 5', whichever is more
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(7) Deck with a height of less than ten
(10) feet above average grade
a. Side yard setback 15 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 15 ft.
(8) Accessory building having less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor area
a. Side yard setback 15 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 15 ft.
80
(9) Outdoor recreational facilities such
as swimming pools, tennis courts, and
basketball courts that are accessory
to a single family residential use
a. Side yard setback 15 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 15 ft.
(Effective December 10, 2003)
(10) Wind energy system
110%
of the distance from the ground to the center
of the turbine
(Effective October 8, 2009)
MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATION HEIGHT
(1) Antenna attached to a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the roof
of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(2) Amateur or governmental tower
attached or braced against a
structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the roof
of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(3) Freestanding amateur or
governmental wireless
telecommunication tower
50'
measured from average original grade
(Effective April 15, 2000)
MAXIMUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(1) All uses to center of turbine 100'
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
(Effective August 11, 1999)
(1) All uses 40 ft.
MAXIMUM BUILDING FOOTPRINT
(1) All uses
None, except non-conforming lots shall
comply with the building footprint
standards contained in Sec. 19-4-3
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
(1) All uses 35 ft.
81
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of any
building permit, plumbing permit, or other permit:
1. Multiplex housing and eldercare facilities. As part of Site Plan Review for
multiplex housing Sec. 19-7-2 (E), Multiplex Housing Standards, shall also
apply. (Effective November 14, 2015)
2. Nonresidential uses listed in Sec. 19-6-2.B.3, except home day cares, wind
energy systems, short term rentals and day camps, which shall not require site
plan review (Effective November 5, 2016)
3. Nonresidential uses listed in Sec. 19-6-2.C.2
4. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2, as requiring site plan review.
SEC. 19-6-3. RESIDENCE C DISTRICT (RC)
A. Purpose
The Residence C District includes lands that are within the built-up areas of Cape
Elizabeth, are sewered or can be easily served by public sewer, are identified in the
Comprehensive Plan as part of the Town’s growth areas, are not presently in agricultural
or woodland uses, and are not considered to be valuable, large-scale open space with
valued scenery or wildlife habitat. The purpose of the district is to provide for areas of
compact development that can foster cohesive neighborhoods that are close to
community services.
B. Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Residence C District:
1. The following resource-related uses:
a. Any use listed in Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetlands District, or in
Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District, or in Resource
Protection 3 – Floodplain District, as shown on Table 19-6-9
b. Agriculture, provided that no animal or fowl shall be raised for commercial
purposes on any lot containing less than one hundred thousand
(100,000) square feet
c. Keeping of livestock, such as a horse, cow, pig, goat, sheep, or similar
animal, provided that such activity occurs only on a lot containing at least
one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet
d. Removal of topsoil, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-5, Earth Materials
Removal Standards
e. Timber harvesting
82
2. The following residential uses:
a. Single family dwelling
b. Manufactured housing on an individual lot
c. Manufactured housing park, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-7-7,
Manufactured Housing Parks
d. Multiplex housing
e. Eldercare facility, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-7-6, Eldercare
Facility Standards
f. Rooming or boarding home
3. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Home day care
b. Farm and fish market, with a maximum floor area of two thousand (2,000)
square feet for retail sales of products
c. Boat repair facility, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-9, Boat Repair
Facility Standards
d. Wind energy system (Effective October 8, 2008)
e. Bed and Breakfast, where the operator of the Bed and Breakfast owns the
structure and maintains it as his/her primary residence (Effective March 9,
2009)
f. Short Term Rental (Effective December 14, 2012)
g. Day Camp (Effective July 10, 2013)
4. The following accessory uses:
a. Accessory building, structure or use
b. Outside athletic facility accessory to permitted use
c. Home occupation
d. Homestay (Effective March 9, 2009)
e. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
f. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility tower
(Effective April 15, 2000)
g. Commercial wireless telecommunication service antenna which is attached
to an alternative tower structure in a manner which conceals the
presence of an antenna (Effective April 15, 2000)
h. Agriculture related use (Effective June 10, 2010)
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted only upon approval by the Zoning Board as a
conditional use, in accordance with Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional Use Permits:
83
1. The following resource-related uses:
a. Extraction of sand, gravel, rock and similar earth materials, except topsoil
(see permitted uses), subject to the provisions of Sec. 10-8-5, Earth
Materials Removal Standards
2. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Cemetery
b. Day care facility
c. Fraternal or social institution
d. Institution of an educational, religious, or philanthropic nature, including
school, hospital, church, municipal use, or similar facility
e. Playground or park
3. The following accessory uses:
a. Home business
b. Accessory dwelling unit
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses are prohibited
within this district.
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. Standards relating to permitted and conditional uses in the Residence C
District include:
Sec. 19-7-5 Creation of an Accessory Dwelling Unit
Sec. 19-7-6 Eldercare Facility Standards
Sec. 19-7-7 Manufactured Housing Parks
Sec. 19-8-5 Earth Materials Removal Standards
Sec. 19-8-8 Home Day Care and Day Care Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-9 Boat Repair Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-14 Short Term Rental Standards (Effective December 14, 2012)
2. The following Space and Bulk Standards shall apply:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
84
(1) Boat repair facility for commercial
purposes 200,000 sq. ft. (4.6 acres)
(2) Multiplex housing 5 acres
(3) Eldercare facilities 5 acres
(4) Wind energy systems 20,000 sq. ft.
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(5) Others 20,000 sq. ft.
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PER AREA
(1) Multiplex housing 1 unit per 15,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
(2) In subdivisions 1 unit per 20,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
(3) In subdivisions that conform to
Sec. 19-7-2. Open Space Zoning
1 unit per 15,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
(4) A single family home on a lot that is not
part of a subdivision
1 unit per 20,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
(5) In eldercare facilities
1 unit per 2,500 sq. ft.
or 1 bed per 2,100 sq. ft. of net residential
area
(Effective May 9, 2007)
(6) Rooming or boarding home 1 bed per 5,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
(7) Other housing 1 unit per 20,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF BED AND BREAKFAST ROOMS
Bed and Breakfast Guest Room 1 room per 5,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE
(1) Bed and Breakfast 100 ft. on Shore Road or Route 77
(2) All uses 100 ft.
MINIMUM SETBACKS
(1) All uses unless otherwise specified
85
a. Side yard setback
20 ft.
The side yard setback may be reduced in
accordance with Sec. 19-4-3.A.2, Developed
Nonconforming Lots.
(Effective August 11, 1999)
b. Rear yard setback
20 ft.
The rear yard setback may be reduced in
accordance with Sec. 19-4-3.A.2, Developed
Nonconforming Lots.
(Effective August 11, 1999)
c. Front yard setback
The front yard setbacks set forth below may
be reduced, only on roads which are not
classified arterial, to the average setback of
the two principal structures fronting on the
same road in closest proximity to the site of
the proposed structure, but any structure
must be at least 20 feet from the right-ofway.
-- Arterial Street 40 ft.
-- Collector and rural connector streets 40 ft.
-- Feeder street 30 ft.
-- Local and private streets 20 ft.
(2) Eldercare facilities
(Effective November 14, 2015)
a. From property line 75 ft.
(3) Accessory structures with floor area not
greater than 100 square feet and a height
not greater than 8-1/2 feet from average
grade
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 5 ft.
(4) Reserved (Effective June 10, 2010)
(5) Antennas extending from 15' to 25'
measured from the highest point of the
alternative tower structure
86
a. Property line setback
125% of the distance from the ground to the
top of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(6) Towers which are freestanding, and
towers which are attached or braced
against a structure and exceed 15' in
height measured from the highest point
of the roof of the structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top of
the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
b. Front yard setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top of
the antenna or the distance from the street
right of way to the front of the existing
structure plus 5', whichever is more
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(7) Open Space Zoning Subdivisions
(See Sec. 19-7-2)
a. Side yard setback 15 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 15 ft.
c. Front yard setback 20 ft.
(8) Deck with a height of less than ten (10)
feet above average grade
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 10 ft.
(9) Accessory building having less than one
hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor
area
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 10 ft.
(10)Outdoor recreational facilities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, and
basketball courts that are accessory to a
single family residential use
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
87
b. Rear yard setback 10 ft.
(Effective December 10, 2003)
(11) Wind energy system
110%
of the distance from the ground to the center
of the turbine
(Effective October 8, 2008)
MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATION HEIGHT
(1) Antenna attached to a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the roof
of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(2) Amateur governmental tower attached
or braced against a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the roof
of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
MAXIMUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(1) All uses to center of turbine 100'
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH
(Effective August 11, 1999)
(1) All uses 40 ft.
MINIMUM BUILDING FOOTPRINT
(1) All uses
None,
except nonconforming lots shall comply
with the building coverage standards
contained in Sec. 19-4-3
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
(1) All uses 35 ft.
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of any
building permit, plumbing permit or other permit:
1. Multiplex housing, eldercare facilities, and boarding care facilities. As part
of Site Plan Review for multiplex housing, Sec. 19-7-2 (E), Multiplex
Housing Standards shall also apply. (Effective November 14, 2015)
88
2. Nonresidential uses listed in Sec. 19-6-3/B/3, except home day cares, wind
energy systems, short term rentals and day camps, which shall not
require site plan review (Effective November 5, 2016)
3. Nonresidential uses listed in Sec. 19-6-3.C.2
4. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2, Applicability, as requiring
site plan review.
SEC. 19-6-4. TOWN CENTER DISTRICT (TC)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to encourage an identifiable Town Center that includes a
village feeling, mixed retail and residential uses to serve residents, an environment
inviting to pedestrians, a common meeting place, visual cohesiveness and enrichment and
linkages to the Town’s open space and nearby school campus. The Town Center district
boundaries reflect the prevalence of public buildings and commercial uses and the
historic compactness of development. The Town Center District requirements are
tailored to the unique characteristics of the Cape Elizabeth Town Center.
In the center of the Town Center District, there exists a unique compactness of
development exemplified by smaller lot sizes and existing structures with compatible
space and bulk massing and requirements of the Town Center District shall apply in the
core subdistrict, except where standards specific to the Town Center Core Subdistrict are
established.
B. Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Town Center District:
1. The following resource-related uses:
a. Farming use, except that outdoor storage of chemicals and commercial
animal husbandry are not permitted.
2. The following residential uses:
a. Single family dwelling
b. Bed and breakfast
c. Multifamily dwelling unit. (Effective May 12, 2010)
d. Congregate housing, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-7-6, Eldercare
Facility Standards
89
e. Rooming or boarding home
3. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Banking, professional, and business office
b. Personal service
c. Village retail shop
d. Veterinarian office not including the boarding of animals but allowing presurgical
and/or postsurgical care
e. Medical clinic
f. Restaurant including delicatessen, ice cream parlor, and sit down restaurant
with a maximum of seventy-five (75) seats.
g. Gas station with not more than two (2) fueling islands with each island
having not more than four (4) “fueling points” from no more than two (2)
gas dispensers. A car wash is allowed only if accessory to a service
station and if each car wash bay’s ingress and egress are not visible from a
street.
h. Repair garage
i. Institutional use including, but not limited to, church, government use, and
school use
j. Day care facility
k. Cottage industry manufacturing
l. Wind energy system (Effective October 8, 2008)
m. Short term rental (Effective December 14, 2012)
4. The following accessory uses:
a. Accessory building, structure or use
b. Outside storage accessory to an allowed use provided that the area used for
storage shall not exceed the floor area of the principal use and that,
except for display area, the outside storage is screened from public view
and abutting properties.
c. A drive-through for a bank or car wash, provided that it is accessory to the
principal use and located immediately adjacent to the structure of the
principal use.
d. Home occupation
e. Home business
f. The renting of not more than two (2) rooms within a single family dwelling
provided that there is no physical alteration of the building and no
change in external appearance of the structure.
g. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
h. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility tower
(Effective April 15, 2000)
i. Commercial wireless telecommunication service antenna which is attached
to an alternative tower structure in a manner which conceals the
presence of an antenna. (Effective April 15, 2000)
90
j. Day Camp (Effective July 10, 2013)
C. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses are prohibited within this district.
Adult businesses, as herein defined, are prohibited within the Town center District.
Drive-through services, except those associated with a bank or car wash that are
specifically permitted as accessory uses, are prohibited within the Town Center District.
D. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. Standards relating to permitted uses in the Town Center District include:
i. Sec. 19-7-6 Eldercare Facility Standards
ii. Sec. 19-8-14 Short Term Rental Standards
(Effective December 14, 2012)
c. No project shall create an adverse impact on butting property values. Each
project shall be compatible with the existing uses and purposes of the
district.
d. Each lot with frontage on an arterial street shall not be allowed more than
one (1) driveway onto the arterial street, unless the driveway is shared
with an abutting property, in which case two (2) driveways are allowed.
Lots with at least two hundred (200) feet of road frontage shall be
allowed two (2) driveways.
e. No communication tower in excess of ten (10) feet in height or exposed
satellite dish in excess of two (2) feet in diameter shall be allowed
which is exposed to public view, except for exclusive municipal and
school uses. Satellite dishes and the base of communication towers that are
installed at ground level shall be screened from public view.
f. No parking for uses other than school uses shall be allowed in the front yard
setback.
g. Structures existing as of June 7, 1995, which do not conform to the
maximum footprint or the maximum lot coverage requirement may increase
the building footprint by up to twenty-five percent (25%), to a maximum
91
footprint expansion of five thousand (5,000) square feet, as long as the
development will be in compliance with all other dimensional
requirements of Sec. 19-6-4.D.2, Space and Bulk Standards, subject to
Site Plan review by the Planning Board.
h. A multifamily dwelling unit shall be accessory to a nonresidential use and
located in a building where more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor
area of the structure is occupied by nonresidential uses. For multi0story
buildings, more than fifty percent (50%) of the structure may be
allocated for multifamily dwelling units as long as the first floor is
nonresidential. (Effective May 12, 2010)
2. The following Space and Bulk Standards shall apply:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
(1a)Single family dwelling unit 80,000 sq. ft.
(1b)Single family dwelling unit in the
Town Center Core Subdistrict 10,000 sq. ft.
(2) Multifamily dwelling unit 7,500 sq. ft.
(3) Wind energy systems 20,000 sq. ft.
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(4) Other uses None
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PER AREA
(1) Multifamily housing in a mixed use
building
1 unit per 3,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
(Effective May 12, 2010)
(2) Rooming or boarding home 1 bed per 5,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE
(1) School and municipal uses None
(2) All other uses 50 ft.
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE
(INCLUDES ALL BUILDINGS, PARKING, AND DRIVEWAY AREAS)
(1) School Uses 40%
(Effective August 11, 1999)
(2) Municipal uses None
92
(3) All other uses 70%
MINIMUM SETBACKS
(1) School uses
a. Side yard setback
50 ft.
The side yard setback shall be increased
to 100 ft. where it abuts a residential
district
b. Rear yard setback
50 ft.
The rear yard setback shall be increased
to 100 ft. where it abuts a residential
district
c. Front yard setback 75 ft.
(2) Municipal uses
a. Side yard setback
15 ft.
The side yard setback shall be increased
to 50 ft. where it abuts a residential
district.
b. Rear yard setback
15 ft.
The side yard setback shall be increased
to 50 ft. where it abuts a residential
district.
c. Front yard setback
Building with up to 5,000 sq. ft. of floor
area Minimum of 25 ft. - Maximum of 35 ft.
Building with more than 5,000 sq. ft. of
floor area 50 ft.
(3) Antennas extending from 15' to 25'
measured from the highest point of the
alternative tower structure
a. Property line setback
125% of the distance from the ground to
the top of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(4) Towers which are freestanding, and
towers which are attached or braced
against a structure and exceed 15' in
height measured from the highest
point of the roof of the structure
93
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
b. Front yard setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna or the distance from the
street right of way to the front of the
existing structure plus 5', whichever is
more (Effective April 15, 2000)
(5) Village Green Development
a. Side yard setback
15 ft.
The side yard setback for new
construction shall be increased to 50 ft.
where it abuts a residential district.
b. Rear yard setback
15 ft.
The side yard setback for new
construction shall be increased to 50 ft.
where it abuts a residential district.
c. Front yard setback
25 ft.
The front yard setback for parking shall
be 35 ft.
(Effective march 9, 2016)
(6) All other uses
a. Side yard setback
15 ft. The side yard setback for new
construction shall be increased to 50 ft.
where it abuts a residential district
b. Rear yard setback
15 ft. The rear yard setback for new
construction shall be increased to 50 ft.
where it abuts a residential district
c. Front yard setback Minimum 25 ft.
Maximum 35 ft.
(7) Deck with a height of less than ten (10)
feet above average grade
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 10 ft.
94
(8) Accessory building having less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor area
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 10 ft.
(9) Outdoor recreational facilities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, and
basketball courts that are accessory to
a single family residential use
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 10 ft.
(Effective December 10, 2003)
(10)Wind energy system
110%
of the distance from the ground to the
center of the turbine
(Effective October 8, 2008)
MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATION HEIGHT
(1) Antenna attached to a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the
roof of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(2) Amateur or governmental tower
attached or braced against a structure
25' measured from the highest point of the
roof of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(3) Freestanding amateur or
governmental wireless
telecommunication tower
50' measured from average original grade
(Effective April 15, 2000)
MAXIMUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(1) All uses to center of turbine 100'
MINIMUM SETBACK OF PARKING
(INCLUDING PARKING AISLES FROM PROPERTY LINE)
(1) All uses
a. Front 80 ft.
b. Side 35 ft.
c. Rear 35 ft.
95
(2) Municipal and other uses
a. Front, side, and rear
5 ft.
Parking setback may be reduced to 0 ft.
for a shared parking lot at the common
property line
(Effective December 10, 2003)
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
(1) All uses 35 ft.
MAXIMUM BUILDING FOOTPRINT
(1) All uses other than school or
municipal uses
5,000 sq. ft.
This limitation shall not prohibit the
connection of separate structures by a
covered or enclosed walkway.
MAXIMUM BUILDING DIMENSION
(1) All uses other than school or
municipal uses 100 ft.
3. Design Requirement
The following requirements shall be applicable to all development which requires
site plan review by the Planning board, any new construction or addition, and any
exterior alteration to a locally historic structure designated in the Town Center Plan.
These standards shall be used to determine if a development is compatible with the
Town Center District. The intent is not that all buildings should look the same, but
rather to encourage a mix of compatible styles, sizes, and characteristics.
a. Footprint. The building footprint of new construction shall be compatible with
the Town Center District. The visual impact of a building is influenced by
the placement of other buildings on the lot, the irregular and varied surface of
buildings due to architectural features, and the spaces between those
buildings along the street. The existing buildings and open spaces between
the buildings create a rhythm with which new construction should be
compatible. Determination of compatibility shall be based on the overall
building footprint square footage, the dimensions of each footprint side,
placement of the building footprint on the lot, and the rhythm of buildings and
spaces along the street edge.
96
b. Scale. Scale is the apparent size of a structure in relation to its surroundings,
including other buildings, open space, and people. Scare gives a building
“presence,” making the building seem large or small, awkward or
graceful, overpowering or unimportant. The perception of a structure is
influenced by its size, but more importantly how the overall size is
distributed throughout the building. New construction shall be
compatible in scale with other structures in the district. Determination of
compatibility shall be based on the maximum dimension of the structure,
the degree of articulation on building surfaces, the magnitude of unbroken
97
faces of a structure, the impact of the building mass upon view sheds,
and the integration of mechanical equipment within the structure.
c. Height and Roof Pitch. The height of a building and the type of roof design
significantly influence the scale of a structure and can detract from the
streetscape. New roof construction shall conform to the predominant heights of
roofs of nearby buildings in the Town Center District and to the design of
the structure. Roofs shall generally be of a gable or other sloping roof design
with a minimum pitch of 7:12 or as matches the existing roof pitch. Flat roofs are
discouraged.
98
d. Building and Parking Orientation. The first impression of a building is from
the side which faces the street. The front façade of the structure shall face
the street. The structure shall be designed with a primary orientation to
the street, although the primary entrance may be located on other than the
front façade. The front façade shall include a distinctive entrance. A
sidewalk shall be constructed parallel to the front façade. The side yard
visible to the public should be designed to present a pleasing
appearance to the pedestrian.
99
c. Openings. The relationship between doors and windows to exterior wall
space of a building creates a rhythm or pattern. The pattern of window
or door openings of a structure shall be compatible with the rhythm of
openings in nearby structures. Doors and windows shall be consistent
with the style of the building. Development in existing structures shall
maintain the original rhythm and size of openings. The first floor front
façade shall be constructed with an equal proportion of openings to wall
space.
100
f. Exterior Materials. Façade materials give a structure character. Exterior
materials shall be compatible with nearby buildings and with the design
of the structure. No structure addition shall consist of architectural
materials inferior in quality, appearance, or detail to any other exterior
of the same building. The use of wood shingles, wood clapboards, copper,
and brick is permitted and the use of concrete block, sheet metal, vinyl, or
aluminum siding is discouraged.
g. Landscaping and Site Development
1. Front setback. The land in the front yard setback is a transitional space
between the public domain of the road right-of-way and the private
structure and is a determining factor in the character and ambiance
of the Town Center. This area shall be designated and landscaped to
be pedestrian-friendly in scale, access, lighting, and security. A
sidewalk and other pedestrian pathways, such as to the building and
to parking areas, shall be located between the road and the structure.
The side of the structure facing the front yard setback shall be
designed with a distinctive entrance for pedestrians. Multifamily
dwellings shall be designated with the main entrance facing the
front yard. Design elements of single family homes such as front
steps and a front porch shall be incorporated whenever practicable.
The front setback shall be carefully landscaped with attention to details
evident to pedestrians and shall include street trees. The development of
101
front courtyard gardens is strongly encouraged. Multifamily
dwellings shall include at least one (1) street tree per unit in the front
yard landscape plan.
102
2. Parking lot. While adequate and convenient parking is necessary in the
Town Center District, an expanse of gravel or asphalt parking can appear
barren and hostile for pedestrians. Landscaping around and within parking
lots perceptually softens the hard surface of parking areas. Parking lots
shall be designed and landscaped to be compatible with the pedestrianfriendly
purpose of the Town Center District. A minimum five (5) foot
wide landscaped esplanade shall be required around parking lots. A
landscaped area shall be required in the front yard setback between the road
and the parking lot and shall include plantings of a size sufficient to obscure
the view of parked cars and parking lots from the sidewalk and transitioning
to lesser height. At least one landscaped island shall be included for each
row of at least ten (10) parking spaces and shall be located within the
interior of the parking lot. The landscaped island(s) shall be of sufficient
103
size to accommodate and be planted with at least one (1) road tree.
(Effective August 11, 1999.)
3. Buffering. Buffering serves to soften narrow yards, screen parking areas,
and create a sense of enclosure by transforming a street into an outdoor
room. Within the Town Center, landscaping between properties can
mitigate conflicts between land uses, densities, and building styles and
scale. Side and rear yard buffering defines the edge of a property and can
also identify the edge of the Town Center. Each lot shall provide a
landscaped side and rear yard buffer. The depth and density of the buffer
shall be determined by the type of use proposed, its compatibility with
adjacent uses and with the Town Center.
104
4. Village green. This section shall apply when a village green is included in a
Site Plan Review application. One purpose of the Town Center District is
to encourage a common meeting place. A village green is a prominent and
highly visible park-like area where the public may gather, relax and
contemplate both casually and as part of organized outdoor public events.
A village green created in compliance with this section must have at least
one hundred (100) continuous feet of road frontage on Ocean House Road,
a depth measured perpendicular from Ocean House Road of at least one
105
hundred (100) feet with a minimum width of one hundred (100) feet, and a
minimum size of at least twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. A village
green shall be designed as a park, green or square, permanently preserved as
groomed open space with legal public access, and offered in fee to the
Town of Cape Elizabeth. A village green shall be developed with a defined
edge framed with elements such as landscaping, roads, pedestrian walkways
and distinctive buildings. A village green shall have a distinctive center
and/or focal point. Pedestrian walkways shall be constructed that guide
movement through and around a village green and connect a village green
to the Town Center sidewalk network, adjacent buildings and properties.
The Center sidewalk network, adjacent buildings and properties. The
requirements of subsection Sec. 19-6-4 (D)(3)(d) Building and Parking
Orientation, and Sec. 19-6-4(D)(3)(g)(2), Parking Lot, shall be applied in a
manner that complements a village green. (Effective March 9, 2016)
E. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to the issuance of
any building permit, plumbing permit, or other permit:
106
1. Construction involving any permitted use other than farming and a single family
dwelling, except that construction of or conversion to a single family dwelling in
the Town Center Core Subdistrict shall be subject to site plan review by the
Planning Board.
2. Conversion of an existing building or structure or portion thereof from a less
intensive category of use to a more intensive category use according to the
following scale of uses with Category 1 being the least intensive and Category
10 being the most intensive:
Use Category 1. Multifamily dwellings and bed and breakfasts
Use Category 2. Banking, professional, and business offices
Use Category 3. Personal services and village retail shops
Use Category 4. Veterinarian offices and medical clinics
Use Category 5. Restaurants, including a delicatessen, ice cream parlor, and a
sit down restaurant
Use Category 6. Gas station and repair garages
Use Category 7. Institutional uses, including but not limited to churches,
governmental, and school uses
Use Category 8. Day care facilities
Use Category 9. Congregate housing
Use Category 10. Cottage industry manufacturing
3. Conversion of an existing building or structure or portion thereof within the
same category or to a less intensive category of use on the above scale of use
categories unless:
a. The current use category received site plan approval,
b. There will be no exterior alterations other than signage, and
c. No multifamily dwelling units, rooming house, or bed and breakfast will be
created.
4. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2, Applicability, as requiring site
plan review.
SEC. 19-6-5. BUSINESS DISTRICT A (BA)
A. Purpose
The Business A District is comprised of neighborhood business districts in which the
business uses are geared to the needs of nearby residents rather than a large scale,
regional destination center. The district requirements seek to promote (i) business
vitality, (ii) pedestrian connectivity between the business district and the adjacent
residential areas, (iii) a mix of commercial and housing uses, (iv) high quality design that
is pedestrian friendly, compatible with, and protects the integrity of the adjacent
107
residential neighborhood, and (v) an efficient use of the land within the district for
business uses. The Business A district regulations recognize that the BA District in the
Shore Road area and the BA District in the Ocean House Road area are individually
distinctive and may require different treatments, which are specified herein. (Effective July
8, 2009)
B. Permitted Use
The following uses are permitted in the Business District A:
1. The following resource-related uses:
a. Any use permitted in Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetlands District, or
in Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District, or in Resource
Protection 3 – Floodplain District, as shown on Table 19-6-9.
b. Agriculture (in the Ocean House Road business A District only), except that
outdoor storage of chemicals and commercial animal husbandry are not
permitted. (Effective June 10, 2010)
2. The following residential uses:
a. Single family detached dwelling existing as of April 1, 2008 (Effective July 8,
2009)
b. Multifamily dwelling units (Effective July 8, 2009)
c. Congregate housing, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-7-6. Eldercare
Facility Standards (Effective July 8, 2009)
d. Rooming or boarding home
3. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Banking, professional, and business office
b. Personal Service
c. Village retail shop
d. Veterinarian office not including the boarding of animals but allowing presurgical
and/or postsurgical care (Effective July 8, 2009)
e. Medical clinic (Effective July 8, 2009)
f. Restaurant including delicatessen, ice cream parlor, and sit down restaurant
(Effective July 8, 2009)
g. Gas station (Effective July 8, 2009)
h. Repair garage (In the Shore Road Business A District, a repair garage may
include up to three (3) vehicles at any time for sale) (Effective July 11 2018)
i. Institutional use including, but not limited to, church, government use, and
school use (Effective July 8, 2009)
j. Day Care facility (Effective July 8, 2009)
k. Cottage industry manufacturing (Effective July 8, 2009)
l. Bed and Breakfast (Effective July 8, 2009)
108
m. Boat repair Facility (in the Ocean House Road Business A District only),
subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-9, Boat Repair Facility Standards
(Effective July 8, 2009)
n. Wind energy system (Effective October 8, 2008)
o. Short Term Rental (Effective December 14, 2012)
4. The following accessory uses:
a. Accessory building, structure or use
b. Outside storage accessory to an allowed use provided that the area used for
storage shall not exceed the floor area of the principal use and that, except
for display area, the outside storage is screened from public view and
abutting properties (Effective July 8, 2009)
c. Home occupation
d. Home business
e. Homestay (Effective July 8, 2009)
f. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
g. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility tower
(Effective April 15, 2000)
h. Commercial wireless telecommunication service antenna which is attached
to an alternative tower structure in a manner which conceals the presence of
an antenna (Effective April 15, 2000)
i. Accessory dwelling unit (Effective July 8, 2009)
j. Metal working where the work is to be conducted indoors in an area not to
exceed 300 sq. ft. with no outside storage of equipment or materials
(Effective July 8, 2009)
k. Day Camp (Effective July 10, 2013)
C. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses are prohibited within this district.
Drive through services are prohibited within the business A District. (Effective July 8, 2009)
D. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. Standards relating to permitted and conditional uses in the Business A
District include:
Sec. 19-7-5 Creation of an Accessory Dwelling Unit
Sec. 19-7-6 Eldercare Facility Standards
Sec. 19-7-7 Earth Materials Removal Standards
Sec. 19-8-8 Home Day Care and Day Care Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-9 Boat Repair Facility Standards
Sec. 19-8-14 Short Term Rental Standards (Effective December 14, 2012)
109
c. Each lot with frontage on an arterial street shall not be allowed more
than one (1) driveway onto the arterial street, unless the driveway is
shared with an abutting property, in which case two (2) driveways are
allowed. Lots with at least two hundred (200) feet of road frontage
shall be allowed two (2) driveways. (Effective July8, 2009)
d. No communication tower in excess of ten (10) feet in height or exposed
satellite dish in excess of two (2) feet in diameter that is exposed to
public view shall be allowed, except for exclusive municipal uses.
Satellite dishes that are installed at ground level and the base of
communication towers shall be screened from public view. (Effective
July 8, 2009)
e. No parking, except for municipal uses, shall be allowed in the front
yard setback. (Effective July 8, 2009)
f. Structures existing as of April 1, 2008, that do not conform to the
maximum footprint or the maximum lot coverage requirement, may
increase the building footprint by up to twenty-five percent (25%), to a
maximum footprint expansion of one thousand (1,000) square feet, as
long as the development will be in compliance with all other
dimensional requirements of Sec. 19-6-5.D.2, Space and bulk
Standards, subject to Site Plan review by the Planning Board. (Effective
July 8, 2009)
g. Restaurant, including delicatessen, ice cream parlor, and sit down
restaurant, size shall be limited to no more than 100 seats. (Effective
August 14, 2014)
h. Gas station size shall be limited to no more than 4 fuel dispensers.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
i. Repair garage size shall be limited to no more than 2 bays. (Effective July
8, 2009)
j. As of July 8, 2009 any establishment in this district shall comply with
the following hours of operation:
1. Within 100’ of a residential district. Establishments where a
building or parking is located within 100’ of a residential district
shall not be open to customers between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m. If such establishment holds a liquor license, no seating,
service, or other organized gathering shall be allowed outdoors
after 6:00 p.m. and no alcohol shall be served outdoors at any time.
2. Greater than 100’ of a residential district. Establishments where all
buildings open to customers and parking are located greater than
110
100’ from a residential district shall not be open to customers
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Notwithstanding the
above closing time, and establishment may remain open to
customers as late as 11:00 p.m. for up to three evenings per
calendar year if the owner provides at least seven days prior notice
to the Code Enforcement Officer of the date of the late night event.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
k. Any activity that requires Planning Board review and is within the
Shore Road Business A District shall be required to construct or
improve a sidewalk along the frontage of Shore road in accordance
with subsection E, Design Requirements. Any activity that requires
Planning Board review and is located in the Ocean House Road
Business A District shall be required to provide pedestrian pathway
connections to adjacent business properties and residential
neighborhoods. (Effective July 8, 2009)
l. Multifamily dwelling units shall be accessory to a nonresidential use
and located in a building more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area
of the structure is occupied by nonresidential uses. For multi-story
buildings, more than fifty percent (50%) of the structure may be
allocated for multifamily dwelling units as long as the first floor is
nonresidential. (Effective July 8, 2009)
m. Any conversion of ownership type, such as but not limited to
conversion from rental to condominium, shall include adherence to any
Planning Board approvals previously granted on the property.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
n. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, any lot within the Shore Road
Business A District that shares one or more boundary lines totaling in
excess of 225’ with any lot in the Residence C District in the Town of
Cape Elizabeth is only eligible for the following uses:
• a site where the following “personal services” are delivered; barber
or beauty salon, tailor shop, shoe repair shop, dressmaking shop, a
studio for dance, art, music or photography;
• village retail shop selling antiques, apparel, baked goods, books,
flowers and plants, furniture, jewelry, toys, works of art, and
articles of a similar nature;
• professional and business office;
• day care facility;
• cottage industry manufacturing;
• bed and breakfast.
111
A “boundary line” for purposes of this subsection means each and every separate line
delineating the edge of a lot, regardless if each separate line abuts the same
neighboring lot. (Effective July 8, 2009)
2. The following Space and bulk Standards shall apply:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
(1) Single family dwelling unit
i. adjacent to the RA District 80,000 sq. ft.
ii. Adjacent to the RC District 20,000 sq. ft.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(2) Multifamily dwelling unit 15,000 sq. ft.
(3) Wind energy systems 20,000 sq. ft.
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(4) Other uses None
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS PER AREA
(1) Multifamily housing in a mixed use
building or multiplex housing
1 unit per 7,500 sq. ft.
of net residential area
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(2) Rooming or boarding home 1 bed per 5,000 sq. ft.
of gross lot area
MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE
(1) All uses None
MINIMUM SETBACKS
(1) All uses unless otherwise specified
a. Side yard setback
5 ft.;
20 ft. if the lot line abuts a Residence
District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
b. Rear yard setback
5 ft.
20 ft. if the lot line abuts a Residence
District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
112
c. Front yard setback
Minimum 10 ft.
Maximum 25 ft.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(2) Accessory structures with floor area
not greater than 100 square feet and a
height not greater than 8 1/2 feet from
average grade
a. Side yard setback 5 ft.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
b. Rear yard setback 5 ft.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(3) Antennas extending from 15' to 25'
measured from the highest point of
the alternative tower structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(4) Towers which are freestanding, and
towers which are attached or braced
against a structure and exceed 15' in
height measured from the highest
point of the roof of the structure
a. Front yard setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna or the front of the existing
structure plus 5', whichever is more
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(5) Deck with a height of less than ten
(10) feet above average grade 5 ft.
a. Side yard setback
20 ft.
if the lot line abuts a Residence District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
b. Rear yard setback
20 ft.
if the lot line abuts a Residence District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(6) Accessory building having less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor area
5 ft.
113
a. Side yard setback
20 ft.
if the lot line abuts a Residence District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
b. Rear yard setback
20 ft.
if the lot line abuts a Residence District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(7) Outdoor recreational facilities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, and
basketball courts that are accessory to
a single family a residential use
5 ft.
a. Side yard setback
20 ft.
if the lot line abuts a Residence District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
b. Rear yard setback
20 ft.
if the lot line abuts a Residence District
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(8) Wind energy system
12.5 ft.
(Effective December 10, 2003)
110%
of the distance from the ground to center
turbine
(Effective October 8, 2008)
MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATION HEIGHT
(1) Antenna attached to a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the roof
of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(2) Amateur or governmental tower
attached or braced against a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the roof
of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(3) Freestanding amateur or
governmental wireless
telecommunication tower
50'
measured from average original grade
(Effective April 15, 2000)
114
MAXIMUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(1) All uses to center of turbine 100'
MINIMUM SETBACK OF NON-SHARED PARKING INCLUDING PARKING
AISLES FROM PROPERTY LINE
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(1) All uses
a. Front, side and rear 5 ft.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
MAXIMUM BUILDING FOOTPRINT
(1) All uses
4,000 sq. ft.
This limitation shall not prohibit the
connection of separate structures by a
covered or enclose walkway.
(Effective July 8, 2009)
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
(1) All uses 35 ft.
MAXIMUM BUILDING DIMENSION
(Effective July 8, 2009)
(1) All uses 75 ft.
E. Design Requirements (Effective July 8, 2009)
The following requirements shall be applicable to all development that requires site
plan review by the Planning Board or any new Construction or addition in the
Business A District. These standards shall be used to determine if a development is
compatible with the purpose of the Business A District. The intent is not that all
buildings should look the same, but rather to encourage a mix of compatible styles,
sizes, and characteristics.
The design requirements recognize that the character of the BA District in the Shore
Road area and the character of the BA District in the Ocean House Road area are
individually distinctive. The design illustrations, therefore, are designated as
applying to both or only one of the BA Districts.
115
The Shore Road Business A District is a compact neighborhood commercial area
where buildings hug the street line, sidewalks are common and setbacks are minimal
The building architecture is predominantly multi-story with retail, transparent
storefronts and architectural details.
The Ocean House Road Business A District, while also a neighborhood commercial
area, has a more relaxed beach/seaside retail character. Buildings are set back
further from the road and from each other. Less formal pedestrian paths that
meander in their distance from the road add to the more casual feel. Buildings are
predominantly single story, although second stories that appear tucked under the
eaves of the roof are present.
a. Footprint. The building footprint of new construction shall be compatible with
the business A District. The visual impact of a building is influenced by the
placement of other buildings on the lot, the irregular and varied surface of
buildings due to architectural features, and the spaces between those buildings
along the street. The existing buildings and open spaces between the buildings
create a rhythm with which new construction should be compatible.
Determination of compatibility shall be based on the overall building footprint
square footage, the dimensions of each footprint side, placement of the building
footprint on the lot, and the rhythm of buildings and spaces along the street
edge.
Compatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
116
Incompatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
117
Compatible: Shore Road
Compatible: Ocean House Road
Modulate façade at
street level with
bays. Storefronts to
be compatible with
other storefronts
Modulate form
by breaking
buildings into
smaller sections
along the façade
Establish a
street façade
with a building
even on an
irregularly
shaped lot
118
b. Scale. Scale is the apparent size of a structure in relation to its
surroundings, including other buildings, open space, and people. Scale
gives a building “presence”, making the building seem large or small,
awkward or graceful, overpowering or unimportant. The perception of a
structure is influenced by its size, but more importantly how the overall size
is distributed throughout the building. New construction shall be
compatible in scale with other structures in the district. A well-articulated
building that is larger in square footage than adjacent residential buildings
may be compatible in scale. Determination of compatibility shall be based
on the maximum dimension of the structure, the degree of articulation on
building surfaces, the magnitude of unbroken faces of a structure, the
impact of the building mass upon view sheds, and the integration of
mechanical equipment within the structure.
Compatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
Angle building
placement to
the street in a
continuation of
a common
pattern
119
Incompatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
Compatible: Shore Road
Incompatible: Shore Road
Examples of
compatible
scale
120
Compatible: Ocean House Road
Incompatible: Ocean House Road
c. Height and Roof Pitch. The height of a building and the type of roof design
significantly influence the scale of a structure and can detract from the
streetscape. New roof construction shall conform to the predominant
heights of roofs of nearby buildings in the Business A District and to the
design of the structure. Roofs shall generally be of a gable or other sloping
roof design. In the Shore Road Business A District, roofs may be flat as
long as total height of the roof does not exceed 30’ and the roof edge is
articulated with substantial architectural elements. Sloped roofs in the
Shore Road Business A District shall have a minimum pitch of 7:12 or as
matches the existing roof pitch. In the Ocean House Road Business A
District, roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12 or as matches the
existing roof pitch.
121
Compatible: Shore Road
Incompatible: Shore Road
Compatible: Ocean House Road
Flat roofs may be
compatible with
a modulated
and/or articulated
roof edge
Incompatible height
and roof pitch
122
Incompatible: Ocean House Road
d. Building and Parking Orientation. The first impression of a building is
from the side which faces the street. The front façade of the structure
shall face the street. The structure shall be designed with a primary
orientation to the street, although the primary entrance may be located
on other than the front façade. The front façade shall include a
distinctive entrance. A sidewalk shall be constructed parallel to the
front façade of lots located on Shore Road in the Shore Road Business
A District. For lots located in the Ocean House Road Business A
District, pedestrian pathways shall be provided to adjacent businesses
and residential neighborhoods. The side yard visible to the public
should be designed to present a pleasing appearance to the pedestrian.
Compatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
Note front
entries facing
street with
parking located
to side or rear
of lot and
further from
the street than
the building
123
Incompatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
Compatible: Shore Road
Note incompatible
rear entry only,
lack of walkway
connecting
building to
sidewalk, and
parking located in
front setback.
124
Compatible: Ocean House Road
e. Openings. The relationship between doors and windows to exterior wall
space of a building creates a rhythm or pattern. The pattern of window
or door openings of a structure shall be compatible with the rhythm of
openings in nearby structures. Doors and windows shall be consistent
with the style of the building. Development in existing structures shall
maintain the original rhythm and size of openings. The first floor front
façade shall be constructed with an equal proportion of openings to wall
space.
Compatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
125
Incompatible: Shore Road, Ocean House Road
Compatible: Shore Road
f. Exterior Materials. Façade materials give a structure character. Exterior
materials shall be compatible with nearby buildings and with the design of
the structure. No structure addition shall consist of architectural materials
inferior in quality, appearance, or detail to any other exterior of the same
building. The use of wood shingles, wood clapboards, copper, and brick is
permitted. The use of concrete block, sheet metal, vinyl, or aluminum
siding is discouraged, except for the use of concrete clapboards or siding,
such as hardiplank, that mirrors the appearance of natural materials.
Rhythm of
window and
door openings
maintained for
each building
and along the
street line
126
g. Landscaping and Site Development. Front setback. The land in the front
yard setback is a transitional space between the public domain of the road
right-of-way and the private structure and is a determining factor in the
character and ambiance of a neighborhood business district. This area shall
be designated and landscaped to be pedestrian-friendly in scale, access,
lighting, and security. A sidewalk and other pedestrian pathways, such as to
the building and to parking areas, shall be located between the road and the
structure. The side of the structure facing the front yard setback shall be
designed with a distinctive entrance for pedestrians. Multifamily dwellings
shall be designated with the main entrance facing the front yard. The front
setback shall be carefully landscaped with attention to details evident to
pedestrians and shall include street trees. The development of front
courtyard gardens is strongly encouraged. Multifamily dwellings shall
include at least one (1) street tree per unit in the landscape plan.
1. Front setback. The land in the front yard setback is a transitional space between the
public domain of the road right-of-way and the private structure and is a determining
factor in the character and ambiance of a neighborhood business district. This area shall
be designated and landscaped to be pedestrian-friendly in scale, access, lighting, and
security. A sidewalk and other pedestrian pathways, such as to the building and parking
areas, shall be located between the road and the structure. The side of the structure facing
the front yard setback shall be designed with a distinctive entrance for pedestrians.
Multifamily dwellings shall be designated with the main entrance facing the front yard.
The front setback shall be carefully landscaped with attention to details evident to
pedestrians and shall include street trees. The development of front courtyard gardens is
strongly encouraged. Multifamily dwellings shall include at least one (1) street tree per
unit in the landscape plan.
Shore Road, Ocean House Road Examples Note progression
from street to
esplanade to
sidewalk to front
yard setback to
building. The
front setback
should be
designed as a
pedestrianoriented
transition space
into the building.
127
Share Road Examples
128
Ocean House Road Examples
A flatiron
building has the
sides of the
building parallel
with the street
frontage where
the road
intersects at a
less than 90º
angle.
129
2. Parking lot. While adequate and convenient parking is necessary in the Business A
District, an expanse of gravel or asphalt parking can appear barren and hostile for
pedestrians. Landscaping around and within parking lots perceptually softens the
hard surface of parking areas. Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped to be
compatible with a neighborhood business district character. A minimum five (5)
foot wide landscaped esplanade shall be required around parking lots. A landscaped
area shall be required in the front yard setback between the road and the parking lot
and shall include plantings of a size sufficient to obscure the view of parked cars and
parking lots from the sidewalk and transitioning to a lesser height. At least one
landscaped island shall be included for each row of at least ten (10) parking spaces
and shall be located within the interior of the parking lot. The landscaped island(s)
shall be of sufficient size to accommodate and be planted with at least one (1) road
tree.
Shore Road, Ocean House Road Example
A landscaped
island shall be
included for each
row of at least 10
parking spaces to
break up the
visual
appearance of
the parking lot.
130
Shore Road Example
Ocean House Road Example
131
3. Buffering. Buffering serves to soften narrow yards, screen parking areas, and create
a sense of enclosure by transforming a street into an outdoor room. Within the
Business A District, landscaping between properties can mitigate conflicts between l
and uses, densities, and building styles and scale. Side and rear yard buffering
defines the edge of a property and can also identify the edge of the neighborhood
business district. Each lot shall provide a landscaped side and rear yard buffer where
it abuts a residential district. The depth and density of the buffer shall be determined
by the type of use proposed, its compatibility with adjacent uses and with the
Business A District.
Non-compatible adjacent uses require wider buffers and wood fences in the Shore Road
Business A District. In the Ocean House Road Business A District, non-compatible
adjacent uses require wider buffers and earth berms. Earth berms should not be more
than 2’ high and planted with beach grasses and native plants. The use of wood chips
shall be minimized to that which is needed to maintain the health of plants and shall not
take the place of plantings, which shall be used to cover the surface of a berm.
Shore Road, Ocean House Road Example
132
F. Site Plan Review (Effective July 8, 2009)
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of any
building permit, plumbing permit, or other special permit.
1. Construction involving any permitted use other than farming and a single family
dwelling.
2. Conversion of an existing building or structure or portion thereof from a less
intensive category of use to a more intensive category of use according to the
following scale of uses with Category 1 being the least intensive and Category 9
being the most intensive:
Use Category 1. Multifamily dwellings and bed and breakfasts
Use Category 2. Banking, professional, and business offices, and day care
facilities
Use Category 3. Personal services and village retail shops
Use Category 4. Veterinarian offices and medical clinics
Use Category 5. Restaurants, including a delicatessen, ice cream parlor, and a
sit down restaurant
Use Category 6. Gas station and repair garages
Use Category 7. Institutional uses, including but not limited to churches,
governmental, and school uses
Use Category 8. Congregate housing
Use Category 9. Cottage industry manufacturing
133
3. Conversion of an existing building or structure or portion thereof within the
same category or to a less intensive category of use on the above scale of use
categories unless:
a. The current use category received site plan approval,
b. There will be no exterior alterations other than signage, and
c. No multifamily dwelling units, rooming house or metal working area will
be created.
4. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2, Applicability, as requiring site
plan review. (Effective July 8, 2009)
SEC. 19-6-6 BUISNESS DISTRICT B (BB)
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Business District B is to recognize locations where moderate
intensity, non-retail commercial uses have developed in close proximity to residential
areas. (Effective February 12, 2005)
B. Permitted Uses
1. The following uses are permitted in the Business District B:
a. Any use permitted in Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetlands District, or in
Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District, or in Resource Protection
3– Floodplain District, as shown on Table 19-6-9.
b. Agriculture
c. Keeping of livestock, such as a horse, cow, pig, goat, sheep, or similar animal
provided that such activity occurs only on a lot containing at least one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet.
d. Removal of topsoil, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-5, Earth Materials
Removal Standards.
e. Timber harvesting.
f. Horticulture, including nurseries, greenhouses, and commercial sale of items
produced in nurseries and greenhouses; accessory retail sales shall be permitted.
2. The following residential uses:
a. Single family detached dwelling existing as of December 8, 1993.
b. Eldercare facility, subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-7-6, eldercare Facility
Standards.
3. The following nonresidential uses:
134
a. Fish and farm market (Effective June 10, 2010)
b. Athletic or recreational facility, riding stable, or corral
c. Earthwork contractor’s yard (Effective February 12, 2005)
d. Wind energy system (Effective October 8, 2008)
e. Day camp (Effective July 10, 2013)
4. The following accessory uses:
a. Home occupation
b. Home business
c. The renting of not more than two (2) rooms within a single family dwelling
provided that there is no physical alteration of the building and no change in the
external appearance of the structure.
d. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility antenna (Effective
April 15, 2000)
e. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility tower (Effective
April 15, 2000)
f. Commercial wireless telecommunication service antenna which is attached to an
alternative tower structure in a manner which conceals the presence of an
antenna (Effective April 15, 2000)
g. Agriculture related use (Effective June 10, 2010)
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted only upon approval by the Zoning Board as a
conditional use, in accordance with Sec. 19-5-5, Applicability:
1. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Hotel or motel
b. Restaurant
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses are prohibited
within this district.
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. Standards relating to permitted and conditional uses in the Business B District
include: Sec. 19-7-6 Eldercare Facility Standards.
2. The following Space and Bulk Standards shall apply:
135
MINIMUM LOT AREA
(1) Nonresidential uses, containing no
dwelling unit other than an accessory
residence for a caretaker or attendant
None, provided that if the lot is not
sewered and requires the installation of
sanitary plumbing, it shall conform to the
regulations of the State Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal rules concerning
waste disposal
(2) Eldercare facilities 5 acres
(3) Single Family dwelling unit 80,000 sq. ft.
(4) Earthwork Contractor 20 acres
(Effective February 12, 2005)
(5) Wind energy systems 20,000 sq. ft.
(Effective October8, 2008)
MAXIMUM NO. OF DWELLING UNITS PER AREA
(1) In Eldercare facilities
1 unit per 3,500 sq. ft.
or 1 bed per 2,500 sq. ft.
of net residential area, whichever is less
MINIMUM STREET FRONTAGE
(1) Earthwork Contractor 100'
(Effective February 12, 2005)
(2) All other uses None
(Effective August 11, 1999)
MINIMUM SETBACKS
(1) All uses unless otherwise specified
a. Side yard setback 25 ft.
50 ft. if the lot abuts a Residence District
b. Rear yard setback 25 ft.
50 ft. if the lot abuts a Residence District
136
c. Front yard setback
The front yard setbacks set forth below
may be reduced, only on roads which are
not classified arterial, to the average
setback of the two principal structures
fronting on the same road in closest
proximity to the site of the proposed
structure, but any structure must be at
least 20 feet from the right-of-way
-- Buildings with footprints of up to
2,000 sq. ft. 50 ft.
-- Buildings with footprints of more than
2,000 sq. ft.
50 ft.
(Effective January 13, 2005)
-- Parking spaces and parking aisles 35 ft.
(2) Nonresidential use abutting a
Residence District
A buffer shall be established in
accordance with the provisions of Sec.
19-8-1.A Buffering of Nonresidential
Uses
(3) Eldercare facilities 50 ft. from property line
(4) Accessory structures with floor area
not greater than 100 square feet and a
height not greater than 8-1/2 feet from
average grade
a. Side yard setback 10 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 5 ft.
(5) Antennas extending from 15' to 25'
measured from the highest point of the
alternative tower structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(6) Towers which are freestanding, and
towers which are attached or braced
against a structure and exceed 15' in
height measured from the highest
point of the roof of the structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
137
b. Front yard setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna or the distance from the
street right of way to the front of the
existing structure plus 5', whichever is
more
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(7) Deck with a height of less than ten (10)
feet above average grade
a. Side yard setback 12.5 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 12.5 ft.
(8) Accessory building having less than
one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor area
a. Side yard setback 12.5 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 12.5 ft.
(9) Outdoor recreational facilities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts, and
basketball courts that are accessory to
a single family residential use
a. Side yard setback 12.5 ft.
b. Rear yard setback 12.5 ft.
(Effective December 10, 20013)
(10)Earthwork Contractor's Yard
a. Road setback 40'
b. Setback from all other property lines 70'
(Effective February 12, 2005)
(11)Wind energy system
110%
of the distance from the ground to the
center of the turbine
(Effective October 8, 2008)
MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATION HEIGHT
(1) Antenna attached to a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the
roof of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
138
(2) Amateur or governmental tower
attached or braced against a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the
roof of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(3) Freestanding amateur or
governmental wireless
telecommunication tower
50'
measured from average original grade
(Effective April 15, 2000)
MAXIMUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(1) All uses to center of turbine 100'
MAXIMUM BUILDING FOOTPRINT
(1) All uses None
(Effective August 11, 1999)
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
(1) All uses 35 ft.
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX. Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of any
building permit, plumbing permit, or other permit:
1. Nonresidential uses listed in Sec. 19-6-6.C.1
2. Eldercare facilities
3. Earthwork contractor’s Yard
4. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2, Applicability, as requiring site
plan review.
SEC. 19-6-7. BUISNESS DISTRICT C (BC)
A. Purpose
The purpose of the Business District C is to provide a flexible mechanism for locating
nonpolluting, job-creating enterprises within the Town. It is intended that this
mechanism will allow for the location of proposed enterprises on sites that have the
capacity to support them, and that are tailored to their needs in a manner that promotes
the public welfare.
B. Permitted Uses
139
The following uses are permitted in the Business District C:
1. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Business or professional office
b. Government office
c. Research laboratory
d. Light manufacturing
C. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses are prohibited within this district.
D. Standards
1. Standards
The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
2. Space and Bulk Standards
The Space and Bulk Standards of Business District B shall apply in Business
District C, except that a site proposed to be zoned as Business District C
shall contain a minimum of five (5) acres (gross).
E. Procedure
1. An application to zone a lot or lots as Business District C shall be submitted to
the Planning Board. It shall include all information required for a change of
zone, as set forth in Article X, Amendment/Interpretive Provisions, of this
Ordinance.
2. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a completed application for the rezoning of a
lot or lots as Business District C, the Planning Board shall forward to the Town
Council a copy of the application along with written discussion of issues
which it believes may relate to the request. This discussion of issues shall not
constitute findings, conclusions, or recommendations concerning the
request, but rather is intended to serve as background for the Town Council.
The written discussion of issues shall be prepared by the Planning Board following
at least one (1) meeting with the applicant.
3. The Town council, upon review of the application and the Planning Board’s
discussion of issues, shall make a written, preliminary finding as to the
likelihood of the success of the application. This conditional municipal
approval may be accompanied by suggestions or conditions that would make the
140
application more acceptable to the Town. The preliminary finding shall
not be construed as either an approval or a denial of the application, but rather
is intended to give guidance to the applicant.
4. Following the preliminary finding of the Town Council, the applicant at his or
her discretion may request in writing that the Planning Board proceed with
a full review of the application. This request, in addition to any alteration of the
original rezoning application, shall be accompanied by an application for
site plan approval containing all the information required by Article IX, Site
Plan Review, of this Ordinance.
5. In its review of the proposed rezoning and accompanying site plan, the Planning
Board shall follow the procedure set forth for a change of zone in Article X
of this Ordinance. After reviewing the site plan, including any additional
information reasonably requested, the Planning Board shall grant approval
of the site plan if it finds that the application, with any reasonable conditions the
Planning Board deems necessary, will conform with the criteria for
approval in Sec. 19-6-7.F, Criteria for Approval.
6. Upon taking action on the site plan, the Planning Board shall forward to the
Town Council a written report containing the action taken along with a
recommendation concerning the rezoning of the subject lot or lots to a Business
District C.
7. The application will become effective only upon the approval by the Town
Council of an amendment to the Zoning Map designating the subject lot or lots
as Business District C.
F. Criteria for Approval
The Planning Board shall grant approval of the site plan and transmit to the Town
Council a favorable recommendation on the application for a change of zone to Business
District C if it finds that the proposal, with any reasonable conditions it deems necessary,
will conform upon completion of construction with the terms of Site Plan Review as set
forth in Article IX and the following criteria:
1. The use will not create any smoke, dust, odor, or other unhealthy or offensive
airborne discharge detectable at the lot line;
2. The use will not create any offensive noise or vibration;
3. The use will not include any outdoor storage of equipment or material;
4. The use will not involve the handling, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste
material in a manner that would threaten public health through
contamination of surface or groundwater;
141
5. The use will not create unsafe traffic conditions or excessive traffic that would
either adversely affect neighborhood character or unduly burden the ability
of the Town to maintain the roads;
6. The proposed use will not adversely affect the value of adjacent properties. In
reaching a decision on this criterion, the Planning Board may require an
independent appraisal by a licensed appraiser hired by the Town at the
expense of the applicant;
7. The design and external appearance of any proposed building will constitute an
attractive and compatible addition to its neighborhood; and
8. The use will comply with all wetland provisions of this Ordinance.
SEC. 19-6-8. FORT WILLIAMS PARK DISTRICT (FWP)
A. Purpose
The Fort Williams Park District (FWP) consists of the ninety-six (96) acre municipally
owned tract known as Fort Williams Park and Portland Head Light. Fort Williams is a
unique community resource which has irreplaceable scenic, natural, and historical
qualities. The purpose of the FWP District is to assure that this resource is dedicated
primarily to park, recreational and cultural uses which preserve, enhance, and are fully
compatible with its unique qualities and are within the financial resources of the Town.
The district is intended to carry out the policies of the Town as expressed in The Master
Plan of Fort Williams Park dated November 1990, as it may be amended by the Town
Council from time to time.
B. Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Fort Williams Park District:
1. Any use shown on the adopted Master Plan of Fort Williams Park (October,
2003) as such plan may be amended from time to time by the Town Council
in accordance with Sec. 19-6-8. D, Master Plan Amendments. (Effective
December 10, 2003)
2. Special events or other nonpermanent uses approved by the Town Council upon
recommendation of the Fort Williams Advisory Commission.
3. Buildings, structures, or uses accessory to a use shown on the adopted Master
Plan as approved by the Town Council upon recommendation of the Fort
Williams Advisory Commission.
142
4. Occupancy of the existing historic buildings for uses determined by the Town
Council, upon recommendation of the Fort Williams Advisory Commission,
to be compatible with the park, recreational and cultural character of the
District. (Effective December 10, 2003)
5. Wind energy system. (Effective October 8, 2008)
C. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses are prohibited within this district.
D. Master Plan Amendments
The Town Council may amend the Master Plan of Fort Williams Park in accordance with
the following procedures and standards:
1. Procedures
Prior to considering any amendment to the Master Plan, the Town Council shall
refer the proposed amendment to both the Planning Board and Fort
Williams Advisory Commission for their recommendation on the proposed
amendment.
The Planning Board and Fort Williams Advisory Commission shall be given a
minimum of forty-five (45) days to review the proposed amendment. Prior
to making its recommendation, the Planning Board may hold a public hearing
on the proposed amendment. The recommendations of the Planning Board and
the Fort Williams Advisory Commission shall be based upon the
Comprehensive Plan, the Town’s general policy for the use of Fort Williams
Park, and the standards set forth in Sec. 19-6-8.D.2, Standards.
Prior to considering the proposed amendment, the Town Council shall hold a
public hearing on the proposal and shall give notice of the hearing as
provided for in Sec. 19-10-3, Amendments. Any recommendation from the
Planning Board or the Fort Williams Advisory Commission shall be
considered at the public hearing. Following the public hearing, the Town
Council shall determine whether to adopt such amendment.
2. Standards
The Town Council shall adopt an amendment to the Master Plan of Fort
Williams Park only if it finds:
a. That such proposal is for a park, recreational or cultural use consistent with
the long term plans of the Town for the use of Fort Williams Park;
143
b. That the proposed building or use will not interfere with or detract from
park, recreational or cultural uses then existing or anticipated during the
period of such use;
c. That such proposed use will be sensitive to and not unduly impact the
adjacent residentially zoned properties; and
d. That such proposed use will be consistent with the active recreational use of
Ship Cove and with the passive recreational use of the remaining shoreline
within Fort Williams Park.
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The standards of performance of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. All use of land, including development and construction activities, within
the FWP District shall be carried out in such manner as to preserve
existing scenic features with particular attention to the preservation of the
views identified in the Assessment of the Visual Resources of Cape
Elizabeth, Maine.
2. The following Space and Bulk Standards shall apply:
MINIMUM SETBACKS
(1) All uses
a. Front and side yard setbacks
All new buildings, structures, athletic
facilities, drives, and parking areas shall be
sited in the approximate location shown on
the Master Plan, but in no case shall they
be located within 100 feet of the front and
side property lines.
Existing buildings, structures, athletic
facilities, drives, and parking areas located
within 100 feet of the front and side
property lines as of June 4, 1997, may be
improved, expanded or modified provided
that such changes do not reduce the setback
beyond the existing conditions.
144
(2) Amateur antennas extending from
15' to 25' measured from the
highest point of the alternative
tower structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(3) Towers which are freestanding,
and towers which are attached or
braced against a structure and
exceed 15' in height measured
from the highest point of the roof
of the structure
a. Property line setback
125%
of the distance from the ground to the top
of the antenna
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(4) Wind energy system
110%
of the distance from the ground to the
center of the turbine
(Effective October 8, 2008)
MAXIMUM TELECOMMUNICATION HEIGHT
(1) Antenna attached to a structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the
alternative tower structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(2) Amateur or governmental tower
attached or braced against a
structure
25'
measured from the highest point of the
roof of the structure
(Effective April 15, 2000)
(3) Freestanding amateur or
governmental wireless
telecommunication tower
50'
measured from average original grade
(Effective April 15, 2000)
MAXIMUM WIND ENERGY SYSTEM HEIGHT
(Effective October 8, 2008)
(1) All uses to center of turbine 100'
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
(1) All uses 35 ft.
145
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of any
building permit, plumbing permit, or other permit.
1. Nonresidential uses involving the construction or expansion of a building or
structure.
2. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2, Applicability, as requiring site
plan review.
SEC. 19-6-9. RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS
(RP1-CW, RP1-CW Buffer Overlay, RP2-WP, and RP3-F)
A. Purpose
The wetlands and floodplains of the Town are fragile natural resources which provide
wildlife habitat, pollution control, storage and passage of flood waters, aquifer recharge,
erosion control, education, scientific study, recreation, and open space. Nationally,
considerable wetland acreage has been lost or impaired by drainage, dredging, filling,
excavating, building, pollution, and other activities inconsistent with the natural uses of
such areas. Therefore, it is the policy of the Town to ensure that wetlands and
floodplains are protected from detrimental impacts and that wetland and floodplain
alteration activities do not threaten public safety, welfare or cause nuisances, or
negatively alter natural wetland ecology. To protect these natural resources, four (4)
Resource Protection Districts are designated based upon their natural resource value and
vulnerability:
1. Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District (RP1-CW)
Areas that deserve the highest protection from filling, draining and other adverse
activities due to their particular environmental or hydrological importance,
sensitivity to alterations or special characteristics are designated Resource
Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District (RP1-CW). Any area that, upon field
verification, is determined to have one (1) or more of the following
characteristics shall be included in the RP1-CW District:
a. is at least one (1) acre in size and the substrate is predominantly hydric soils
categorized as very poorly drained organic or mineral soils as defined (see
Sec. 19-1-3, hydric soil definition);
146
b. is at least one (1) acre in size and contains, at least periodically,
predominantly “Obligate” wetland vegetation, as defined in Sec. 19-1-3,
Definitions – Wetland Vegetation; or
c. is a coastal dune, as defined herein.
The Town has prepared a zoning map showing the RP1-CW District based upon
the best available information at a townwide scale. The actual boundaries of this
district, however, shall be determined by field verification in accordance with
Sec. 19-2-5, Location of Resource Protection District Boundaries.
2. Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay District (RP1-CW
Buffer Overlay)
Areas that require regulation due to their proximity to Resource Protection 1 –
Critical Wetland Districts, and function to protect wetland values including
but not limited to wildlife habitat, pollution abatement, and erosion control are
designated Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay District
(RP1-CW Buffer Overlay). The RP1-CW Buffer Overlay District is an
overlay zone and is located adjacent to Resource Protection 1 – Critical
Wetland Districts. The RP1-CW Buffer Overlay District shall extend
upland from the wetland upland edge of any critical wetland as determined by
the following criteria:
a. a two hundred fifty (250) foot buffer will be required if the critical wetland
meets one (1) of the following criteria:
1. The wetland is rated as moderate or high value for waterfowl or wading
bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife and are depicted on a
Geographic Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by either
MDIF&F or the Department of environmental Protection as of
2/31/08. For the purposes of this paragraph, “wetlands associated with
great ponds and rivers” shall mean areas characterized by nonforested
wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are contiguous with a
great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or below the
water level of the great pond or river during the period of normal high
water. “Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers” are
considered to be part of that great pond or river. (Effective October 15,
2009)
2. The wetland is a marine and/or estuarine marsh; or
3. The Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District as defined is not
well separated from adjacent areas by topography or other natural
features.
147
b. Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, a one hundred
(100) foot buffer will be required if the wetland area meets one (1) of the
following criteria and the critical wetland is not rated as having
moderate or high value for wildlife by the Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife:
1. The Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District is distinctly
separated from the area of the proposed development by topography
such that the development area, in its natural state, drains away
from the wetland. An existing road or driveway shall not be
considered a topographical divide if the road drains toward the
wetland.
2. The Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District is within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of densely developed areas. For the
purposes of this section, an area shall be considered densely
developed if at least six (6) principal buildings are located within two
hundred fifty (250) feet of the center of any proposed structure.
3. The Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District is two (2) acres
or less in size.
4. The Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District is a coastal sand
dune as measured from the point where sand and dune grasses are
replaced by upland soils and vegetation.
5. The Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District is located in or
adjacent to a property located in the Business A District which is
served by public water and public sewer.
c. The RP1-CW Buffer Overlay District may be reduced to one hundred (100)
feet from the edge of the wetland to allow placement of a permanent or
temporary tool shed where the footprint of the tool shed does not
exceed eighty (80) square feet and the tool shed will be used for storage.
Tool sheds allowed under this provision shall require a building permit.
3. Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District (RP2-WP)
Areas that require regulation due to the sensitivity to development or to their
general wetland qualities are designated Resource Protection 2 – Wetland
Protection District (RP2-WP). Any area that, upon field verification, is
determined to have one (1) or more of the following characteristics shall be
included in the RP2-WP District:
a. An area where the substrate is predominantly hydric soils categorized as
poorly drained mineral soils (see Sec. 19-1-3 for hydric soil definition)
148
and that, at least periodically, supports wetland vegetation listed as
“Facultative Wetland” as defined in Section 19-1-3, Definitions – Wetland
Vegetation.
b. An area less than one (1) acre in size where the substrate is predominantly
hydric soils categorized as very poorly drained organic or mineral soils
as defined (see Sec. 19-1-3 for hydric soil definition); or
c. An area where the substrate is saturated with water to the surface or
submerged for at least twenty (20) consecutive days during the growing
season each year.
The Town has prepared a zoning map showing the RP2-WP District based upon
the best available information at a town wide scale. The actual boundaries
of this district, however, shall be determined by field verification in
accordance with Sec. 19-2-5, Location of Resource Protection District
Boundaries.
4. Resource Protection 3 – Floodplain District (RP3-F) Areas that require
regulation due to their sensitivity to development that would adversely affect
water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems or natural values are
designated Resource Protection 3 – Floodplain (RP3-F). Any area that, upon
field verification, is determined to have one (1) or more of the following
characteristics shall be included in the RP3-F District:
a. Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed great
ponds along rivers defined by the 100-year floodplain as shown on the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate
Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of record, or in the
absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
This district shall also include 100-year floodplains adjacent to tidal
waters as shown on FEMA’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps. Floodplains that include two (2) or more
principal structures per one thousand (1,000) linear feet of shoreline are not
included. (Effective October15, 2009).
b. Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of twenty
percent (20%) or greater.
c. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or
river bed movement and lands adjacent to tidal waters which are subject to
severe erosion or mass movement, such as steep coastal bluffs.
The Town has prepared a zoning map showing the RP3-F District based upon
the best available information at a town wide scale. The actual boundaries
of this district, however, shall be determined by field verification in
149
accordance with Sec. 19-2-5, Location of Resource Protection District
Boundaries.
B. Permitted Uses
Any use shown on Table 19-6-9 as a permitted use in each district shall be permitted in
the RP1-CW, RP1-CW Buffer Overlay, RP2-WP, or RP3-F district respectively.
C. Uses Permitted with a Resource Protection Permit
Any use shown on Table 19-6-9 as a permitted use with a resource protection permit in
the RP1-CW, RP1-CW Buffer Overlay, RP2-WP, or RP3-F District shall be permitted in
that district but only upon the issuance of a resource protection permit in accordance with
the provisions of Sec. 19-8-3, Resource Protection Performance Standards.
D. Prohibited Uses
Uses shown as prohibited uses on Table 19-6-9 and any other use not specifically listed
as a permitted use or a use permitted with a resource protection permit shall be prohibited
in the RP1-CW, RP1-CW Buffer Overlay, RP2-WP, and RP3-F Districts.
TABLE 19-6-9 USES PERMITTED, ALLOWED WITH A RESOURCE
PROTECTION PERMIT, AND PROHIBITED IN THE
RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICTS.
All use of land, buildings, and structures within the Resource Protection Districts shall be
in accordance with the following:
a. “Permitted” indicates uses that are permitted by right subject to Sec.19-8-3
Resource Protection Performance Standards.
b. “RPP” indicates uses that are permitted, provided that a resource protection
permit is issued in accordance with Sec. 19-8-3, Resource Protection
Performance Standards.
c. “No” indicates uses that are prohibited.
No use, structure, or activity shall be permitted that is not in compliance with
Sec. 19-8-3, Resource Protection Performance Standards.
Uses allowed with a resource protection permit may include incidental activities that
otherwise would be prohibited, provided that such incidental activities are expressly
included in the permit application. A permitted use that includes within it an
incidental prohibited activity shall be allowed only if a resource protection permit is
issued in accordance with Sec. 19-8-3, Resource Protection Performance Standards.
150
Use, Activity, Structure
RP1-CW
and RP1-
CW Buffer
Overlay
RP2-WP RP3-F
1. Expansion of nonconforming structure
subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-4-5,
Nonconformance within the Resource
Protection Districts
Permitted Permitted Permitted
1.a. Expansion or change of a nonconforming
use where the activity is permitted in an
abutting district and is located in an
existing building or paved area.
RPP RPP RPP
2. Forest management activities Permitted Permitted Permitted
3. Timber harvesting Permitted Permitted Permitted
4. Conservation of soil, water, vegetation,
fish, shellfish, and wildlife Permitted Permitted Permitted
5. Wilderness area, wildlife preservation and
refuges Permitted Permitted Permitted
6. Education and scientific research and
nature trails Permitted Permitted Permitted
7. Shellfishing and trapping Permitted Permitted Permitted
8. Non-intensive recreational activity
including but not limited to hunting where
permitted, bird-watching, duck blinds,
hiking, horseback riding, swimming and
trapping, provided there is no alteration of
the wetland and no operation of any
motorized recreational vehicles
Permitted Permitted Permitted
9. Maintenance of existing golf course,
waterholes, municipal skating ponds, and
existing agricultural ponds. (Effective
June 10, 2010)
Permitted Permitted Permitted
10. Maintenance of stormwater detention
basins by the Town, or by a homeowners'
association as approved by the Planning
Board as part of an approved subdivision
or site plan
Permitted Permitted Permitted
11. Grooming of existing residential lawns
and landscaping, including the installation
of fences in existing lawns
Permitted Permitted Permitted
12. Fire prevention activities Permitted Permitted Permitted
151
13. Aquaculture (Effective October 15, 2009) RPP RPP RPP
14. Replacement of septic disposal system Permitted Permitted Permitted
15. Service drop to allowed use Permitted Permitted Permitted
16. Individual campsite Permitted Permitted Permitted
17. Home occupation and home business Permitted Permitted Permitted
18. Fences, wildlife management shelters,
observation decks and shelters RPP Permitted RPP
19. Minor recreational structure RPP Permitted RPP
20. Catwalks and footbridges RPP RPP RPP
21. Public utilities/essential utility services RPP RPP RPP
22. Existing road reconstruction RPP RPP RPP
23. Official vegetated playing fields and
related accessory structures, including
parking facilities, located more than one
hundred (100) feet from the RP1 wetland
upland edge
RPP RPP RPP
24. Damming RPP RPP No
25. Dredging No RPP RPP
26. Grading No RPP RPP
27. New street construction No RPP RPP
28. Agriculture (existing uses exempted
(Effective June 10, 2010) RPP RPP RPP
29. Piers, docks and boathouses No RPP RPP
30. Marina No RPP RPP
31. Filling No RPP No
32. Draining No RPP No
33. Excavating No RPP No
34. Mining or drilling No RPP No
35. One and two family dwellings and
accessory buildings and structures No RPP No
36. Multiplex Housing or Multifamily
dwelling unit (Effective November 14, 2015) No RPP No
37. Parking facility No No RPP
152
38. Commercial structure No No No
39. Industrial structure No No No
40. Governmental/institutional No No No
41. Conversion to year-round No No No
42. Private septic disposal system No No No
43. Campground No No No
44. Polluting No No No
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The general standards of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. All uses of land and buildings within the RP1-CW, RP1-CW Buffer
Overlay, RP2-WP, and RP3-F Districts shall be subject to the applicable
provisions of Sec. 19-8-3, Resource Protection Performance Standards.
2. Space and Bulk Standards
Within a Resource Protection District, the Space and Bulk Standards of the most
restrictive abutting district shall apply except that lots within one hundred (100)
feet of the Residence C District shall use the Space and bulk Standards of
the Residence C District.
3. Other Standards
All permitted structures shall be constructed to allow the unobstructed flow of
waters and preserve the natural contour of the wetland except as authorized
by resource protection permits.
F. Concurrent Site Plan Review
Uses or activities listed in Sec. 19-9-2.A, Activities Requiring Site Plan Review, as
requiring site plan review that also requires a resource protection permit shall be
reviewed concurrently by the Planning Board.
SEC. 19-6-10. TOWN FARM DISTRICT (TF) (Effective November 13, 1999)
A. Purpose
153
The Town Farm District includes the area west of Spurwink Avenue formerly known as
the “Poor Farm” and an area extending from Spurwink Ave 100’ to the east. The Town
Farm District is intended to preserve the upland portion of the Town Farm. The historic
boundaries of the Town Poor Farm also include the Spurwink Marsh, extending to
Sawyer Rd.
The land is undeveloped open space comprised of rolling fields, treed ridge lines, and the
Spurwink River and Spurwink Marsh. The purpose of this district is to recognize and
protect the special nature of the Town Farm as an area representing historic, cultural,
scenic, natural, and open space qualities which should continue. The Town Farm
embodies rural character and is integral and essential to the Town and the Greenbelt. The
scenic significance of the Town Farm is discussed in more detail in a town report entitled
an Assessment of the Visual Resources of Cape Elizabeth, Maine, dated February 1989.
The Town Farm District is created to preserve these features for the benefit of the public.
B. Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Town Farm District:
1. The following resource-related uses:
a. Agriculture
b. Vegetation Management
1. Mowing
2. Tree maintenance
3. Brush clearing
4. Other vegetation management activities necessary to maintain and
enhance views and scenic quality.
2. Reserved
3. The following nonresidential uses:
a. Informal Recreation
b. Education and scientific research
c. Nature trails, catwalks and footbridges
d. Snowmobile touring
C. Conditional Uses
The following uses may be permitted only upon approval by the Zoning Board as a
conditional use, in accordance with Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional Use Permits:
1. Reserved
2. The following nonresidential uses:
154
a. Public utilities/essential utility services, except telecommunication towers
Activities permitted under the terms of the Portland Water District
lease, to be located only on the land leased to the Portland Water District
for as long as such lease remains in effect.
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted or conditional are prohibited within this
district. In addition, the following uses are expressly prohibited:
1. Parking
2. Organized sports involving teams with coaches, uniforms or established
schedules
3. Athletic playing fields
4. New structures
5. Telecommunication towers
6. Public bathrooms or rest facilities
E. Standards
1. Performance standards
The standards of performance of Articles VII, General Standards, and VIII,
Performance Standards, shall be observed.
2. Reserved
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to issuance of any
building permit, plumbing permit, or other permit:
1. Public utilities/essential utility services
2. Any construction allowed under the Portland Water District Lease
3. Any other use or activity listed in Sec. 19-9-2, Applicability, as requiring site
plan review.
SEC. 19-6-11. SHORELAND PERFORMANCE OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
In order to maintain safe and healthful conditions; to prevent and control water pollution;
to protect spawning grounds of fish, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat; to protect
155
archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to
control building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover; to
protect visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland and coastal waters; to conserve
natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate and respond to the impact of
development in Shoreland areas, all land use activities within the Shoreland Performance
Overlay District shall conform to the applicable land use standards in Sec. 19-8-2,
Shoreland Performance Standards. This district is established in accordance with the
provisions of 38 M.R.S.A. §435 et seq.
The Shoreland Performance Overlay District applies to all land within two hundred fifty
(250) feet, horizontal distance, of the:
• normal high-water line of any great pond and the Spurwink River
• normal high-water line of tidal waters; (Effective September 11, 2014)
• upland edge of a freshwater wetland
and all land areas within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a stream. This district also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting
a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending below the normal high-water line of a
water body or within a wetland. (Effective October 15, 2009). The Town has prepared a
zoning map showing the Shoreland Performance Overlay District based on the best
available information at a town wide scale. The actual boundaries of this district,
however, shall be determined by the physical features present on the site that are included
in the Shoreland Performance Overlay District as defined above. (Effective September 11,
2014)
B. Permitted Uses
The Shoreland Performance Overlay District is an overlay zone. As such, any use that is
permitted in the underlying zoning district is permitted in the Shoreland Performance
Overlay District, except as specifically provided in Sec. 19-6-11.D, Prohibited Uses.
Any permitted use shall comply with the standards of Sec. 19-8-2, Shoreland
Performance Standards.
C. Conditional Uses
Any use that is allowed as a conditional use in the underlying zoning district is a
conditional use in the Shoreland Performance Overlay District, except as specifically
provided in Sec. 19-6-11.D., Prohibited Uses. A conditional use may be permitted only
upon approval of the Zoning Board as a conditional use in accordance with Sec. 19-5-5,
Applicability, of this Ordinance, provided further that the standards of Sec. 19-8-2,
Shoreland Performance Standards, are met.
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses in the underlying
zoning district are prohibited in the Shoreland Performance Overlay District. In addition,
the following commercial and industrial uses are expressly prohibited within the
156
Shoreland Performance Overlay District adjacent to Great Pond and the streams which
flow to great Pond:
1. Auto washing facility
2. Auto or other land vehicle service and/or repair operation, including body shop
3. Chemical and bacteriological laboratory
4. Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers other than
amounts normally associated with individual households or farms
5. Commercial painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping
6. Dry cleaning establishment
7. Electronic circuit assembly
8. Laundromat, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
9. Metal plating, finishing or polishing
10. Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale, except storage on the same
property as use occurs and except for storage and sales associated with
marinas
11. Photographic processing
12. Printing
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The general standards of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. All uses of land and buildings within the Shoreland Performance Overlay
District shall conform to the applicable provisions of Sec. 19-8-2,
Shoreland Performance Standards.
2. Space and Bulk Standards
In addition to the Space and Bulk Standards of the underlying district, all use of
land within the Shoreland Performance Overlay District shall comply with
the standards set forth in this subsection. In the event of a conflict between the
standards of this overlay district and those of the underlying district, the
more restrictive standards shall apply:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
(Unless the requirements of the underlying district require a larger lot)
(1) Residential per dwelling unit adjacent
to tidal areas 30,000 sq. ft.
(2) Residential per dwelling unit adjacent
to non-tidal areas 40,000 sq. ft.
(3) Governmental, Institutional,
Commercial or Industrial per principal
structure adjacent to tidal areas
40,000 sq. ft.
157
(4) Governmental, Institutional,
Commercial or Industrial per principal
structure adjacent to non-tidal areas
60,000 sq. ft.
(5) Public and Private Recreational
Facilities in tidal and non-tidal areas 40,000 sq. ft.
MINIMUM SHORE FRONTAGE
Note: Shore Frontage shall be measured along the normal high water line. In addition
to the shore frontage requirements below, all conforming shoreland lots shall also
have a minimum distance of 100 feet measured in a straight line between the
intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline at the normal high water line.
(1) Residential per dwelling unit adjacent
to tidal areas 150 ft.
(2) Residential per dwelling unit adjacent
to non-tidal areas 200 ft.
(3) Governmental, Institutional,
Commercial or Industrial per principal
structure adjacent to tidal areas
200 ft.
(4) Governmental, Institutional,
Commercial or Industrial per principal
structure adjacent to non-tidal areas
300 ft.
(5) Public and Private Recreational
Facilities in tidal and non-tidal areas 200 ft.
MINIMUM SHORELINE SETBACKS
Note: The water body or wetland setback provision shall not apply to structures which
require direct access to the water as an operational necessity, such as piers, docks, and
retaining walls, nor to other functionally water-dependent uses. All setbacks shall be
measured in horizontal distance.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
(1) Normal high water line of Great Pond
250 ft.
for all new principal and accessory
structures not including structures
operationally necessitated by
functionally water-dependent uses
(Effective October 15, 2009)
(2) Wetland upland edge of the RP1-CW
District
100 ft.
for all new principal and accessory
structures, not including structures
operationally necessitated by
functionally water dependent uses
(Effective October 15, 2009)
158
(3) Normal high water line of other water
bodies and tributary streams
75 ft.
for all new principal and accessory
structures, not including structures
operationally necessitated by
functionally water-dependent uses
(Effective October 15, 2009)
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT
Note: This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission towers,
windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
(1) Principal and accessory structures and
expansions of existing structures 35 ft.
MAXIMUM COVERAGE
(1) All uses
The total footprint area of all
structures, parking lots and other
impervious surfaces, within the
shoreland district shall not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the lot, or
the portion thereof, located within the
district, including land area
previously developed.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
a. Land below the normal high water line of a water body or wetland upland
edge and land beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be
included toward calculating minimum lot area.
b. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall each be
considered a separate tract or parcel of land unless such road was
established by the owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22,
1971.
c. The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100)
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of a water body
or wetland upland edge shall be no less than the shore frontage
requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
d. If more than one (1) residential dwelling unit principal governmental,
institutional, commercial or industrial structure, or use, or combination
thereof, is constructed or established on a single parcel, all dimensional
requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit or principal
structure, except for clustered developments under Sec. 19-7-2, Open Space
Zoning, where dimensional requirements are waived provided that the
159
overall dimensional requirement, including but not limited to frontage and
lot area per dwelling unit, are met. (Effective October 15, 2009)
e. Setbacks shall be measured from the closest point of the structure (e.g.
eaves, deck, patio, etc.) to the normal high water line. For principal
structures, water and wetland setbacks shall be measured from the top of a
coastal bluff that has been identified on Coastal Bluff maps as being
“highly unstable” or “unstable” by the Maine Geological Survey pursuant to its
“Classification of Coastal Bluffs” and published on the most recent
Coastal Bluff map. If the applicant and the permitting official(s) are in
disagreement as to the specific location of a “highly unstable” or
“unstable” bluff, or where the top of the bluff is located, the applicant
may at his or her expense, employ a Maine Registered Professional Engineer, a
Maine Certified Soil Scientist, a Maine State Geologist, or other qualified
individual to make a determination. If agreement is still not
reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. (Effective October 15, 2009)
f. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar
structures may be allowed to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils, with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer
provided that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in
width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high water
line of a water body or wetland upland edge (unless permitted by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. §480-C); and that the applicant
demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists on the property.
F. Site Plan Review
Any use that requires site plan review in the underlying zoning district shall require site
plan review in the Shoreland Performance Overlay District.
SEC. 19-6-12. GREAT POND WATERSHED OVERLAY DISTRICT
A. Purpose
The Great Pond Watershed Overlay District is created to protect and improve the water
quality of Great Pond by limiting the runoff of nutrients such as phosphorous.
The Great Pond Watershed Overlay District applies to all land within the watershed of
Great Pond being all of the land area that drains to Great Pond as depicted on the Great
Pond Watershed Map.
160
B. Permitted Uses
The Great Pond Watershed Overlay District is an overlay zone. As such, any use that is
permitted in the underlying zoning district is permitted in the Great Pond Watershed
Overlay District. Any permitted use shall comply with the standards of Sec. 19-8-7,
Great Pond Watershed Performance Standards.
C. Conditional Uses
Any use that is allowed as a conditional use in the underlying zoning district is a
conditional use in the Great Pond Watershed Overlay District. A conditional use may be
permitted only upon approval of the Zoning Board as a conditional use in accordance
with Sec. 19-5-5, Applicability, of this Ordinance, provided further that the standards of
Sec. 19-8-7, Great Pond Watershed Performance Standards, are met.
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses in the underlying
zoning district are prohibited in the Great Pond Watershed Overlay District.
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The general standards of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. All uses of land and buildings within the Great Pond Watershed Overlay
District shall conform to the applicable provisions of Sec. 19-8-7, Great
Pond Watershed Performance Standards.
2. Space and Bulk Standards
All uses shall conform to the Space and Bulk Standards of the underlying
district and the standards of Sec. 19-8-7, Great Pond Watershed Performance
Standards.
F. Site Plan Review
Any use that requires site plan review in the underlying zoning district shall require site
plan review in the Great Pond Watershed Overlay District.
161
SEC. 19-6-13. TOWER OVERLAY DISTRICT (Effective April 15, 2000)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to respond to the communication policies embodied in the
1996 Federal Telecommunications Act by establishing predictable and balanced
regulations, within the confines of permissible local regulation, for the siting and
screening of towers and antennas in order to accommodate the growth of
telecommunications within the Town while protecting the public against any adverse
impacts on the Town’s public health, safety and welfare.
B. Permitted Uses
The Tower Overlay District is an overlay zone. As such, any use that is permitted in the
underlying zoning district is permitted in the Tower Overlay District. In addition,
notwithstanding the underlying zone, the following uses are also permitted:
Towers providing commercial, amateur and governmental wireless telecommunication
services.
Antennas providing commercial, amateur, and governmental wireless telecommunication
services.
C. Conditional Uses
Any use that is allowed as a conditional use in the underlying zoning district is a
conditional use in the Tower Overlay District.
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses in the underlying
zone or in the Tower Overlay District are prohibited in the Tower Overlay District.
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The general standards of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed.
b. All uses of land and buildings within the Tower Overlay District shall
conform to the applicable provisions of Sec. 19-8-12, Tower and Antenna
Performance Standards.
2. Space and Bulk Standards
In addition to the Space and bulk Standards of the underlying district, all use of
land within the Tower Overlay District or any other district shall comply
with the standards set forth in this subsection. In the event of a conflict
162
between the standards of this overlay district and those of the underlying
district, the more restrictive standards shall apply:
MAXIMUM HEIGHT
Towers, including antennas and any
other attachments 180 ft.
MINIMUM SETBACK
Property Line Setback 125% of tower height
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to the issuance of
any building permit, plumbing permit, or other permit.
1. Commercial wireless telecommunication services towers.
2. Amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility towers in excess
of 50’ feet in height.
SEC. 19-6-14. SPECIAL EVENT FACILITY OVERLAY DISTRICT (Effective
December 4, 2015)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this district is to allow small scale, hospitality venues on large properties
in the residential zoning districts (RA, RB, RC) where there is a buffer from abutting
neighbors. Cape Elizabeth has historically been an attractive destination for visitors.
Landowners have made their property available seasonally for private special events both
to share the picturesque beauty of the Cape Elizabeth coast and to generate revenue.
When relatively isolated, these events are consistent with the town’s residential character,
but must also be managed to protect the public health, safety and welfare of town
residents and event guests and staff.
B. Permitted Uses
The Special Event Facility Overlay District is an overlay zone that may be applied over
the Residence A, Residence B, and Residence C base zoning districts. As such, any use
that is permitted in the underlying zoning district is permitted in the Special Event
Overlay District. In addition, notwithstanding the underlying zone, the following use is
also permitted:
Special Event Facility
163
C. Conditional Uses
Any use that is allowed as a conditional use in the underlying zoning district is a
conditional use in the Special Event Facility Overlay District.
D. Prohibited Uses
All uses not specifically allowed as permitted uses or conditional uses in the underlying
zone or in the Special Event Facility Overlay District are prohibited in the Special Event
Facility District.
E. Standards
1. Performance Standards
a. The general standards of Articles VII and VIII shall be observed
b. All uses of land and buildings within the Special Event Facilities Overlay
District shall conform to the applicable provisions of Sec. 19-8-15,
Special Event Facility Standards.
2. Space and Bulk Standards
In addition to the Space and Bulk Standards of the underlying district, all use of
land within the Special Event Facility Overlay District or any other district
shall comply with the standards set forth in this subsection. In the event of a
conflict between the standards of this overlay district and those of the
underlying district, the more restrictive standards shall apply:
MINIMUM LOT AREA
(1) Special event facility
15 acres
all of which must be included in a Special
Event Facility Overlay District. To
comply with the special event facility
minimum lot area, the total area of
(i) the lot where the special event facility
is located, and
(ii) any other lot held in common
ownership and sharing any portion of a lot
line boundary with the special event
facility lot may be counted toward the
minimum lot area.
164
F. Site Plan Review
The following uses and activities shall be subject to site plan review by the planning
Board, according to the terms of Article IX, Site Plan Review, prior to the issuance of
any building permit, plumbing permit or other permit.
1. Special event facility
ARTICLE VII. GENERAL STANDARDS
SEC. 19-7-1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to incorporate into the Zoning Ordinance tools that will
better enable the Town to implement its policies, as expressed in the Comprehensive
Plan, to preserve open space and rural character and to provide opportunities for
affordable housing. These tools are designed to achieve these goals while respecting the
rights of property owners.
SEC. 19-7-2. OPEN SPACE ZONING
A. Applicability
1. Residence B District
The provisions of this section shall be mandatory for residential subdivisions
and multiplex housing in the Residence B District. (Effective November 14,
2015)
2. Other Districts
In the Residence A District and Residence C District, the provisions of this
section shall be optional. In such districts, notwithstanding other provisions of
this Ordinance, the Planning Board in reviewing and approving proposed
residential development may modify provisions relating to space and bulk,
including but not limited to setbacks, to permit innovative approaches to
housing and environmental design in accordance with the standards of this section.
Such modifications of Space and Bulk Standards shall not be constructed as
granting variances to relieve hardship. (Effective November 14, 2015)
B. General Standards
1. Developments proposed under the terms of this section shall meet all
requirements of this section, unless otherwise noted.
165
2. The uses of the land shall not differ from the uses allowed in the district in
which the development is located.
3. Each lot or building must be an element of an overall plan for site development.
When the development consists of the creation of lots, the plan shall establish a
building envelope for each lot that identifies the area within which the
buildings will be located. When the development involves the construction
of multiple buildings on one (1) or more lots, the plan shall show the location
of each building.
4. Notwithstanding subsection 3 above, when the development of a parcel shall be
divided into phases, the Planning Board may allow future phases to be
designed at a concept level. Concept level plans shall provide sufficient
detail to demonstrate that the Subdivision Ordinance Standards and the Open
Space Zoning Standards will be met when final design is completed and
submitted to the Planning Board. Concept level plans, at a minimum, shall
include: vehicular access, location of significant wetlands and/or other prominent
natural features, a general layout of lots or buildings and an adequate amount
of open space. No phase of a development shall be constructed until a final
plan for such phase demonstrating full compliance with the Subdivision
Ordinance and the Open Space Zoning Standards has been approved by the
Planning Board and complies with all other requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance. (Effective December 8, 2004)
C. Dimensional Standards
The average size of the individual lots shall be smaller than that required in the district in
which the cluster development is located and the balance of the required area shall be
reserved as open space. The lots and open space shall conform to the following Space
and bulk Standards:
1. Density
The overall density of the residential development shall not exceed the density
requirements of the district in which it is located as shown in the chart
below. In the event that a residential development is located in more than one
zoning district, the overall density of the development shall not exceed the
combination of the density requirements of the districts in which the
development is located. For example, if a subdivision has 660,000 square feet
of net residential area in the RA District and 150,000 square feet in the RC
District (with public sewage) then the overall density shall not exceed 20 units.
(Effective November 14, 2015)
166
District Maximum Density of Residential Development
Single Family Multiplex
RA 1 unit per 66,000 sq. ft. of net
residential area
1 unit
per 66,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
RB
1 unit per 60,000 sq. ft. of net
residential area with on-site sewage
disposal
1 unit
per 60,000 sq. ft. of
net residential area with on-site
sewage disposal
1 unit per 20,000 sq. ft. of net
residential area with public sewage
1 unit
per 20,000 sq. ft. of
net residential area with public
sewage
RC 1 unit per 15,000 sq. ft. of net
residential area
1 unit
per 15,000 sq. ft. of
net residential area
(Effective November 14, 2015)
When calculating density, a multiplex unit with not more than one (1) bedroom and not
more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross area shall be counted as 0.5 unit.
A multiplex unit with not more than two (2) bedrooms and not more than one thousand
two hundred (1,200) square feet of gross area shall be counted as 0.66 unit. A multiplex
unit with three (3) or more bedrooms or more than one thousand two hundred (1,200)
square feet of gross area shall be counted at 1.0 unit. (Effective November 14, 2015)
2. Minimum Lot Size
Each lot within the subdivision shall contain at least the following area:
District Minimum Lot Size
With On-site Sewage
disposal With Public Sewage
RA 30,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
30,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
RB 20,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
10,000 sq. ft.
of net residential area
RC NA 7,500 sq. ft.
of net residential area
167
3. Average Lot Size
Lots and/or dwelling units shall be laid out so that the average lot size is not more
than sixty percent (60%) of the maximum density set forth in Sec. 19-7-2.C.1 above
in the RA and RC Districts and not more than fifty percent (50%) of the maximum
density in the RP District.
4. Open Space
At least forty percent (40%) of the gross acreage shall remain as open space outside
of the lots and not otherwise assigned to individual dwelling units. In the RB
District, where the development will be served by public sewer, at least forty-five
percent (45%) of the gross acreage shall remain as open space outside of the lots and
not otherwise assigned to individual dwelling units. At least one third of this
required open space shall be land that is usable as determined by applying the criteria
of the net residential area definition. [For example, if a parcel consists of one
hundred twenty (12) acres, at least forty-eight) acres shall be kept as open space. Of
these forty-eight (48) acres, at least sixteen (16) acres shall be usable applying the
criteria of the net residential area definition.] (Effective November 14, 2015)
5. Road Frontage The minimum road frontage of each lot shall be fifty (50) feet.
However, no individual lot or dwelling unit shall have its required frontage on a
public road existing as of June 4, 1997.
6. Building Envelope/Location
If the development consists of buildings on individual lots, the applicant shall
establish and show on the subdivision plat a building envelope for each lot, within
which the building shall be located. The bounds of the building envelope shall be at
least twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way of the road serving the lot, and at least
five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line.
If the development consists of multiple buildings on one (1) or more lots, the plat
shall show the proposed location of each building. Buildings shall be located so that
the distance between any two (2) buildings is at least equal to the height of the taller
building.
7. Other Setbacks
Neither shore frontage nor setbacks from the normal high water marks of water
bodies shall be reduced below the minimum otherwise required in this Ordinance.
The structures within a block shall maintain a uniform relationship to the street. A
uniform relationship shall mean front setbacks that are within a range of ten (10)
feet. The Planning Board may waive this requirement based on the physical
characteristics of the site or the design concept for the development.
168
D. Open Space Design Standards (Effective November 14, 2015)
In addition to other standards of this Ordinance and of the Town’s Subdivision
Ordinance, the following design standards shall apply.
1. Land to be preserved as open space
The land within the residential development to be preserved as open space shall
be designed in accordance with the following standards.
a. Contiguous land.
To the greatest extent possible, open space shall be conserved in large,
contiguous blocks. Narrow strips of open space (for example, extended
strips of open space of less than fifty (50) feet in width) shall not be
included in the open space design unless they provide public access
connectors (i.e. greenbelt trail) to nearby public open space (which
includes lands and/or greenbelt trails), wildlife corridors or links to
neighborhoods that would benefit from use of the open space to be
preserved.
b. Connectivity.
Where public open space is located in close proximity to the residential
development, open space shall be laid out to concentrate land to be
preserved adjacent to or near existing public open space. Access for
lots/units in the development shall be provided to land to be preserved
as open space. Greenbelt trail connections to existing public open space
and land to be preserved shall also be provided where appropriate.
c. Preservation priorities.
Consistent with the standards set forth above, the land within the residential
development to be preserved as open space shall be determined using
the following priorities, in the order that they appear. To the extent
priorities that are higher on this list are met by the proposed open space
provisions in a residential development, the landowner shall have
satisfied the requirements of this subsection even if the proposed open
space design does not preserve lower priorities.
i. Wetlands/environmentally sensitive areas/wildlife habitat. In a manner
that preserves environmentally sensitive areas, such as wetlands,
steep slopes (as included in the computation of net residential area),
flood plains, and wildlife habitat rated by the Maine Department of
Inland Fisheries and Wildlife as high value.
ii. Agriculture. In a manner that preserves active agricultural fields for
agricultural use. The agricultural land to be preserved as open space
169
must meet the requirements of “farmland” as that term is defined in the
Farm and Open Space Tax Law, 36 M.R.S.A. Sections 1101-1121,
Farmland Tax Law, but does not need to be registered under this state
program. The agricultural land to be preserved under this subsection
shall be deemed to meet the requirements of “farmland” if it is part of a
parcel or parcels that meet the farmland definition referenced above,
even though the agricultural land to be preserved does not
independently meet all the criteria in the definition. (Effective September
13, 2017)
iii. Greenbelt and Recreation area. In a manner that preserves and
promotes connectivity of the Cape Elizabeth greenbelt townwide.
iv. Scenic character. In a manner that preserves visual resources identified
in An Assessment of the Visual Resources of Cape Elizabeth, Maine
(February 19, 1989), a copy of which is on file with the Town
Clerk.
2. Permanent Open Space Preservation
The land in the residential development to be preserved as open space shall be
permanently preserved and shall meet the following standards.
a. Permanent legal protection. Deeds or any other documents necessary to
permanently protect the land within the residential development to be
preserved as open space shall be prepared and recorded.
Documentation that reflects how the applicant intends to ensure legally
that the land within the residential development to be preserved as open
space will be protected shall be submitted to the Planning Board as part
of the application review. In particular, the documentation shall specify the
ownership structure of the open space. For example, land within the
residential development to be preserved as open space (or an easement
interest therein) may be dedicated or deeded to the Town of Cape
Elizabeth, the land may be deeded to a residential development
homeowners’ association, the land may be deeded to a third party
conservation organization, or the land may be retained by the applicant.
The documentation shall specify, at a minimum, restricted activities and
vegetation preservation. Access to the open space must be made
available to the homeowners of the residential development and is strongly
encouraged to be made available to the public, and such access may be
limited consistent with the open space priorities.
b. Restricted activities. Activities on the open space shall be restricted to
preserve the open space from future development. No principal residential,
commercial or other buildings shall be constructed on the preserved
open space. Structures related to the preservation priorities in Sec. 19-7-
2 (D) (2) may be allowed. For example, open space preserved as a (i)
170
wetlands/environmentally sensitive areas/wildlife habitat priority
may include viewing platforms, nature observation shelters, or
boardwalk and bridge structures; (ii) agriculture priority may include a
barn or shed structure; (iii) greenbelt and recreation area may include
boardwalk and bridge structures; and (iv) scenic character areas may
include an overlook.
Existing vegetation shall be preserved, but vegetation management related
to the preservation priorities may be allowed. For example, open space
preserved as a (i) wetlands/environmentally sensitive areas/wildlife
habitat priority may include limited clearing and vegetation trimming to
install and maintain greenbelt trails; (ii) agriculture priority may include
tilling of fields and animal grazing; (iii) greenbelt and recreation area
may include construction and maintenance of athletic fields; and (iv) scenic
character areas may include vegetation removal and management to
create and maintain public views.
c. Maintenance. If the land in the residential development to be preserved as
open space is not deeded to the Town of Cape Elizabeth,
documentation shall be submitted identifying the party responsible for
maintaining the open space and describing the methods to be employed to
maintain the open space.
3. Vehicular Access, Street Layout, and Construction
In addition to the standards of the Town’s Subdivision Ordinance, vehicular
access within a cluster subdivision shall meet the following additional
standards:
a. All vehicular access to buildings and lots shall be from a street within the
development and not from an existing public road.
b. All streets, roads, access drives, and parking areas shall be designed to
harmonize with the topographic and natural features of the site. The road
network shall provide for vehicular and pedestrian safety, all-season
emergency access, snow storage, delivery and collection services, and
potential connections to abutting land.
4. Other Design Elements
The applicant shall address the following issues in the plans prepared under the
terms of this section:
a. The screening and buffering of above-ground utility structures, such as
transformer boxes, meters, and pumping stations;
171
b. The location of private outdoor space for each dwelling unit;
c. Private storage space for each dwelling unit, if needed, in order to store
such items as lawnmowers, recreational vehicles, lawn furniture, and the
like;
d. Owner and visitor parking;
e. A landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect or other qualified design
professional, which preserves the natural landscape and which adds new
landscape materials where needed to buffer, or mitigate, the impacts of
new development; and
f. Pedestrian circulation within the development and, as appropriate, to
abutting developments and pedestrian systems.
E. Multiplex Housing Standards (Effective November 14, 2015)
Multiplex housing in the RA, RB and RC Districts must comply with the following
provisions.
1. Open Space
At least forty-five percent (45%) of the gross acreage shall remain as open space
outside of the building footprint(s), parking areas and other developed areas
(excluding open space improvements), and any areas assigned to individual
dwelling units. At least one third of this required open space shall be land
that is usable as determined by applying the criteria of the net residential area
definition.
2. Building Size
The maximum building footprint shall not exceed 7,500 sq. ft. The maximum
height shall be limited to thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Public Water and Sewer
The multiplex housing must be served by public water and public sewerage.
Where the most reasonable public sewer connection will require public
sewer construction of more than one-quarter (1/4) mile from the existing
public sewer to the development property line, or where the development
density is less than 20 multiplex units, the development may increase the
base density by fifteen percent (15%), provided that the total density
bonuses available under Sec. 19-7- 2 (E) shall not exceed thirty percent (30%)
when aggregated.
172
4. Site Design Standards
a. Open Space. Open space shall be designed in accordance with Sec. 19-7-
2(D), Open Space Design Standards.
b. Building location. The building, parking areas and related development
structures shall be located on the portion of the site most suited to
development. The first impression of a building is from the side that
faces the street. When the building is located within one-hundred feet
(100’) of a public right-of-way, the front of the building shall be oriented
toward the public right-of-way. Vehicular and pedestrian connections to
the public right-of-way shall be incorporated into the site design.
c. Landscaping. Areas of significant existing vegetation that shall be
preserved shall be shown on the site plan. The plan shall include a
preservation plan for that landscaping during construction. Where suitable
existing vegetation is not present or will not be preserved and where
any part of the building is located within one hundred feet (100’) of a public
right-of-way, the area between the building and the public right-of-way
shall be landscaped. The landscape plan shall create a transition from
the public right-of-way to the building and serve to enhance the perspective
of the building.
General site landscaping shall include transition areas from the building to
parking areas and include a buffer between the developed portions of
the site and abutting properties.
d. Parking Areas. Parking shall be provided in accordance with Sec. 19-7-8,
Off-Street Parking. Parking lots shall be landscaped to soften the
perception of an expanse of hard surface. Landscaped islands may be
required in parking lots exceeding 20 spaces.
5. Architectural Standards
The multiplex building(s) must be designed to be compatible with the character
of Cape Elizabeth, which ranges from compact neighborhoods to
undeveloped open space and from agricultural fields to limited commercial
areas. Compatibility shall be determined using the following standards.
a. Massing. The perception of a building is influenced by its size, but more
importantly by how the overall size is distributed throughout the
building. Determination of compatibility shall be based on the degree of
articulation on building surfaces, the magnitude of unbroken faces of a
structure, the impact of the building mass upon view sheds and the
integration of mechanical equipment within the structure.
173
b. Roof. The height of a building and the type of roof design significantly
influence the scale of a building. Roofs shall generally be of a gable or
other sloping roof design. Roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 7:12.
Roof lines shall be integrated into the façade and structure of the building
and use of any kind of a parapet to simulate a roof line shall be prohibited.
c. Entrance and windows. The relationship between doors and windows to
exterior wall space of a building creates a rhythm or pattern. Doors and
windows shall be consistent with the style of the building. The
building shall have a distinctive front entrance. The front entrance shall be
prominently located and articulated on the façade of the building.
Individual outside entrances may be permitted. Windows shall be
generously incorporated into the design, both in number and size.
174
d. Exterior Siding Materials. Color boards, which include a representation of
the building color palette, and exterior material samples shall be
provided by the applicant. Façade materials give a structure character.
Exterior materials shall be compatible with the design of the structure.
Exterior materials shall be of high quality and durable. The use of wood
shingles, wood clapboards, brick and stone is permitted. The Board
may approve high quality manufactured materials, for example
concrete clapboards or siding, such as hardiplank, that mirrors rthe
appearance of natural materials, however no other use of concrete block,
sheet metal or aluminium siding is permitted.
175
6. Density Bonus for additional Public Benefit
In order to create an incentive for property owners to incorporate additional
community goals into private development, density bonuses may be incorporated
into multiplex housing development. When any combination of the density bonuses
in paragraph b. below are included in a development, the dimensional standards in
paragraph a. below shall apply to the development, notwithstanding the dimensional
standards of the zoning district. In addition, the total density bonuses available under
Sec. 19-7-2 (E) shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) when aggregated.
a. Dimensional standards. When a multiplex development will include a density
bonus, the following dimensional standards shall replace dimensional
standards that otherwise would be applicable.
Maximum building footprint 10,000 sq. ft.
b. Density Bonus. The total density bonus allowed under the provisions in Sec.
19-7-2 (E), shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the base density
determined for each zoning district. The base density for subdivisions and
multiplex housing in the RB District is determined in Sec. 19-7-2 (C)(1).
Any combination of the following density bonuses may be proposed.
i. Agricultural land. When agricultural land is permanently preserved in
compliance with Sec. 19-7-2 (D), Open Space Design Standards, a density
bonus of one (1) unit per thirty-thousand (30,000) square feet of
agricultural land preserved may be applied to the development. The
agricultural land to be preserved as open space may be located on the
development parcel or anywhere in the Town and must meet the
176
requirements of “farmland” as that term is defined in the Farm and Open Space
Tax Law, 36 M.R.S.A. Sections 1101-1121, but does not need to be
registered under this state program. The agricultural land to be deemed to
meet the requirements of “farmland” if it is part of a parcel or parcels that meet
the farmland definition referenced above, even though the agricultural land to
be preserved does not independently meet all the criteria in the
definition. (Effective September 13, 2017)
ii. Open Space. When more than forty-five percent (45%) of the gross acreage
of the development parcel shall remain as open space outside of the
building footprint(s), parking areas and other developed areas (excluding
open space improvements), and any areas assigned to individual
dwelling units, a density bonus of one (1) unit per forty-thousand
(40,000) square feet of preserved open space above forty-five percent
(45%) may be applied to the development. The open space must be
permanently preserved in compliance with Sec. 19-7-2 (d), Open Space
Design Standards, be located on the development parcel and include
reasonable public access.
iii. Affordable Housing. When affordable housing is provided in excess of the
minimum required in compliance with the Sec. 19-7-4, Mandatory
Affordable Housing Provisions, the density bonus shall be subject to
the dimensional standards in subsection 6, Public Benefit Density Bonuses.
(Effective November 14, 2015)
SEC. 19-7-3 TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
A. Applicability
The Planning Board may approve residential developments in the Residence A District
that exceed the density standards of Sec. 19-6-1. E, Standards, due to the transfer of
development rights, provided that the development conforms to all of the following
criteria:
1. The development is consistent with the comprehensive plan;
2. The development conforms to the requirements set forth in Sec. 19-7-3.B,
Standards;
3. The parcel proposed for development is not designated as a TDR sending zone
on the Transfer of Development Rights map. (Effective November 14, 2015)
4. Development rights equal to the increase in density will be transferred from a lot
or lots within the Transfer Zone through conservation easements on land
meeting the requirements of Sec. 19-7-3. D, Easement Reservation, that have
been approved by the Planning Board.
177
5. The proposed development will be a clustered development in accordance with
Sec. 19-7-2, Open Space Zoning.
B. Standards
The Planning Board may approve residential developments utilizing transferred
development rights that conform with the following requirements provided that the
applicant has transferred the appropriate number of development rights to support the
increased density from land located within a transfer zone in accordance with Sec. 19-7-
3.D., Easement Reservation.
MINIMUM RECEIVING LOT AREA 5 acres
MAXIMUM DENSITY OF A RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT UTILIZING
TRANSFER OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS
(1) Developments in the RA District
connected to the public sewage
system
1 lot/unit
per 20,000 sq. ft. of net residential area
(2) Developments in the RA District
served by on-site sewage disposal
when the development rights are
transferred from an abutting
parcel
1 lot/unit
per 40,000 sq. ft. of net residential area
(3) Developments in the RA District
served by on-site sewage disposal
when the development rights are
transferred from a parcel in the
same ownership as the
development parcel
1 lot/unit
per 40,000 sq. ft. of net residential area
(4) Developments in the RA District
served by on-site sewage disposal
when the development rights are
transferred from a parcel located
within two thousand feet of the
perimeter of the development
parcel
1 lot/unit
per 50,000 sq. ft. of net residential area
(5) Developments in the RA District
served by on-site sewage disposal
when the development rights are
transferred from a parcel located
more than two thousand feet from
the perimeter of the development
parcel
1 lot/unit
per 60,000 sq. ft. of net residential area
(Effective November 14, 2015)
178
C. TDR Sending Zone
Development rights may be transferred from any parcel designated as a TDR sending
zone on the official Transfer of Development Rights map. The Transfer of Development
Rights (TDR) Map shall be part of the ordinance. The Map shall designate parcels or
tracts of land within the RA District that are appropriate for conservation by reason of
one or more of the following attributes:
1. The land is used for agricultural purposes.
2. The land is identified as having greenbelt and/or recreation area value in the
most recent town Greenbelt Plan.
3. The land is identified as having significant wildlife habitat value.
4. The land has significant scenic, cultural and/or unique properties identified by
the Town Council using a public process.
(Effective November 14, 2015)
D. Easement Reservation
The Planning Board may approve a development that exceeds the base density only if the
applicant provides a conservation easement(s) on land located within a TDR sending
zone as depicted on the Transfer of Development Rights (TDR) map. For each unit in the
proposed development in excess of that allowed by the base RA density, a conservation
easement shall be provided on at least sixty-four thousand (64,000) square feet of net
residential area within a designated TDR sending zone, except as provided in subsection
F. Agricultural Transfer of Development Bonus. The conservation easement(s) shall be
perpetual subject to the terms of Sec. 19-7-3.E, Easement Provisions. (Effective November
14, 2015)
E. Easement Provisions
The form and conditions of each easement shall be determined by the Planning Board,
and approved by the Town Council. The easement shall be recorded in the Cumberland
County Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the vote of approval of the
development by the Planning Board and a copy provided to the Town Planner.
F. Agricultural Transfer of Development Bonus
Land that has been designated a TDR sending area because it is used for agricultural
purposes may transfer up to 33% more development rights than the density allowed on
the agricultural land. For each 1.34 development right transferred, a conservation
easement shall be provided on at least sixty-four thousand (64,000) square feet of net
residential area within a designated TDR sending zone. The conservation easement(s)
shall be perpetual subject to the terms of Sec. 19-7-3.E, Easement Provisions. (Effective
November 14, 2015)
179
SEC. 19-7-4. MANDATORY AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROVISIONS
A. Purpose
The Town finds that an adequate supply of affordable housing for persons of low and
moderate income is desirable for the public health, safety and welfare in that it promotes
a community rich in economic, social and cultural diversity. It is therefore a public
purpose and an objective of the Comprehensive Plan to make available and integrate in
the Town an adequate supply of housing for persons of all economic segments of the
community.
B. Applicability
The mandatory affordable housing provisions shall apply to all major subdivisions as
defined in Sec. 16-1-4, located in the Residence A, Residence B, and Residence C
Districts.
All major subdivisions, as defined in Sec. 16-1-4 of the Subdivision Ordinance, shall set
aside at least ten percent (10%) of the lots/units in the project as affordable housing for
moderate income buyers or five percent (5%) of the lots/units in the project as affordable
housing for low income buyers. For projects where a number of lots/units in excess of
the mandatory required lots/units are set aside as affordable housing, the applicant shall
be eligible for a density bonus of one (1) additional lot/unit for each moderate income
affordable lot/unit and two (2) additional lots/units for each low income affordable
lot/unit in excess of the mandatory requirement. Non-bonus lots shall meet all
requirements of the subdivision regulations. The following minimum lot sizes may be
approved for the additional bonus lots/units which may be affordable or market rate:
Zoning
District Minimum Lot Size
Residence A 30,000 sq. ft./lot
Residence B 20,000 sq. ft./lot connected to public sewerage
50,000 sq. ft./lot with on-site sewage disposal
Residence C 8,000 sq. ft./lot
Must be served by public sewer
The reduced minimum lot size shall apply only to the creation of bonus lots in new
subdivisions.
C. Standards
180
1. Affordable housing lots/units shall be sold to qualified low and moderate
income buyers as defined in Sec. 19-1-3, Definitions, and any additional criteria
adopted by the Town Council. Preference shall be given first to Town
residents and then to employees of the Town. A determination of
preference shall only be needed where the number of qualified and interested
buyers exceeds the number of available units. Buyers shall indicate interest
in purchase by contacting the seller. When the number of units available
exceeds the number of qualified and interested buyers, the owner shall advertise
in the Cape Courier and in a newspaper of general circulation that affordable
housing is available for sale. All affordable housing units shall be owneroccupied.
(Effective December 10, 2003)
2. Affordable housing lots/units shall be geographically dispersed throughout the
development where feasible.
3. The dwellings on affordable housing lots/units shall be compatible with the
design of the dwellings on the remainder of the development in terms of
appearance, materials, finished quality and level of finish, including finished
second floors, and providing a reasonably comparable number of finished
bedrooms and baths to the market rate dwellings in the development. Any
dwelling sited on a lot shall be located to allow the construction of a garage
on the lot without requiring a setback variance.
4. The applicant shall submit for Town Council review and acceptance an
agreement which preserves the long-term affordability of the lots/units to low
and moderate income households. The agreement shall be either a second
mortgage, deed restriction or a combination of the two. The applicant may
use an agreement provided by the Town or may present a comparable
instrument for review. Agreements must include but not be limited to:
a. a proven method to preserve long-term (99 years) affordability to low and
moderate income buyers;
b. a formula for accruing limited equity to the buyer which includes any
physical improvements to the property;
c. the option to return housing to market rates only if there are no qualified
buyers within one hundred eighty (180) days of the property being on
the market; (Effective December 10, 2003)
d. an option to the Town to purchase the affordable lots/units if no qualified
buyers apply at the “affordable” price;
e. the enforceability of the mechanism;
f. the amount of administrative costs to the Town; and
181
g. the supervision of the agreement.
5. The mandatory affordable housing provisions shall run with the land.
6. Affordable housing lots/units shall be constructed and completed at least
concurrently with the remainder of the project. In developments where the
applicant or its agents, or its successors or assigns shall construct at least
fifty percent (50%) of the units, the approved affordable housing units shall be
constructed in proportion to the market rate units. Proportionality shall be
determined by dividing the total number of units in the development by the
total number of affordable units. No building permit shall be issued for a
market rate unit in excess of the proportion of affordable housing units for
which a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
For example, in a development of 50 units (total) with 5 affordable units, the
proportional number of total units to affordable units is 10 total units to 1
affordable unit. If one building permit is issued for an affordable unit, then
up to 9 building permits for market rate units can be issued. No additional
market rate unit building permit can be issued until the first affordable unit is
built and a certificate of occupancy for that unit is issued. An additional 9 market
rate unit building permits can then be issued before the second affordable unit
has been issued a certificate of occupancy.
When calculating proportionality, any fractional sum shall be rounded down to
the nearest whole building unit. For example, in a development of 50 units
with 3 affordable units, the proportional number of units to affordable units
would be 16 units to 1 affordable unit. (Effective December 10, 2003)
D. Modifications and Fees
1. For projects with less than ten (10) lots/units, the applicant may propose to pay a
fee in lieu of creating affordable housing. In-lieu fees shall be equal to the
difference between the average fair market value of the housing developed, as
determined by the Planning Board based upon the submission by the
applicant of an appraisal or equivalent information, and the maximum cost
of moderate income affordable housing as defined in Sec. 19-1-3, Definitions.
The fee shall be proportional to the number of lots/units in the development.
2. Where the Planning Board finds that undue hardship or environmental
conditions do not make the inclusion of affordable housing feasible, the
Planning Board may modify the affordable housing provisions in favor of a
proposed alternative upon a showing that it will not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan or the provisions of
this section; provided, however, that in granting a modification the Planning
Board may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to secure the
182
foregoing objectives, including but not limited to the imposition of in-lieu
fees as calculated in Sec. 19-7-4.D.1, Modifications and Fees, and the
creation of affordable housing elsewhere in the Town.
The reduced lot sizes for affordable housing are only applicable in a new
subdivision. This provision does not allow otherwise unbuildable lots to be
developed to meet Sec. 19-7-4, Mandatory Affordable Housing Provisions.
3. In-lieu fees shall be deposited in a municipal account dedicated to providing
affordable housing.
For projects in which the developer will only be selling un-built lots, the in-lieu of fee
shall be based upon the difference between the proposed selling price of the lots and forty
percent (40%) of the cost of a housing unit affordable for a low income buyer as defined
in Sec. 19-1-3, Definitions.
SEC. 19-7-5. CREATION OF ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT
A. Purpose
The purpose of this provision shall be to permit the creation of a single, subordinate
dwelling unit within and incidental to an existing single family dwelling. The creation of
a subordinate accessory dwelling unit within a new single family dwelling shall also be
permitted. An accessory dwelling unit is intended to be a separate suite of rooms within
a home where the unit is occupied by one or two people who have a close, personal
relationship with the residents of the main dwelling. Accessory dwelling units shall only
be created where the single family character of the principal building is maintained.
B. Requirements
The following requirements shall be in addition to other requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance. No accessory dwelling unit is permitted where a variance is also required.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the creation of an accessory dwelling unit,
subject to the applicant’s compliance with the provisions of Section 19-5-5, Conditional
Use Permits, and the provisions below:
1. A lot must have a minimum of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet to be
eligible for the addition of an accessory dwelling unit to an existing single
family home. The applicant shall have the burden to establish the lot area by a
survey signed and sealed by a registered Maine surveyor. The applicant
shall also demonstrate compliance with the Town Sewage Ordinance.
2. An accessory dwelling unit may only be created in a single family, detached
dwelling which has a total existing floor area of the structure, excluding
garages, of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or more prior to the
addition of the accessory dwelling unit.
183
3. The accessory dwelling unit shall occupy no more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of the resulting floor area of the structure, as defined herein, excluding
garages. In no event, however, shall the floor area of the accessory unit be
less than a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet or exceed a maximum
of six hundred (600) square feet. An interior connecting doorway between
the single family dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit shall be provided.
The interior connecting doorway shall not permit the informal extension or
expansion of the allowable dimensions of the accessory dwelling unit.
4. Any addition to the floor area of the single family detached dwelling to create
the accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the
floor area of the structure of the single family dwelling prior to conversion.
5. One parking space shall be provided for the accessory dwelling unit in addition
to the parking for the single family detached dwelling. The parking space must
be located a minimum of five (5) feet from the side and rear property lines.
The parking areas for the lot shall be arranged and landscaped to be
compatible with adjacent structures.
6. Any exterior alteration shall preserve the single family appearance, architectural
style, and character of the original structure and shall be in harmony with
the design of the original structure and the general appearance of the
neighborhood. Any exterior alteration shall preserve the formal, front entrance of
the original structure, in order to maintain the single family appearance and
architectural style of the structure; although a secondary entrance which serves
the accessory dwelling unit may be permitted. Any secondary entrance shall
not detract from the main entrance and shall not be located on the face of the
building where the main entrance is located.
7. No accessory dwelling unit shall be approved for any structure that includes a
home occupation or home business, nor shall a home occupation or home
business be permitted in a structure that includes an accessory dwelling
unit.
8. The single family dwelling and the accessory dwelling unit installed therein
shall be held in the same ownership. No rights shall accrue to the recipient of
the conditional use permit under this section unless the recipient records an
attested copy of the conditional use permit in the Cumberland County
Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of final approval of the
conditional use permit. A conditional use permit shall become null and void if not
recorded within ninety (90) days of final approval.
184
SEC. 19-7-6. ELDERCARE FACILITY STANDARDS
In addition to the other requirements of this Ordinance, any project that meets the
definition of an eldercare facility as contained in Sec. 19-1-3, Definitions, shall comply
with the following additional requirements:
A. Required Open Spaces
At least fifty percent (50%) of the site’s gross acreage shall be devoted to unpaved, nonvehicular
open space. A majority of the required open space shall consist of land that is
usable for passive recreation purposes.
B. Buffering
Adequate landscaping and screening shall be provided to minimize or eliminate the
visual, noise, lighting and other impacts of a development on surrounding properties.
Landscaping may include such types as tree plantings, hedges, fencing, walling and
combinations thereof. Existing significant vegetation shall be preserved whenever
possible. A landscaping plan prepared by a landscape architect or other qualified design
professional shall be submitted with the project’s site plan. Adequate screening from
adjacent properties shall be required along the boundaries of the projected site or in other
appropriate locations. Screening locations and details shall be included as part of the
project’s site plan.
C. Elderly Household Occupancy Guarantee
Any facility falling under the definition of eldercare facility shall be restricted to
occupancy by elderly households. This requirement shall be an express condition of
approval of an application for an eldercare facility and shall be included in every
resident’s written agreement by which residents occupy the units in the facility.
D. Community Impact Statement
All applications for an eldercare facility shall include an analysis identifying the impacts
that the proposed development is expected to have on community facilities and services.
This shall include an analysis of the increased service demands that will be placed on
each municipal department, the ability of each department to service the increased
demand, and any actions necessary to address deficiencies in services. The statement
shall demonstrate that the demands upon facilities and services created by a proposed
project will be adequately met or that the applicant will take actions to assure that the
needs will be met. The community impact statement shall be submitted with the initial
application material submission.
185
E. Market and Feasibility Study
The Planning Board may require the applicant to submit an independent market and
project feasibility study to demonstrate the economic viability of the proposed
development, the information from which the Planning Board may use to impose
additional restrictions or conditions on a proposed development. Unless extended by
mutual agreement, the market and project feasibility study shall be submitted within one
(1) month of the date that the Planning Board first requests its submission.
F. Conversion of Eldercare Facilities
Any eldercare facility that is converted to any other use shall meet the density standards
of the Ordinances in place at the time of conversion for the proposed new use and shall
also be subject to site plan review and approval by the Planning Board.
G. Reserved Units
The Planning Board may require that a congregate housing or nursing home facility give
a priority to Town residents or immediate family members thereof on any waiting list for
entrance to the proposed facility.
H. Elevator
Where an elevator is required by the Building Code, the elevator shall be of sufficient
size to accommodate the Town Emergency Rescue stretcher, as determined by the Fire
Chief. (Effective August 11, 1999)
SEC. 19-7-7. MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to accommodate additional housing types in appropriate
areas of the Town, while protecting the value and integrity of established residential
neighborhoods and ensuring a balanced and orderly pattern of residential development.
B. Compliance with Laws, Ordinances or Regulations
Except as stipulated below, manufactured housing parks shall meet all the requirements
for a residential subdivision and shall conform to all applicable local and State laws,
ordinances or regulations. Where the provisions of this section conflict with specific
provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance or other sections of the Zoning Ordinance, the
provisions of this section shall prevail.
186
C. Lot Area and Lot Width Requirements
1. Lots served by individual subsurface wastewater disposal systems:
Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet
2. Lots served by a central subsurface wastewater disposal system approved by the
Maine Department of Human Services:
Minimum Lot Area: 12,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet
The density for lots served by central subsurface wastewater disposal systems
shall be determined in accordance with the Net Residential Acreage formula
contained in this Ordinance, except that the overall density of such a
manufactured housing park shall be no more than one home for every
twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. Lots served by public sewer:
Minimum Lot Area: 6,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width: 60 feet
4. All individual or central subsurface wastewater disposal systems serving
manufactured housing park lots shall meet the requirements of the State
Plumbing Code and the ordinances and regulations of the Town.
5. Lots located within any area covered by Sec. 19-6-11, Shoreland Performance
Overlay District, shall meet the lot area, lot width and shore frontage
requirements of the shoreland zoning provisions.
6. The overall area of the manufactured housing park shall equal at least the sum
of:
a. The combined area of all manufactured housing lots including the density
requirements for lots served by a central subsurface wastewater
disposal system;
b. The area required for street rights-of-way;
c. The area required for buffer strips; and
d. The area within the shoreland setback.
187
D. Unit Setback Requirements
1. The following lot setbacks shall apply to all manufactured homes and accessory
buildings:
a. Front Setback: 20 feet
b. Side Setback: 20 feet
c. Rear Setback: 10 feet
2. All manufactured housing units and any accessory structures within such
development shall be set back from any existing arterial or feeder street as those
terms are defined in the Town’s Ordinances and regulations, in accordance
with the setback provisions for the underlying zone.
E. Open Space dedication
1. For lots served by public sewer and public water, the Planning Board may
require that a portion of the lot be reserved as open space as provided for in Sec.
16-3-1 (q), General Standards of Subdivision Design.
F. Buffering
1. A fifty (50) foot wide buffer strip shall be provided along all property
boundaries that:
a. Abut developed residential land that has a gross density (dwelling units per
acre) of less than half of that proposed in the manufactured
housing park; or
b. Abut undeveloped residential land that is zoned at a net residential density
of less than half of that proposed in the manufactured housing park.
Further, no structures, streets, or utilities shall be placed in the buffer strip,
except that utilities may cross a buffer strip to provide services to the park.
2. Within the first twenty-five (25) feet of the buffer, as measured from the exterior
boundary of the park, landscaping or visual screening shall be provided to
minimize or eliminate the visual, noise, lighting and other impacts of the
development on surrounding properties. Landscaping may include such types as
tree plantings, hedges, fencing, walling and combinations thereof. Existing
significant vegetation shall be preserved whenever possible. A landscaping plan
shall be submitted with the project’s subdivision plan, which shall include
screening locations and details.
188
3. The setbacks of the individual manufactured housing park lots may be
incorporated into the buffer strip to achieve the required fifty (50) feet of
buffering.
G. Street Standards
1. Streets that the applicant proposes to be dedicated as public streets and to be
offered to the Town for acceptance shall meet the minimum design
standards contained in Article III of the Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Streets that the applicant proposes to remain private streets shall be designed by
a Professional Engineer, registered in the State of Maine, and shall be built
in accordance with accepted engineering standards and the requirements
described below. Where the street standards duly promulgated by the state
Manufactured Housing Board conflict with the standards described below,
the Manufactured Housing Board’s standards shall apply.
3. The internal street system of a manufactured housing park shall intersect with a
public street, and such intersections shall meet all of the intersection
requirements of the Town.
4. Single entrance dead-end streets shall meet the requirements of
Sec. 16-3-2(a)(9) of the subdivision Ordinance.
5. Manufactured housing park lots shall have vehicular access only to the interior
street created for the manufactured housing park.
6. Rights-of-Way and Pavement Widths:
a. Privately owned streets within a manufactured housing park shall have a
minimum right-of-way of twenty-three (23) feet. The minimum paved
surface width of a private street shall be twenty (20) feet for a two-way
private street and fourteen (14) feet for a one-way private street. Onstreet
parking shall be prohibited along 14-foot one-way streets and 20-
foot two- way streets.
b. Parking lanes shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width, if provided.
c. Cul-de sac turnarounds shall have a minimum radius of sixty (60) feet at the
outer edge of the pavement, exclusive of any parking areas.
7. Private streets within a manufactured housing park shall be maintained and kept
clear on a year-round basis by the park’s owner or management staff.
H. Parking Requirements
189
1. There shall be provided and maintained at least two (2) off-street parking spaces
for each manufactured housing park lot. Each parking space shall have
minimum dimensions of at least nine (9) feet by eighteen and a half (18 ½) feet.
2. In addition to occupant parking, off-street guest and service parking shall be
provided and maintained within the boundaries of a manufactured housing
park at a ratio of one (1) space for each four (4) manufactured housing park
lots.
I. Sidewalks/Walkways
Sidewalks may be required by the Planning Board, if it deems them necessary for
pedestrian safety purposes.
J. Storage
At least five hundred (500) cubic feet of enclosed tenant storage facilities shall be
conveniently provided near or on each manufactured housing park lot for the storage of
materials and equipment.
K. Trash Containers
Central trash storage containers shall be provided to adequately store all trash and waste
produced by a manufactured housing park.
L. Screening
All trash storage containers, bottled gas tanks, storage sheds, or other similar items or
accessory structures shall be located and suitably screened by planting or fencing so as
not to be clearly visible from the street or abutting properties.
M. Groundwater
1. For mobile home parks not served by a public sewer or public water system, the
application shall include an assessment of the impacts of the manufactured
housing park development on groundwater quality. The person developing
a manufactured housing park has the burden of proving that the development
will not pollute a public water supply or aquifer. The assessment shall be
prepared by a Certified Geologist or Registered Professional Engineer and
shall demonstrate that the proposed manufactured housing park shall
include at least the following information:
a. A map showing the basic soil types
b. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
manufactured housing park
190
c. Drainage conditions throughout the manufactured housing park
d. Data on the existing groundwater quality, either from test wells in the
manufactured housing park or from existing wells on neighboring properties
e. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the manufactured housing park
on groundwater resources. The evaluation shall, at a minimum, include
a projection of post-development nitrate nitrogen concentrations at any
wells within the manufactured housing park, at the park’s boundaries and
at a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from potential contamination
sources, whichever is a shorter distance
f. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal systems
and drinking water wells within the manufactured housing park and
within two hundred (200) feet of the manufactured housing park
boundaries
2. The standards for the groundwater assessment studies, described in Sec. 19-7-
7.M.1, Groundwater, are as follows:
a. No manufactured housing park shall increase any contaminant
concentration in the groundwater to more than one half of the Primary
Drinking Water Standards. No manufactured housing park shall increase
any contaminant concentration in the groundwater to more than the
Secondary Drinking Water Standards.
b. If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the primary or secondary
standards, and the manufactured housing park is to be served by on-site
groundwater supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water
quality will be improved or treated.
N. Manufactured Housing Park Lots, Ownership and Use
1. The manufactured housing park lots shall be shown on the subdivision plan for a
proposed manufactured housing park.
2. The subdivision plan for a manufactured housing park shall contain a note
indicating that Town services shall not be provided on private streets within the
manufactured housing park. Individual leases for lots shall disclose that
Town services shall not be provided on private streets within the
manufactured housing park.
3. The land within a manufactured housing park shall remain in a unified
ownership. No individual interests in the manufactured housing park lots may
be created or conveyed, except that individual manufactured housing pads
191
may be leased to the owners or occupants of the manufactured housing
placed thereon.
4. Manufactured housing park lots are allowed only in manufactured housing parks
approved by the Planning Board in compliance with this section, and shall not
be considered lots for any other purpose under this Zoning Ordinance.
5. No dwelling unit other than a manufactured housing unit shall be located within
a manufactured housing park.
6. All rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of a manufactured housing
park within Cape Elizabeth shall be reviewed and approved by the Town
Attorney and Town Planner prior to final subdivision approval, and shall
thereafter be made available by the park’s management staff to the Planning
Board and Town Planner on an annual basis.
SEC. 19-7-8. OFF-STREET PARKING (Effective May 12, 2002)
A. Applicability
Off-street parking shall be provided for all new construction, expansions, and changes of
use in accordance with the requirements and standards found in this section.
B. Minimum Requirements for Off-Street Parking
Off-street parking shall be considered an accessory use when required or provided to
serve any legal use located in any zone except as set forth in the following sections. An
off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet
long may be open or covered. The Planning Board may allow up to twenty percent
(20%) of the parking requirement to be met with “compact car” spaces that are a
minimum of eight (8)feet wide by sixteen (16) feet long provided that such spaces shall
be clearly marked as “compact car parking”. Each parking space must be sited to allow
access and exit without obstruction. Handicapped parking shall be provided in
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and applicable State requirements.
In order to determine compliance with this section, the owner or applicant shall submit a
plan showing the physical layout of all required off-street parking areas. Any change in
the evidence or conditions upon which the plan is approved shall nullify such approval.
1. Parking shall be provided on the lot occupied by the use for which the parking is
required, or on an adjacent lot owned or controlled by such use. In addition,
uses located within the Town Center, BA or BB District may provide all or
part of the required off-street parking through any of the following:
192
a. Private off-street parking located on another lot that is located within one
mile of the subject lot and that is controlled by long-term written lease
or ownership by the applicant.
b. Off-street parking shared with other uses (consistent with paragraph 2
below) located within one mile of the subject lot, provided that the Planning
Board finds that there is adequate parking capacity to meet the parking
requirements of all uses sharing the parking due to variation in the time of
parking demand and that the shared parking is available to the applicant
through a written lease or other enforceable agreement.
Where parking is proposed elsewhere on an existing parking lot which has received Site
Plan approval, the Planning Board shall approve or deny the off site parking after
considering the adequacy of the parking and traffic impacts. Where parking is proposed
elsewhere on an existing parking lot which has not received Site Plan approval, the
Planning Board shall approve or deny the off site parking after reviewing the lot for
compliance with the following Site Plan Standards in Sec. 19-9-5 (B) Traffic Access and
Parking, (M) Exterior Lighting, and (N) Landscaping and Buffering.
2. Where multiple use of a lot occurs or where the use involves more than one
activity (i.e. an ice cream shop that includes a gift shop), off-street parking shall
be provided for each use in accordance with this section. Where the
applicant can demonstrate and document non-conflicting periods of use,
shared use of parking spaces may be permitted by the Planning Board.
3. Travel and queuing aisles associated with off-street parking, drive-in facilities
and motor vehicle fuel pumps shall be provided and shall not interfere with
the use of or be part of the required off-street parking.
Parking stalls and aisle layout shall conform to the following standards.
Parking Stall Skew Stall Aisle
Angle Width Width Depth Width
________________ ________________ _____
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ \ \ \ \ \? \ ¦__ __¦
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦?¦ ¦ \ \ ?\ \ \ \ ¦__? _¦
¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ \ \ \ \ ?\ \ ¦__ __¦
90° 9'-0" 18'-0" 24'-0" two way
60° 8'-6" 10'-6" 18'-0" 16'-0" one way only
45° 8'-6" 12'-9" 17'-6" 12'-0" one way only
30° 8'-6" 17'-0" 17'-0" 12'-0" one way only
4. The following minimum number of spaces, rounded up to the nearest whole number,
shall be provided and maintained for each use on a lot, including each use within all
buildings. The Planning Board may reduce by up to thirty percent (30%) the
193
required parking for the reuse of a building existing as of June 4, 1997. In granting
such a reduction, the Planning Board must find that:
a. the reduction will not create or aggravate parking problems in the neighborhood,
and
b. the required number of spaces cannot be reasonably accommodated on the lot.
The maximum number of employees scheduled during peak demand/shift shall be used in
calculating the number of required parking spaces when employee is referenced in the
list below:
The floor area of the structure as defined in Sec. 19-1-3 shall be used in calculating the
number of required parking spaces, unless otherwise noted.
a. Residential
1. Single Family Dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit including
manufactured housing
2. Two-Family Dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit
3. Multiplex housing or 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit with one
multifamily dwellings bedroom, 1.75 spaces for unit with
two bedrooms, and 2 spaces per unit
with three or more bedrooms
4. Home Businesses 2 spaces in addition to required parking
for residence (this requirement may
be reduced by the Zoning Board of
Appeals)
5. Eldercare Facilities 1.25 spaces per unit or 1 space per 4
beds plus 1 space per employee
b. Institutional
1. Municipal Uses 1.25 spaces per employee plus 1 space
per 150 sq. ft. of public assembly
and meeting area
2. Places of Public 1 space per 4 seats plus 1 space per
Assembly, such as: 2 employees
theaters, cinemas, auditorium,
stadiums, sports arenas, churches
194
and synagogues, gymnasiums
3. Schools:
Grades K-8 1 space per classroom plus 1 space for
each employee plus parking in
accordance with the places of
public assembly for the largest
assembly space
Secondary 8 spaces per classroom plus parking in
accordance with the places of
public assembly for the largest
assembly space
Post Secondary 1 space for each 2 students plus 1 space
for each employee plus parking in
accordance with the places of
public assembly for the largest
assembly space
Nursery Schools and Day 1 space per employee plus a safe off-
Care Facilities street area for vehicle pickup and dropoff
of students/children
Schools not listed above: 1 space per each 2 students at capacity plus 1 space for each
employee plus parking in accordance with the places of public assembly for the largest
assembly space.
c. Commercial
1. Retail sales 3 spaces per use or 3 spaces per
1,000 sq. ft. (or 1 space per
333 sq. ft. or portions thereof)
plus 1 space per employee,
whichever is greater
2. Gas and/or Service
Station, Auto Repair Garage .25 space per fuel pump plus 1
space per employee plus 4 spaces
per service bay
(For gas stations involving other uses [e.g., gas pumps with convenience stores],
the minimum number of required parking spaces shall be the total of the
requirements for each use, plus the standards listed above).
195
3. Banks 4 spaces per use or 3 spaces per
1,000 sq. ft. (or 1 space per 333 sq.
ft. or portions thereof), whichever
is greater)
4. Personal Services and Business 3 spaces per use or 4 spaces per
Services 1,000 sq. ft. (or 1 space per 250 sq.
ft. or portions thereof) whichever is
greater)
5. Business and Professional 3 spaces per use or 4 spaces per
Offices (non-medical) 1,000 sq. ft. (or 1 space per
250 sq. ft. or portions thereof),
whichever is greater)
6. Professional Office (medical) 5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. (or 1
space per 200 sq. ft. or portions
thereof)
7. Restaurants/Eating Places 1 space per 4 patrons at capacity
plus 1 space per employee
(Measurement of standing and seating capacity shall be based upon the latest
adopted edition of the BOCA National Building Code and NFPA 101, whichever is
more stringent.)
8. Motels, Hotels, Inns 1 space per guest room plus 1 space
per employee plus 4 spaces per
1,000 sq. ft. (or 1 space per 250 sq.
ft. or portions thereof) of public
assembly area
9. Bed and Breakfasts and 2 spaces plus 1 space per guest
Homestays room
(Effective March 9, 2009)
10. Veterinary Clinics 4 spaces/doctor plus 1 space/other
employee
11. Farm and Fish Markets 3 spaces per use or 3 spaces per
1,000 sq. ft. (or 1 space per 333 sq.
ft. or portions thereof.
(Effective June 10, 2010)
196
12. Short Term Rental 1 space per 2 tenants, with a
minimum of 2 spaces
(Effective December 14, 2012)
d. Industrial 1 space per employee
e. Golf Courses 4 spaces per hole plus parking for
any assembly, restaurant, or retail
space in accordance with the
appropriate requirements
f. Other Uses As determined by the Planning
Board based upon the ITE Parking
Generation Manual or data of
actual parking demand of similar
uses
C. Off-Street Parking Design Standards
The following design standards shall apply to all new and expanded off-street
parking areas:
1. Parking areas for uses other than single and two-family dwellings shall be
designed so that vehicles will not back out into a street.
2. Parking areas shall not inhibit emergency vehicle access to any building or
structure.
3. Parking areas shall be separated from the front of all buildings by a
landscaped area at least five (5) feet wide where parking is allowed in the
yard area.
4. Wheel stops/curbs shall be placed where needed to prevent encroachment
into walkways, landscaped areas, circulation aisles, streets and structures.
5. Parking spaces and travel aisles shall be clearly delineated in parking lots.
6. All parking areas shall be designed to adequately control drainage. In
furtherance of this standard, drainage calculations used shall reflect a paved
condition and all parking areas shall be constructed with base material
which can withstand normally expected vehicle loading and winter
maintenance.
197
7. If parking spaces are provided for self-parking by employees or visitors or
both, accessible spaces meeting ADA requirements shall be provided in
each parking area in conformance with the following:
Total Parking
in Lot
Required
Minimum Number
of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25
26 to 50
51 to 75
76 to 100
101 to 150
151 to 200
201 to 300
301 to 400
401 to 500
501 to 1000
1001 and over
123456789
2 percent of total
20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1000
8. Parking facilities within the Town Center District shall comply with the
standards of Sec. 19-6-4.D.3.g., Landscaping and Site Development.
SEC. 19-7-9. PRIVATE ACCESS PROVISIONS
A. Existing Private Road Standards
A private road that existed as of June 4, 1997, and is shown on the Town Street Map
may be used to provide access to and street frontage for a residential lot upon
certification by the Code Enforcement Officer that:
1. based upon the recommendation of the Fire Chief, that the road provides
adequate all-season emergency access for the existing and proposed
use, and
2. legally binding arrangements exist to provide for the long term
maintenance of the road.
If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the existing private road does not
provide adequate all-season emergency access, the applicant may submit a report to
the Code Enforcement Officer prepared by a registered professional engineer setting
forth improvements that are proposed to be made to the road to improve emergency
access. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the report with the advice of the
Fire chief and Town Engineer and determine if adequate emergency access will be
198
provided if the proposed improvements are made. If the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that the improvements will provide adequate access, the applicant shall
be responsible for making the proposed improvements and providing the Code
Enforcement Officer with a written certification from the professional engineer
verifying that the improvements were constructed as designed. No building permit
shall be issued until the road improvements are completed, the engineer’s
certification is provided to the Code Enforcement Officer, and legally binding
arrangements for long-term maintenance are in place.
B. New Private Road Standards
A private road may be created to provide access to and street frontage for one (1) or
more residential lots provided that:
1. the design and construction of the road has been approved by the Planning
Board using the procedures for the review of a subdivision application
as being in compliance with the standards for a local road as set forth in
Chapter 16, Subdivision Regulations, except that the Planning Board
may waive the requirement for sidewalks and permit a gravel travel
surface instead of asphalt paving, and
2. a legally binding agreement approved by the Planning Board exists that
provides for the long-term maintenance of the road.
C. Private Accessways
The Space and Bulk Standards of Article VI, District Regulations, establish
minimum street frontage requirements for lots to be developable. Recognizing that
the natural character of the landscape and prior development patterns make
compliance with the minimum street frontage requirement difficult or impossible in
some situations, this section allows the Planning Board to approve the development
of an individual lot lacking the required street frontage if adequate access is provided
to the lot, the development is carried out in a manner that minimizes the impact on
adjacent properties, and is consistent with sound neighborhood development. The
Planning Board may approve the creation and/or development of one (1) lot lacking
the required minimum street frontage for the district in which it is located if the
Planning Board finds that it conforms with the standards set forth in Sec. 19-7-
9.D.4., Private Accessway Standards. The Planning Board may approve the creation
of only one (1) such lot from each lot in existence as of June 4, 1997.
D. Private Accessway Procedures
1. Pre-application Conference
199
Applicants for approval of a lot served by a private accessway are required
to schedule a pre-application conference with the Town Planner. The
purpose of this meeting is to familiarize the applicant with the review
procedures and submission requirements, review the private accessway
standards and familiarize the Planner with the nature of the proposal.
No decisions relative to the application may be made at this meeting. The
Town Planner may ask representatives of other departments and
agencies to participate in the conference.
2. Application Procedure
The owner shall submit a formal application for review and approval of a
lot on a private accessway to the Planning Board. The application shall
consist of:
a. a fully executed and signed copy of the application for private
accessway review (provided by the Town)
b. Fourteen (14) copies of a plan and supporting documentation as
described in Sec. 19-7-9.D.3., Submission Requirements
c. a review fee as established by the Town
d. a review escrow fee as established in Sec. 19-9-4.B., Application
Review Procedures.
Upon receipt of an application, the application shall be processed and
reviewed in accordance with the procedures established in Sec. 19-9-4,
Review Procedures.
3. Submission Requirements
The applicant for a lot on a private accessway shall provide fourteen (14)
copies of written materials plus fourteen (14) sets of the plan, maps, or
drawings containing the information listed below. The plan, maps, or
drawings shall be at a scale sufficient to allow review of the items listed
under Subsection 4, Private Accessway Standards, but in no case shall
be more than fifty (50) feet to the inch.
a. A completed application form showing:
1. the record owner’s name, address, and phone number and
applicant’s name, address and phone number if different
2. the assessing tax map and lot number of the parcel or parcels
200
3. documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest
b. A map showing the general location of the site
c. A plan showing the private accessway prepared by a registered land
surveyor. The plan shall be drawn in permanent ink or permanent
transparency material and shall be sealed by the surveyor preparing
the plan. The plan shall be labeled “Plan of a Private Accessway” and
shall provide an approval block for signatures of a legal majority
of the Planning Board, the date of approval, and the words, “Private
Accessway, Approved by the Town of Cape Elizabeth
Planning Board.” The plan shall also contain the following note:
“The Town of Cape Elizabeth shall not be responsible for the
maintenance, repair, plowing, or similar services for the private
accessway shown on this plan.” The plan shall show information
sufficient to establish on the ground the exact location, direction,
width, and length of the private accessway and related right-of-way
and the following:
1. boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of the
owner or applicant regardless of whether all or part is affected by
the application,
2. location and size of any existing and proposed sewer and water
mains, culverts and drains, on-site sewage disposal systems,
wells, and power and telephone lines and poles within the rightof-
way of the proposed private access and the location, names, and
present widths of existing streets and rights-of-way within or
adjacent to the proposed private access,
3. location of intersecting roads or driveways within fifty (50) feet of
the private access,
4. the location of open drainage courses, floodplains, wetland
boundaries, stands of trees, major trees, and other important natural
features, with a description of such features to be retained,
5. the direction of existing surface water drainage in the vicinity of
the proposed private access and the location of proposed
surface water drainage with provisions for drainage handling,
including culverts when necessary,
6. location and dimensions of any existing easements and copies of
existing covenants or deed restrictions,
201
7. the location of the nearest fire hydrant, dry hydrant or other water
supply for fire protection and a description of any existing fire
protection systems,
8. the location of all proposed utilities, including fire protection
systems,
9. a building envelope defining the area of the lot within which
building may occur.
d. A maintenance agreement which shall run with the land establishing
the responsibilities for the long-term maintenance of the private
accessway.
4. Private Accessway Standards
The Planning Board shall find that the proposed lot and related accessway
conform to the following standards:
a. The lot approved under this provision shall be improved with only one
(1) dwelling unit and related accessory buildings and uses.
b. The lot shall be served by a private accessway meeting the following
requirements:
1. The access way shall be located within a dedicated right-of-way
having a minimum width of thirty (30) feet.
2. The accessway shall be improved with gravel or paved drive
meeting the following standards:
a. The sub-base shall be constructed with gravel meeting MDOT
Spec. 703.06 Type D with a depth of at least fifteen (15)
inches, and having a width of at least eighteen (18) feet.
b. The travel way shall be constructed with a minimum of three
(3) inches of crushed gravel having a width of at least
fourteen (14) feet. The remaining width of the gravel base may be
loamed and seeded.
c. Within ten (10) feet of the edge of the street paving, the
accessway shall be paved with at least two (2) inches of
asphalt paving. The maximum grade within the first fifty
(50) feet of the edge of street paving shall be five percent
(5%). Pavement radius at the intersection with the street shall
be twenty (20) feet. (Effective December 10, 2003)
202
d. Gutter drainage along the street shall not be allowed to sheet
across the face of the intersection and provisions shall be
made to keep drainage from the access from running into
the public street.
e. A turnaround shall be provided meeting the requirements of
the Fire Chief.
3. The accessway shall be located so that sight distance conforms to
the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance.
4. A private accessway may serve only one (1) lot.
5. The Planning Board may reduce the requirements of subsection
b. (1), (2) and (3) above to a lesser standard where there is an
existing private access or to promote better neighborhood
development, but in no case shall standards be reduced so that
access for any municipal emergency vehicle is prohibited.
(Effective August 11, 1999.)
c. Adequate disposal of sewage shall be provided as evidenced by
connection to the public sewerage system or the submission of a
completed HHE-200 form or subsequent form.
d. That a building envelope be depicted wherein the house and accessory
buildings will be located on the lot demonstrating conformance
with the setback requirements of the district in which it is located
and any natural constraints and that the house site will be buffered
from abutting residential properties.
5. Post Approval Procedures
a. Inspection:
The applicant shall be responsible for demonstrating that the
construction of the private access way meets the standards of this section.
The private accessway shall be inspected under the direction of a
registered professional engineer. Prior to the issuance of any building
permits for the lot served by a private accessway, (1) the engineer shall
certify to the Code Enforcement Officer that the private accessway has
been constructed in accordance with this section or (2) a performance
guarantee shall be posted in compliance with the provisions of Sec. 16-2-
6.C. of the Subdivision Ordinance.
b. Recording of the Approved Plan:
203
The original plan(s) and maintenance agreement shall be recorded in the
Cumberland County Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of
approval by the Planning Board and prior to the issuance of building
permits on any lots served by the private access. If the plan and
agreement are not recorded within this period, the approval of the Planning
Board shall be void.
c. Amendments:
Any construction of the private accessway that is inconsistent with the
approved private accessway plan shall require an amendment to the plan.
De minimus changes may be approved by the Town Planner. All other
changes must be approved by the Planning Board.
SEC. 19-7-10. AFTER THE FACT REDUCTIONS
Notwithstanding the provisions of Article VI Districts, setback requirements may be
reduced in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a certificate reducing the required setback
to validate the sites of mis-located single family, residential structures, and related
accessory structures which are not otherwise legally sited and which were in
existence on April 1, 1997, provided that:
1. The use of the property is and will remain as a single family dwelling,
2. The reduction will not be more than ten (10) feet, and
3. The encroachment is the result of the inadvertent misplacement of a
structure.
If a reduction is approved, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide the applicant
with a signed instrument in recordable form indicating the setback reduction granted
under the terms of this section. The applicant shall be responsible for the recording
of this instrument in the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds. If the reduction is
not approved, the Code Enforcement Officer shall advise the applicant of the right to
seek an appeal through the Zoning Board of Appeals. (Effective December10, 2003)
SEC. 19-7-11. MULTIPLE PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS ON A LOT
If more than one (1) principal building is located on a lot, the lot size and location of each
building shall be such that a separate lot conforming to the provisions of this Ordinance
could be created for each building. The potential creation of a separate lot shall be
204
demonstrated by submitting a plan to the Code Enforcement Officer showing how the
land could be divided to create conforming lots.
SEC. 19-7-12. CORNER CLEARANCES
On a corner lot in any district, no fence, wall, hedge, or other planting more than three
and a half (3 ½) feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the threesided
area formed by the intersecting street lines and a line joining them at points which
lie twenty (20) feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along said street lines.
SEC. 19-7-13. SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING BISECTED LOTS
No new single family dwelling lot shall be created which is bisected by a public or
private road unless the lot area on at least one (1) side of the road meets the minimum lot
size requirement for the district in which it is located. If any segment of the bisected
single family dwelling lot does not meet the minimum lot size requirement, the various
segments shall be retained in single ownership and shall be treated as one lot for the
purposes of this Ordinance. (Effective March 15, 2006)
SEC. 19-7-14. TEMPORARY ACTIVITIES AND EVENTS
Temporary uses of a community or nonprofit nature such as festivals, fairs, carnivals, and
similar events may be permitted in any district by vote of the Town Council,
notwithstanding the provisions of this Ordinance. Such temporary use shall not be
contrary to the objectives of this Ordinance. A vote by the Council allowing such
temporary use shall not be deemed a change in the zoning and shall apply to the specific
event or activity only for its stated duration.
SEC. 19-7-15. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
The use of a temporary construction trailer on a site that has an active building permit
may be permitted by the Code Enforcement Officer. The use of a temporary marketing
and/or sales trailer may be permitted on a lot in an approved subdivision, in which case
the construction, marketing and sales uses shall be combined in one trailer. A marketing
and/or sales trailer which is not necessary to and located in an approved subdivision
under construction shall not be permitted unless it has received Site Plan Approval or is
part of a building which has received Site Plan Approval. A building permit shall be
required for the temporary structure and shall require that the structure be removed in one
year, which may be extended once by the Code Enforcement Officer for an additional
year. (Effective August 11, 1999)
SEC. 19-7-16. CREATION OF A SHORT-CUT VIA DEVELOPED
RESIDENTIAL STREET
No new short-cut may be created, if the measurement of the distance along such short-cut
includes a developed residential street.
205
Notwithstanding the waiver provision of Sec. 16-3-5 or otherwise, the foregoing
limitation on the creation of short-cuts via developed residential streets shall not waived
by the Planning Board in connection with any subdivision approval.
Notwithstanding 1 M.R.S.A. Sec. 302, this provision shall apply to any pending
proceeding proposing the creation of a short-cut via developed residential street, unless
all approvals and building permits for the project have been obtained prior to the filing of
the petition for enactment of this Ordinance with the Town Clerk. (Effective June 23, 2006)
ARTICLE VIII. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
The following standards of performance shall apply to the uses and areas of the
community as listed in the specific standard. Any use of land, buildings, or structures to
which these standards apply shall be in conformance with the requirements.
SEC. 19-8-1. RESERVED
SEC. 19-8-2. SHORELAND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
All activities in the Shoreland Performance Overlay District shall comply with the
following performance standards as applicable, except where the requirements of the
underlying district are more restrictive, in which case the more restrictive standards shall
apply:
A. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges Over Ten (10) Feet in Length and Other
Marine Structures Extending Over or Below the Normal High Water Line of
Water Body or Within a Wetland (Effective October 15, 2009)
All piers, docks, wharves and other structures listed above shall require site plan approval
by the Planning Board and compliance with the performance standards below. The
Planning Board may require the submission of an environmental impact assessment on
natural areas and may require mitigation measures such as changes in the design and
construction of the marine structure and in the magnitude, duration, and location, of
activities on the marine structure. Structures are considered temporary when they will
remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months and considered permanent when they will remain in or over the water
for seven (7) months or more in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months. (Effective
October 15, 2009). The performance standards are as follows:
1. Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use, and
constructed so as to control erosion. (Effective October 15, 2009)
2. The location of the marine structure shall not unreasonably interfere with
existing developed or natural beach areas. (Effective October 15, 2009)
206
3. The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
4. The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the
activity and be consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the
area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf in non-tidal waters shall not be wider
than six feet for non-commercial uses. (Effective October 15, 2009)
5. No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or
other structure extending beyond the normal high water line of a water body
or within a wetland unless the structure requires direct access to the water
body or wetland as an operational necessity. (Effective October 15, 2009)
6. New permanent piers and docks on non-tidal waters shall not be permitted
unless it is clearly demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier
or dock is not feasible, and a permit has been obtained from the Department
of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection
Act. (Effective October 15, 2009)
7. No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other
structure extending beyond the normal high water line of a water body or
within a wetland shall be converted to residential dwelling units in the
district.
8. Structures built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure
extending beyond the normal high water line of a water body or within a
wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier, wharf,
dock or other structure.
9. All such structures shall be considered permanent unless constructed for
removal from the water and remaining in the water for less than seven (7)
months in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
B. Individual Private Campsites
Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds are allowed provided the
following conditions are met: (Effective October 15, 2009)
1. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this district, or thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland district,
whichever is less, may be permitted.
2. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a tent
platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet from the normal high
water line of Great Pond, and seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high
water line of other water bodies, tributary stream, or the wetland upland
edge.
207
3. Recreational camping vehicles shall not be allowed.
4. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of a tent or similar shelter in a
Resource Protection 1-Critical Wetland District, if a Resource Protection
Permit is issued by the Planning Board, shall be limited to one thousand
(1,000) square feet per site.
5. When a tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one hundred
and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures
shall be met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal
system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities. (Effective October
15, 2009)
C. Parking Areas
1. Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback
requirements for structures. The setback requirement for parking areas
serving public boat launching facilities may be reduced to no less than fifty
(50) feet from the shoreline or tributary stream if the Zoning Board of
Appeals finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the
shoreline or tributary stream. (Effective October 15, 2009)
2. Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be
designed to prevent stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water
body, tributary stream or wetland and where feasible, to retain all runoff onsite.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
3. In determining the appropriate size of parking facilities, the following shall
apply:
Typical parking space: Nine (9) feet wide and Eighteen (18) feet long.
Boat trailer parking space: Nine (9) feet wide and forty (40) feet long.
Internal travel aisles: Twenty-four (24) feet wide.
D. Roads and Driveways
The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or driveways and
drainage systems, culverts, and other related features.
1. New roads and driveways shall be setback at least two hundred fifty (250)
feet from the normal high water line of Great Pond and one hundred (100)
feet from the wetland upland edge of the Resource Protection 1 District and
seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high water line of other water bodies
and tributary streams, unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined
208
by the Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the
Planning Board may reduce the road and/or driveway setback requirement
to no less than fifty (50) feet upon a clear showing by the applicant that
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are
not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed so as to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. On slopes of
greater than twenty percent (20%), the road and/or driveway setback shall
be increased by ten (10) feet for each five percent (5%) increase in slope
above twenty percent (20%). (Effective October 15, 2009)
This section does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or
driveways that provide access to permitted structures, and facilities located
nearer to the shoreline or tributary stream due to an operational necessity,
excluding temporary docks for recreational uses. Roads and driveways
providing access to permitted structures within the setback area shall
comply fully with the requirements of this section except for that portion of
the road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure. (Effective
October 15, 2009)
2. An existing public road may be expanded within the legal road right-of-way
regardless of its setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
3. New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection 1 Critical
Wetland District except to provide access to permitted uses within the
district. New driveways may be approved by the Planning Board upon a
finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside
the district, in which case the driveway shall be set back as far as
practicable from the normal high water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland and shall have a maximum width of
sixteen (16) feet.
4. Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2)
horizontal to one (1) vertical and shall be graded and stabilized in
accordance with the provisions contained in Sec. 19-8-2.L, Erosion and
Sedimentation Control. (Effective October 15, 2009)
5. Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten percent (10%) except
for segments of less than two hundred (200) feet. (Effective October 15,
2009)
6. In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly
entering water bodies, tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways
shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty onto an unscarified
buffer strip at least fifty (50) feet plus two (2) times the average slope in
209
width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal high
water line of a water body, tributary stream, or wetland upland edge.
Surface drainage which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be
diffused or spread out to promote infiltration of the runoff and to minimize
channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer strip. (Effective
October 15, 2009)
7. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall
be installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified
buffer strips before the flow gains sufficient volume or head to erode the
road, driveway or ditch. To accomplish this, the following shall apply:
(Effective October 15, 2009)
a. Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall
be spaced along the road or driveway at intervals no greater than
indicated in the following table: (Effective October 15, 2009)
Grade (Percent) Spacing (feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200
6-10 100
11-15 80
16-20 60
21+ 40
b. Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where
the grade is ten percent (10%) or less. (Effective October 15, 2009)
c. On sections having slopes greater than ten percent (10%), ditch relief
culverts shall be placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle
down slope from a line perpendicular to the center line of the road
or driveway. (Effective October 15, 2009)
d. Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in
order to allow for effective functioning. Inlet and outlet ends shall be
stabilized with appropriate materials.
8. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other stormwater runoff
control installations associated with roads and driveway shall be maintained
on a regular basis to assure effective functioning. (Effective October 15, 2009)
E. Stormwater Runoff
1. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize
stormwater runoff from the site in excess of the natural predevelopment
conditions. Where possible, existing natural runoff control features such as
210
berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas shall be retained in order to
reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwater.
2. Stormwater runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to
ensure proper functioning.
F. Sewage Disposal Standards
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in compliance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal rules Chapter 15, Article II, Private Sewage
Disposal Ordinance and the following: a) clearing or removal of woody vegetation
necessary to site a new system and any associated fill extensions, shall not extend closer
than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of a
water body or the upland edge of a wetland and b) a holding tank is not allowed for a
first-time residential use in the shoreland zone. (Effective October 15, 2009)
G. Essential Services
1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to
existing public ways and existing service corridors. (Effective October 15,
2009)
2. The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines,
is not allowed in a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except
to provide services to a permitted use within said district, or except where
the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative exists. Where
allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to minimize any
adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual
impacts. (Effective October 15, 2009)
3. Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines,
towers and related equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a
permit. (Effective October 15, 2009)
H. Mineral Exploration and Extraction
Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of mineral resources shall be
accomplished by hand sampling, test boring or other methods which create minimal
disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Planning Board shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the
above limitations. All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately
capped, filled or secured by other equally effective measures, so as to restore
disturbed areas and to protect the public health and safety. Mineral extraction may
be permitted in accordance with Sec. 19-8-5, Earth Materials Removal Standards,
and the following conditions:
211
1. A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the Planning Board
before a permit is granted. (Effective October 15, 2009)
2. No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control
features, shall be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of the normal
high water line of Great Pond or the wetland upland edge in the
Resource Protection 1 District, nor within seventy-five (75) feet of the
normal high water line of any other water body tributary stream or the
upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations shall not be permitted
within fifty (50) feet of any property line without written permission of the
owner of such adjacent property. (Effective October 15, 2009)
3. Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction
operations at any extraction site, which operations shall be deemed
complete when less than one hundred (100) cubic yards of materials are
removed in any consecutive twelve (12) month period, ground levels
and grades shall be established in accordance with the following: (Effective
October15, 2009)
a. All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal
in an approved location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials
generated on-site may be buried or covered on-site.
b. The final graded slope shall be no steeper than a three to one (3:1)
slope.
c. Topsoil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed areas, which
shall be reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area.
Additional topsoil or loam shall be obtained from off-site sources
if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
I. Agriculture
1. All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the
Manure Utilization Guidelines published by the Maine Department of
Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the Nutrient Management Law
(7M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209). (Effective October 15, 2009)
2. There shall be no new tilling of soil within one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of Great Pond or the
wetland upland edge in the Resource Protection 1 District; within seventyfive
(75) feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies and coastal
wetlands; nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams and freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective
date of this ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be
maintained. (Effective October 15, 2009)
212
3. Where soil is tilled in a Resource Protection 1 – Critical Wetland District,
tilled in excess of forty thousand (40,000) square feet in surface area in the
shoreland zone, such tillage shall be carried out in conformance with the
provisions of a Conservation Plan. The plan shall be filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer. Nonconformance with the provisions of such
Conservation Plan shall be considered to be a violation of this ordinance.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
4. Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, of Great Pond, or within seventy-five (75) feet,
horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands.
All manure storage areas within the shoreland district must be constructed
or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or
contaminated stormwater. (Effective October 15, 2009)
5. Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one
hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high water line of
Great Pond; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of other
water bodies, nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of
tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated
with ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the
above setback provisions may continue, provided that such grazing is
conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan. (Effective October 15,
2009)
J. Timber Harvesting
Timber harvesting within the Shoreland Zoning Overlay District shall be carried out in
conformance with the following:
1. Adjacent to Great Pond
a. Within the strip of land extending seventy-five (75) feet inland from the
high water line of Great Pond, there shall be no timber harvesting,
except to remove safety hazards.
b. At a distance greater than seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high water
line of Great Pond, harvesting of no more than forty percent (40%) of
the total volume on each acre of trees 4.5 inches DBH or greater on any lot
in any ten (10) year period is permitted. Volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area. In no case, however, shall the average residual
basal area of trees over 4 ½ inches in diameter at 4 ½ feet above ground
level be reduced to less than 30 square feet per acre. There shall be no
clear-cut openings. A well distributed stand of trees which is wind firm
213
and other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be maintained.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
2. Adjacent to the Spurwink River and the Atlantic Ocean, and Streams
Subject to Shoreland Zoning
a. Within seventy-five (75) feet of the normal high water line of the
Spurwink River, the Atlantic Ocean, and streams subject to shoreland
zoning, there shall be no timber harvesting, except to remove safety
hazards. (Effective October 15, 2009)
b. At a distance greater than seventy-five (75) feet from the normal high
water line of the Spurwink River, the Atlantic Ocean, and streams
subject to shoreland zoning, harvesting of no more than forty percent
(40%) of the total volume on each acre of trees 4.5 inches BDH or
greater on any lot in any ten (10) year period is permitted. Clear-cut
openings shall be permitted, provided that harvesting activities shall not
create single clear-cut openings greater than seven thousand five
hundred (7,500) square feet in the forest canopy. When clear-cut
openings exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet, they shall be at least
one hundred (100) feet apart. Clear-cut openings shall be included in
the calculation of total volume removal. Volume may be considered to
be equivalent to basal area. (Effective October 15, 2009)
3. Additional Timber Harvesting Standards
All timber harvesting shall conform to the following standards:
a. Shoreline integrity and sedimentation. Persons conducting timber
harvesting and related activities must take reasonable measures to
avoid the disruption off-shoreline integrity, the occurrence of
sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of water body and tributary
stream banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and
soil lying within water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands. If,
despite such precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity,
sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of water body and tributary
stream banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and
soil lying within water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands occurs,
such conditions must be corrected.
b. Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall be
conducted such that slash or debris is not left below the normal high
water line of any water body or tributary stream, or the upland edge of
a wetland.
214
1. Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by equipment
or to stabilize exposed soil, may be left in place, provided that no
part thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
2. Adjacent to great ponds, rivers and wetlands:
(i) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet of the
normal high water line or upland edge of a wetland or river;
(ii) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 75 feet of the
normal high water line of Great Pond;
(iii) Between 50 feet and 250 feet of the normal high water line or
upland edge of a wetland or river, all slash larger than 3 inches
in diameter must be disposed of in such a manner that no part
thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
(iv) Between 75 feet and 250 feet of the normal high water line of
Great Pond, all slash larger than 3 inches in diameter must be
disposed of in such a manner that no part thereof extends more
than 4 feet above the ground.
c. Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement applies
to the construction, maintenance, and use of skid trails and yards in
shoreland areas.
1. Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities shall not
use river, stream or tributary stream channels as travel routes
except when surface waters are frozen and snow covered, and the
activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
2. Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to prevent
sediment and concentrated water runoff from entering a water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. Upon termination of their use,
skid trails and yards must be stabilized.
3. Setbacks:
(i) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of mineral
soil within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of any water body,
tributary stream, or wetland. On slopes of 10 percent or
greater, the setback for equipment operation must be increased
by 20 feet, horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet,
horizontal distance, for each 5 percent increase in slope above
10 percent. Where slopes fall away from the resource, no
increase in the 25-foot setback is required.
215
(ii) Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate techniques
shall be used to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream or wetland. Such techniques may include the
installation of sump holes or settling basins, and/or the
effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water
turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs,
such conditions must be corrected.
d. Land Management Roads. Land management roads, including
approaches to crossings of water bodies, tributary stream channels, and
freshwater wetlands, ditches and other related structures, must be
designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent sediment and
concentrated water runoff from directly entering the water body,
tributary stream or wetland. Surface water on or adjacent to water
crossing approaches must be diverted through vegetative filter
strips to avoid sedimentation of the watercourse or wetland. Because
roadside ditches may not extend to the resource being crossed,
vegetative filter strips must be established in accordance with the
setback requirements in Subsection c(3). above.
1. Land management roads and associated ditches, excavation, and
fill must be set back at least:
a. 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line
of a great pond, river or freshwater or coastal wetland;
b. 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of
streams; and
c. 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high water line of
tributary streams.
2. The minimum 100 foot setback specified in Subsection c.3 above
may be reduced to no less than 50 feet and the 50 foot setback
specified in Subsection c.3 above may be reduced to no less
than 25 feet, horizontal distance, if, prior to construction, the
landowner or the landowner’s designated agent obtains a variance
from the Zoning Board of Appeals, and includes in its variance
application evidence that no reasonable alternative exists, and the
appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques
may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief
culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream or wetland. If, despite such precautions,
216
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
3. On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the land management road
setback must be increased by at least 20 feet plus an additional 10
feet for each 5 percent increase in slope above 10 percent.
4. New land management roads are not allowed within the shoreland
area along Significant River Segments as identified in 38
M.R.S.A. section 437, nor in a Resource Protection District, unless,
prior to construction, the landowner or the landowner’s
designated agent makes a clear demonstration to the Planning
Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative route exists
outside the shoreland zone, and that the new road must be set back
as far as practicable from the normal high water line and
screened from the river by existing vegetation.
5. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other water
control installations associated with roads must be maintained
on a regular basis to assure effective functioning. Drainage
structures shall deliver a dispersed flow of water into an
unscarified filter strip no less than the width indicated in the
setback requirements above. Where such a filter strip is
impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
Such techniques may include the installation of sump holes or
settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief
culverts and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation
of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such
precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
6. Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the water
control installations required above must continue until use of the
road is discontinued and the road is put to bed by effective
installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage
structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to avoid surface
water flowing over or under the water bar, and extending a
sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that water does
not reenter the road surface.
7. Upgrading existing roads. Extension or enlargement of presently
existing roads must conform to the provisions for land
management roads. Any nonconforming existing road may
continue to exist and to be maintained, as long as the
nonconforming conditions are not made more nonconforming.
217
8. Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads
need not conform to the setback requirements above if, prior
to extension of enlargement, the landowner or the landowner’s
designated agent demonstrates to the Code Enforcement
Officer’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and
that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such
techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of
settling basins and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief
culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
9. Additional measures. In addition to the foregoing minimum
requirements, persons undertaking construction and maintenance
of roads and river, stream and tributary stream crossings must
take reasonable measures to avoid sedimentation of surface
waters.
e. Crossings of water bodies. Crossings of rivers, streams, and tributary
streams must allow for fish passage at all times of the year, must
not impound water, and must allow for the maintenance of normal
flows.
1. Determination of flow. Provided they are properly applied and
used for the circumstances for which they are designed,
methods including but not limited to the following are
acceptable as a means of calculating the 10 year and 25 year
frequency water flows and thereby determining water crossing
sizes as required above: The United States Geological Survey
(USGS) Methods; specifically: Hodgkins, G. 1999, Estimating
the Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in Maine for Selected
Recurrence Intervals. U.S. Geological Survey. Water
Resources Investigations Report 99-4008. 45 pp.
2. Upgrading existing water crossings. Extension or enlargement of
presently existing water crossings must conform to the above
provisions. Any nonconforming existing water crossing may
continue to exist and be maintained, as long as the
nonconforming conditions are not made more nonconforming;
however, any maintenance or repair work done below the
normal high water line must conform to the provisions of the
Shoreland Performance Overlay District.
218
3. Other Agency Permits. Any timber harvesting and related
activities involving the design, construction, and maintenance of
crossings on water bodies other than a river, stream or
tributary stream may require a permit from the Land Use
Regulation Commission, the Department of Environmental
Protection, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
4. Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design,
construction, and maintenance of crossings of freshwater
wetlands identified by the Department of Inland Fisheries and
Wildlife as essential wildlife habitat require prior consultation
with the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
5. Notice to Bureau of Forestry. Written notice of all water crossing
construction maintenance, alteration and replacement
activities in shoreland areas must be given by the property owner
to the Bureau prior to the commencement of such activities. Such
notice must contain all information required by the Bureau,
including:
(i) a map showing the location of all proposed permanent
crossings;
(ii) the GPS location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(iii) for any temporary or permanent crossing that requires a permit
from state or federal agencies, a copy of the approved permit
or permits; and
(iv) a statement signed by the responsible party that all temporary
and permanent crossings will be constructed, maintained,
and closed out in accordance with the requirements of this
Section.
6. Water crossing standards. All crossings of rivers require a bridge
or culvert sized according to the requirements below. Subject
to other provisions above, skid trail crossings of streams and
tributary streams when channels of such streams and tributary
streams are frozen and snow-covered or are composed of a hard
surface, which will not be eroded or otherwise damaged, are not
required to use permanent or temporary structures. Streams and
tributary streams may be crossed using temporary structures that
are not bridges or culverts provided:
(i) concentrated water runoff does not enter the stream or
tributary stream;
219
(ii) sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
(iii) there is no substantial disturbance of the bank, or stream or
tributary stream channel;
(iv) fish passage is not impeded; and
(v) water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
7. Bridge and Culvert Sizing. For crossings of river, stream and
tributary stream channels with a bridge or culvert, the following
requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to
provide an opening sufficient in size and structure to
accommodate 10-year frequency water flows or with a cross
sectional area at least equal to 2 ½ times the crosssectional
area of the river, stream, or tributary stream
channel.
(ii) Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than
provided in Subsection (i) above if techniques are effectively
employed such that in the event of culvert or bridge
failure, the natural course of water flow is maintained and
sedimentation of the water body or tributary stream is
avoided. Such crossing structures must be at least as wide as
the channel and placed above the normal high water line.
Techniques may include, but are not limited to, the
effective use of any, a combination of, or all of the
following:
1. use of temporary skidder bridges;
2. removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen ground
conditions;
3. using water bars in conjunction with culverts;
4. using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
(iii) Culverts utilized in river, stream and tributary stream
crossings must:
1. be installed at or below river, stream or tributary stream
bed elevation;
2. be seated on firm ground;
3. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side of the
culvert;
220
4. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot or
according to the culvert manufacturer’s specifications,
whichever is greater; and
5. have a headwall at the inlet end which is adequately
stabilized by riprap or other suitable means to reasonably
avoid erosion of material around the culvert.
(iv) River, stream and tributary stream crossings allowed under the
Shoreland Performance Overlay District standards, but located
in flood hazard areas (i.e. A zones) as identified on a
community’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood
Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM), must be designed and
constructed under the stricter standards contained in that
community’s National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
For example, a water crossing may be required to pass a 100-
year flood event.
8. Skid trail closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting and
related activities, or upon the expiration of a Forest Operations
Notification, whichever is earlier, the following requirements
apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts installed for river, stream and tributary
stream crossings by skid trails must either be removed
and areas of exposed soil stabilized, or upgraded to comply
with the closeout standards for land management roads
below.
(ii) Water crossing structures that are not bridges or culverts must
either be removed immediately following timber
harvesting and related activities, or, if frozen into the river,
stream or tributary stream bed or bank, as soon as practical
after snowmelt.
(iii) River, stream and tributary stream channels, banks and
approaches to crossings of water bodies and tributary streams
must be immediately stabilized on completion of harvest,
or if the ground is frozen and/or snow-covered, as soon as
practical after snowmelt. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs,
such conditions must be corrected.
9. Land management road closeout. Maintenance of the water
control features must continue until use of the road is discontinued
and the road is put to bed by taking the following actions:
221
(i) Effective installation of water bars or other adequate road
drainage structures at appropriate intervals, constructed to
reasonably avoid surface water flowing over or under the
water bar, and extending sufficient distance beyond the
traveled way so that water does not reenter the road
surface.
(ii) Water crossing structures must be appropriately sized or
dismantled and removed in a manner that reasonably avoids
sedimentation of the water body or tributary stream.
(iii) Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be
discontinued shall satisfy one of the following requirements:
1. it shall be designed to provide an opening sufficient in
size and structure to accommodate 25-year frequency
water flows;
2. it shall be designed to provide an opening with a crosssectional
area at least 3 ½ times the cross-sectional
area of the river, stream or tributary stream channel; or
3. it shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to
reasonably avoid sedimentation of the river, stream or
tributary stream. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity
occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
f. Slope Table. Filter strips, skid trail setbacks, and land management road
setbacks must be maintained as specified above, but in no case shall be
less than shown in the following table:
Average slope of land between exposed width of strip between exposed
mineral soil and the shoreline (percent) mineral soil and shoreline
(feet along surface of the ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
(Effective October 15, 2009)
222
K. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other than Timber
Harvesting (Effective October 15, 2009)
1. The Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland District abutting Great Pond,
there shall be no cutting of vegetation except to remove safety hazards or
that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
2. A buffer strip shall be required except to allow for the development of
permitted uses, or for those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent
to public swimming areas where cleared areas are limited to the minimum
area necessary. Within a strip of land extending one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, inland from the wetland upland edge in the Resource
Protection 1 District, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from
any other water body or tributary stream, a buffer strip of vegetation shall
be preserved as follows: (Effective October 15, 2009)
a. There shall be no cleared opening greater than two hundred fifty (250)
square feet in the forest canopy (or other existing woody vegetation) if
a forested canopy is not present as measured from the outer limits of
the tree crown. However, a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in width
as measured between tree trunks is permitted provided that a cleared
line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
b. Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is permitted provided
that a well distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation is
maintained. For the purposes of this section, a “well-distributed stand
of trees” adjacent to a stream flowing to Great Pond shall be defined as
maintaining a rating score of twenty-four (24) or more in any twentyfive
(25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as
determined by the following rating system. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Diameter of Tree at 4 ½ feet Points Above Ground Level (inches)
2 < 4 inches 1
> 4 < 8 inches 2
8 < 12 inches 4
12 inches or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a
“well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation” is defined as
maintaining a minimum rating score of sixteen (16) per twenty-five
(25) foot by fifty (50) foot rectangular area. (Effective October 15,
2009)
223
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25 foot by 50 foot rectangular plots must be established where
the landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required
buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a
previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no
vegetation removed except as otherwise allowed by this
Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation
removed down to the minimum points required or as otherwise
allowed by this Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any
25 foot by 50-foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater
than 12 inches in diameter. For the purposes of the point system,
“other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining existing vegetation
under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining
at least five (5) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four
and one half (4 ½) feet above ground level for each 25 foot by 50 foot
rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist, no woody stems less
than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 5 saplings
have been recruited into the plot. (Effective October 15, 2009)
Notwithstanding the above provision, no more than forty percent (40%)
of the total volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter,
measured at four and a half (4 ½) feet above ground level may be
removed in any ten (10) year period.
c. In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing
vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover,
including leaf litter and the forest duff layer shall not be cut,
covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other
permitted uses as described in paragraphs 1 and 2a above.
(Effective October 15, 2009)
d. Pruning of tree branches on the bottom one-third (1/3) of the tree is
permitted.
e. In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of
storm-damaged, diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the
224
creation of cleared openings, these openings shall be replanted with
native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present.
3. At distances greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from
the normal high water line of any water body other than Great Pond or
tributary stream, there shall be permitted on any lot, in any ten (10) year
period, selective cutting of not more than forty percent (40%) of the volume
of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured four and a half (4 ½)
feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with the development
of permitted uses shall be included in the forty percent (40%) calculation.
For the purposes of these standards, volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area. (Effective October 15, 2009)
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited
to, principal and accessory structures, driveways and sewage disposal areas,
exceed in the aggregate, twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot area within the
shoreland zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever is greater,
including land previously cleared. (Effective October 15, 2009)
4. Legally existing cleared openings in existence on the effective date of this
district may be maintained, but shall not be enlarged, except as permitted by
this district. (Effective October 15, 2009)
5. Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs,
trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of
Section K. (Effective October 15, 2009)
L. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
1. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar
activities which result in un-stabilized soil conditions and which require a
permit shall require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
The plan shall be submitted to the permitting authority for approval and
shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
a. Mulching and re-vegetation of disturbed soil.
b. Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or
diversion ditches.
c. Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
2. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be
designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep
slopes where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever
possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely as possible.
225
3. Erosion and sedimentation measures shall apply to all aspects of the
proposed project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation
during all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase
of construction shall be minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
4. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized
within one (1) week from the time it was actively worked, by use of riprap,
sod, seed, and mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases, permanent
stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of the initial date of
exposure. In addition:
a. Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of least one (1) bale
per five hundred (500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch
of vegetation is established.
b. Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable
method may be required to maintain the mulch cover.
c. Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid
siltation into the water. Such measures may include the use of staked
hay bales and/or silt fences.
5. Natural and man-made ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from
erosion from water flowing through them. Drainage ways shall be designed
and constructed in order to carry water from a twenty-five (25) year storm
or greater, and shall be stabilized with vegetation or lined with riprap.
M. Soils
All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures
can be established and maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts,
including severe erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution,
whether during or after construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal,
commercial or industrial development and other similar intensive land uses shall require a
soils report based on an on-site investigation and be prepared by qualified professionals.
Certified persons may include Maine State Certified Soils Scientists, Maine Registered
Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified Geologists and other persons who have
training and experience in the recognition and evaluation of soil properties. The report
shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and surrounding land
and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils
report shall include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations
where they exist. (Effective October 15, 2009)
N. Water Quality Protection
226
No activity shall impair designated uses or the water classification of the water body,
tributary stream or wetland. (Effective October 15, 2009)
O. Archaeological Sites
1. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, as determined by the permitting
authority shall be submitted by the applicant to the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20)
days prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting
authority shall consider comments received from the Commission prior to
rendering a decision on the application.
2. A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the
excavation is conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic
Preservation Officer’s level 1 or level 2 approved list, and unreasonable
erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of adequate and timely
temporary and permanent stabilization measures. (Effective October 15, 2009)
SEC. 19-8-3. RESOURCE PROTECTION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
All activities in the Resource Protection Districts shall comply with the following
performance standards as applicable:
A. Resource Protection Permit Procedures
1. Review
a. Any activity, use or structure listed in Sec. 19-6-9, Resource Protection
Districts, in a Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland, Resource
Protection 2 Wetland Protection, Resource Protection 3 Floodplain, or
Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay District listed as
permitted with a Resource Protection Permit shall be permitted only if a
Resource Protection Permit is obtained in accordance with this section.
b. The Planning Board shall review the submitted application and
accompanying materials. The Planning Board may require additional
material that, considering the probable cost and effects of the proposed
alteration, it deems necessary for a full consideration of the proposal
and its effects, including more detailed plans.
c. The Planning Board in its review of an application may require a “peer
review” by a professional engineer, a botanist or other relevant expert.
The cost of all such reviews, including the cost of review by the Town
227
Engineer, shall be taken from the application’s Review Escrow
Account. If a Review Escrow Account has not been established
pursuant to the provisions of other ordinances governing an aspect of
the applicant’s proposed activity, the Planning Board shall be
authorized to require an applicant for a Resource Protection permit to
establish a Review Escrow Account under the terms of Sec. 16-2-1.c.
of the Subdivision Ordinance. Any funds not disbursed from the
Review Escrow Account shall be promptly returned to the applicant
upon final disposition of his or her application. (Effective November
14, 2015)
d. The Planning Board shall process the application in accordance with
the procedures established for site plan review in Sec. 19-9-4, Review
Procedures.
e. Prior to considering the application, the Planning Board shall refer it to
the Conservation Commission for its review and recommendation.
f. Within thirty-five (35) days following the public hearing if one is held
or sixty (60) days following the application being determined to be
complete if no hearing is held, or such longer period as may be
mutually agreeable to the Planning Board and the applicant, the
Planning Board shall render its decision to approve, to approve with
conditions or to disapprove in writing, specifying the reasons thereof.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, the applicant, or
any property owner entitled to notice of the public hearing, who is
aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board under this ordinance,
may appeal to the Superior Court as provided by the Maine Rules of
Civil Procedure.
g. For projects reviewed under the Subdivision Regulations or the Site
Plan Review Provisions, the Planning Board shall conduct a concurrent
review of any past or proposed wetlands alterations within the
subdivision, applying the procedures and standards of this Ordinance.
Alterations to be reviewed shall include proposed public improvements
and all anticipated wetlands alterations within any of the proposed
individual lots or common areas.
h. Permits shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issue. An
applicant may request an extension of the permit for an additional
period of up to one (1) year. The request must be submitted prior to the
expiration of the permit.
2. Submission Requirements
228
a. The owner of lands in a Resource Protection District shall apply for the
Resource Protection Permit by submitting to the Town Planner or the
Code Enforcement Officer fifteen (15) copies of the plans for the
proposed location or activity.
b. Upon receipt of all such materials and upon payment by the applicant
of fees established by the Town Council, the Town Planner shall
submit the proposal to the Planning Board; the Town Planner shall also
submit one (1) copy of all materials to the Chair of the Conservation
Commission for its consideration and any recommendations which it
deems advisable. The Conservation Commission may request that the
applicant attend a meeting of the Commission to discuss the
application.
c. Unless the Planning Board waives one or more of the following
requirements, applications for a Resource Protection Permit shall
include the information listed below. For Resource Protection Permit
applications in the Resource Protection 3 Floodplain District, the
submission requirements in Sec. 6-6-3 of the Floodplain Management
Ordinance shall be substituted for the list below, except that item 4.
below shall also be submitted. The application shall include:
1. a detailed site plan for the proposed activity including a map at a
scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet showing the
location, width, depth, and length of all existing and proposed
structures, roads, wells, sewage treatment facilities, drainage
facilities, and utility installations within three hundred (300) feet of
the mapped wetland;
2. a topographic map showing the location and slope for all grades
existing and as proposed upon the completion of the wetland
alteration. Wetland areas should be mapped at no greater than one
(1) foot contours, and non-wetland areas at no more than two (2)
foot contours;
3. a written description of the entire parcel of land owned by the
applicant and the location of the wetland on the parcel;
4. property locations and names of all abutting property owners;
5. a written description of the vegetative cover of the site including
dominant species, and a map indicating existing wetland
vegetation as defined herein and the Wetland Upland Edge as
defined by wetland vegetation. This map and accompanying
materials shall be prepared by a qualified botanist or wetland
specialist;
229
6. a written description of the site’s underlying soils and a high
intensity soils map with all mapping units being no greater than
one quarter (1/4) acre, indicating the boundaries of soil types, the
location of hydric soils as defined herein and the Wetland Upland
Edge as defined by hydric soils. This requirement shall apply
notwithstanding that fill material has been placed on the site, and
shall apply regardless of the depth to the underlying soils. Where
fill has been placed (prior to 5/9/90) on hydric soils and then
developed by construction of a principal structure on the filled
land, the area of filled wetland to a maximum distance of fifty (50)
feet from the principal building footprint shall be identified as
filled land. This map and accompanying materials shall be
prepared by a soil scientist certified by the State of Maine;
7. in cases where there are no hydric soils or wetland vegetation, a
map indicating the Wetland Upland Edge based on site-specific
hydrology;
8. the location and flow direction of all existing watercourses, ponds,
or standing water present for two (2) or more months each year;
9. a stormwater runoff plan prepared by a professional engineer
showing pre- and post-development runoff patterns for both
twenty-five (25) and one hundred (100) year storm events, a
contour map of the wetland’s watershed and proposed stormwater
management measures including sewers, drainage ditches,
conduits, catch basins, culverts and impoundment areas;
10. delineation of the building envelope within which the proposed
activities will occur;
11. the exact sites and specifications for all proposed draining, filling,
grading, dredging, and vegetation removal including the amount
and procedures;
12. the purpose of the project and an explanation of why the proposed
activity cannot be located at other sites, and if applicable, an
explanation of how the proposed activity is dependent on wetlands
or water-related resources;
13. any mitigation measures taken to offset wetland losses;
14. the Town Planner may require the submission of additional
information, such as study of flood erosion, other hazards at the
site, and the effect of any protective measures that might be taken
230
to reduce such hazards, and other information deemed necessary to
evaluate the proposed use in terms of the goals and standards of the
wetlands provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Resource Protection Permit Standards
The Planning Board shall grant a Resource Protection Permit for uses, structures and
activities within Resource Protection Districts if it makes a positive finding based upon
the information presented that the alteration as proposed, or with specified conditions of
approval:
1. will not materially obstruct the flow of surface or subsurface waters across
or from the alteration area;
2. will not impound surface waters or reduce the absorptive capacity of the
alteration area so as to cause or increase the flooding of adjacent properties;
3. will not increase the flow of surface waters across, or the discharge of
surface waters from, the alteration area so as to threaten injury to the
alteration area or to upstream and/or downstream lands by flooding,
draining, erosion, sedimentation or otherwise;
4. will not result in significant damage to spawning grounds or habitat for
aquatic life, birds or other wildlife;
5. will not pose problems related to the support of structures;
6. will not be detrimental to aquifer recharge or the quantity or quality of
groundwater;
7. will not disturb coastal dunes or contiguous back dune areas;
8. will maintain or improve ecological and aesthetic values;
9. will maintain an adequate buffer area between the wetland and adjacent
land uses;
10. will be accomplished in conformance with the erosion prevention
provisions of Environmental Quality Handbook Erosion and Sediment
Control, published by the Maine Soil and Water Conservation Commission
dated March, 1986, or subsequent revisions thereof;
11. will be accomplished without discharging wastewater from buildings or
from other construction into Wastewater Treatment Facilities in violation of
Section 15-1-4 of the Sewage Ordinance; and
231
12. will, in the case of Resource Protection Permits in the Resource Protection
Floodplain District, also comply with Section 6-6-6 of the Floodplain
Management Ordinance.
In evaluating the proposed activity, the Planning Board may consult with expert
persons or agencies.
C. Resource Protection Permit Conditions
The Planning Board may attach such conditions to the granting of a Resource Protection
Permit as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance. Such conditions
may include but shall not be limited to:
1. establishment of a buffer between Resource Protection 2 Wetland
Protection Districts and adjacent uses, structures and activities;
2. increases beyond two hundred fifty (250) feet in the required buffer for
Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland Districts;
3. limitation on the total portion of any lot or the portion of the wetland on the
lot that may be graded, filled, or otherwise modified. This limitation may
be linked to an overall protection policy for the particular wetland.
4. requirements that structures be elevated on piles or otherwise protected
against natural hazards;
5. modification of subsurface waste disposal systems and water supply
facilities;
6. imposition of operational controls and deed restrictions concerning future
use and subdivision of land such as flood warnings, preservation of
undeveloped areas in open space use, and limitation of vegetation removal;
7. dedication of easements to protect wetlands;
8. erosion control measures;
9. setbacks for structures, fill deposit of spoil and other activities from the
wetlands;
10. modifications in project design to ensure continued water supply to the
wetland and circulation of waters;
11. replanting of wetland vegetation.
232
The Planning Board may require that the applicant furnish to the Town, before the
issuance of a permit, a performance guarantee in accordance with Section 16-2-4c.7.A. of
the Subdivision Ordinance. The amount and the conditions shall be consistent with the
purposes of this Ordinance and shall secure the proper performance of the alteration
work. The amount shall be based upon the estimated cost of completing or correcting
any work necessary to satisfy the conditions of the permit and the criteria of this
Ordinance plus the estimated costs of preventing or correcting any damage to the subject
or other property which the Planning Board considers probable or of sufficient gravity to
justify the expected expense of such guarantee. Further, as an additional remedy, and not
in lieu of such performance guarantee, the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer
may pursue the remedies hereafter set forth in Sec. 19-8-3.D.
Further, the Code Enforcement Officer may suspend or revoke a permit if he/she finds
that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the
permit, or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the application.
D. Wetlands Restoration and Creation
1. The Planning Board, as a condition of a Resource Protection Permit or the
Code Enforcement Office, as a remedy for a violation of this Ordinance,
may require that the applicant, or violator, engage in the restoration or
creation of wetlands in order to offset, in whole or in part, the losses
resulting from an applicant’s or violator’s actions. In determining whether
such a requirement will be imposed, the Planning Board or the Code
Enforcement Officer shall consider factors including the following:
a. The type, size, and location of the wetland altered, and the effect it may
have upon the remaining system or watershed of which the wetland is a
part;
b. The reversible or irreversible nature of the wetland’s impairment or
loss;
c. The degree to which the applicant has demonstrated a good faith effort
to incorporate measures to minimize or avoid any negative impact upon
wetlands.
2. As part of this process, the applicant or violator may be required to develop
a wetlands restoration or creation plan for review and approval by the
Planning Board, with advice from the Conservation Commission. This plan
should contain the following elements: the location of the proposed
wetlands restoration or creation site; ownership, size, type, and complete
ecological assessment of the restored or new wetland area; topographic
survey date, including slope percentage and final grade elevations; plane
view and cross-sectional scaled drawing; and other technical information in
sufficient detail as required to explain, illustrate and provide for:
233
a. soils and substrate conditions
b. erosion and sediment control needed for the short and long-term
survival of the new or restored wetland area
c. planting plants specifying plant species types, quantities, locations,
size, and method(s) of planting
d. water quality and hydro cycle conditions necessary to ensure the longterm
viability of the restored or new wetland area
e. a three (3) year monitoring and replacement plan establishing
responsibility for the permanent establishment of the wetland system
f. a demonstration of fiscal capacity and technical competence to
successfully execute the overall project
3. The applicant or violator shall ordinarily be required to undertake
restoration or creation efforts on or adjacent to the site where permanent
losses have been sustained or where restoration of a former wetland is
possible. Replication of the impacted wetland will be the preferred
alternative for restoration or creation efforts. Where the applicant is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, with advice from the
Conservation Commission, that a wetland of a different type or location is
strongly justified, or that replication is not feasible due to technical
constraints, the Planning Board may approve an alternative proposal that
meets the intent of this Ordinance.
4. In evaluating the proposed wetland restoration or creation proposal and
implementation, the Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer may
consult with expert persons or agencies.
E. Additional Standards for Construction of Roads and Public Utilities
The Planning Board may permit the construction of public utilities and the reconstruction
of existing roads within Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland Districts or associated
buffers and the construction of public utilities and new roads or the reconstruction of
existing roads within Resource Protection 2 Wetland Protection Districts and Resource
Protection 3 Floodplain Districts, which may include associated construction activities
that are otherwise not permitted under Sec. 19-6-9, Resource Protection Districts. In
addition to meeting the Resource Protection Permit standards above, the proposed
construction or reconstruction shall meet one of the following standards:
234
1. The road or structure shall be sited within the designated Resource
Protection 1 Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay as far as possible from the
established Wetland Upland Edge; or, if siting within the actual wetland
area is unavoidable, as close to the Wetland Upland Edge as possible.
2. The road or structure shall be sited in such a way that the least amount of
wetland area is disturbed.
In determining whether subsection 1. or subsection 2. should be applied to a proposed
development, the Planning Board shall select the siting standard that will minimize the
negative ecological impact on the wetland area.
The placement of public utilities in the Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland District
shall also be subject to the following standards:
1. Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to
existing public ways and existing service corridors.
2. The installation of essential services is not permitted except to provide
services to a permitted use within the Resource Protection 1 Critical
Wetland District, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no
reasonable alternative exists. Where permitted, such structures and
facilities shall be located so as to minimize any adverse impacts on
surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
F. Timber Harvesting Standards
1. Notification and Plan
a. Notification
The owner of the land to be harvested shall give the Code Enforcement
Officer written notice at least five (5) working days prior to the start of any
timber harvesting activities.
b. Forest Management and Timber Harvesting Plan
Prior to timber harvesting that involves more than fifty (50) cords in any
five (5) year period, a Forest Management and Timber Harvesting Plan
prepared by a professional forester licensed in the State of Maine in
accordance with 36 M.R.S.A. § 573 (3-A) shall be submitted to the
Code Enforcement Officer. In addition to the minimum requirements,
the Forest Management and Timber Harvesting Plan shall include a map
of the area to be harvested drawn to scale with a tie-in to an accepted
town road, north arrow, property lines, name of the property owner, names
235
of the abutting property owners, and the location of the Wetland Upland
Edge as defined in this Ordinance based on the forester’s best assessment.
2. Wetland Buffer Overlay Surrounding Great Pond
a. Within the Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay
surrounding Great Pond, there shall be no timber harvesting within the strip
of land extending seventy-five (75) feet inland from the Wetland
Upland Edge surrounding Great Pond except to remove safety hazards.
b. At a distance of greater than seventy-five (75) feet from the Wetland
Upland Edge surrounding Great Pond, selective cutting of no more than
forty percent (40%) of the basal area on any lot within a ten (10) year
period shall be permitted in the Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland Buffer
Overlay. There shall be no clear-cut openings and a well distributed
stand of trees and other vegetation, including existing ground cover,
shall be maintained.
3. Other Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetlands
a. Within seventy-five (75) feet of any Wetland Upland Edge in the RP1 CW
District other than the Wetland Upland Edge surrounding Great Pond,
selective cutting of no more than forty percent (40%) of the basal area
on any lot within a ten (10) year period shall be permitted in the Resource
Protection 1 Critical Wetland Buffer Overlay. There shall be no clearcut
openings and a well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation,
including existing ground cover, shall be maintained.
b. At a distance of greater than seventy-five (75) feet from any Wetland
Upland Edge in the RP1 CW District other than the Wetland Upland Edge
surrounding Great Pond, selective cutting of no more than forty percent
(40%) of the basal area on any lot within a ten (10) year period shall be
permitted in the Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland Buffer
Overlay. In addition, clear-cut openings not to exceed ten thousand
(10,000) square feet in the forest canopy shall be permitted. Where clearcut
openings exceed five thousand (5,000) square feet, they shall be at
least one hundred (100) feet apart.
4. Resource Protection 2 – Wetland Protection District
Within the Resource Protection 2 Wetland Protection District, selective cutting
of no more than forty percent (40%) of the basal area on any lot within a ten
(10) year period shall be permitted. There shall be no clear-cut openings and a
well distributed stand of trees and other vegetation, including existing ground
cover, shall be maintained.
236
5. Additional Timber Harvesting Standards (Effective October 15, 2009)
a. Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall be conducted
such that slash or debris is not left below the upland edge of a wetland.
1. Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by equipment or to
stabilize exposed soil, may be left in place, provided that no part
thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
2. No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet of the wetland
upland edge.
3. Between 50 feet and 250 feet of the wetland upland edge, all slash
larger than 3 inches in diameter must be disposed of in such a manner
that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
4. Between 75 feet and 250 feet of the normal high water line of Great
Pond, all slash larger than 3 inches in diameter must be disposed of
in such a manner that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet above
the ground.
b. Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement applies to the
construction maintenance, and use of skid trails and yards in wetland areas.
1. Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities shall not use
river, stream or tributary stream channels as travel routes except
when surface waters are frozen and snow covered, and the activity
will not result in any ground disturbance.
2. Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to prevent
sediment and concentrated water runoff from entering a water body,
tributary stream, or wetland. Upon termination of their use, skid
trails and yards must be stabilized.
3. Setbacks.
(i) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of mineral soils
within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of any water body, tributary
stream, or wetland. On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the
setback for equipment operation must be increased by 20 feet,
horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal
distance, for each 5 percent increase in slope above 10 percent.
Where slopes fall away from the resource, no increase in the
25-foot setback is required.
237
(ii) Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate techniques
shall be used to avoid sedimentation of the wetland. Such
techniques may include the installation of sump holes or settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts
and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the
wetland.
c. Land Management Roads. Land management roads must be designed,
constructed, and maintained to prevent sediment and concentrated water
runoff from directly entering the wetland. Surface water on or adjacent
to water crossing approaches must be diverted through vegetative filter
strips to avoid sedimentation of the wetland. Because roadside ditches
may not extend to the resource being crossed, vegetative filter strips must
be established in accordance with the setback requirements in Subsection
c.3. above.
1. Land management roads and associated ditches, excavation, and
fill must be set back at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the
upland wetland edge;
2. The minimum 100-foot setback specified in Subsection c.3. above
may be reduced to no less than 50 feet and the 50-foot setback
specified in Subsection c.3. above may be reduced to no less than
25 feet, horizontal distance, if, prior to construction, the landowner
or the landowner’s designated agent obtains a variance from the
Zoning Board of Appeals, and includes in its variance application
evidence that no reasonable alternative exists, and that appropriate
techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include,
but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the
effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed
to avoid sedimentation of the wetland.
3. On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the land management road setback
must be increased by at least 20 feet plus an additional 10 feet for
each 5 percent increase in slope above 10 percent.
4. New land management roads are not allowed within the shoreland area
along Significant River Segments as identified in 38 M.R.S.A.
section 437, nor in a Resource Protection District, unless, prior to
construction, the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent makes
a clear demonstration to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no
reasonable alternative route exists outside the wetland, and that the
new road must be set back as far as practicable from the wetland
upland edge and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
238
5. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other water control
installations associated with roads must be maintained on a regular
basis to assure effective functioning. Drainage structures shall
deliver a dispersed flow of water into an unscarified filter strip no less
than the width indicated in the setback requirements above. Where
such a filter strip is impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used
to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
Such techniques may include the installation of sump holes or
settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts
and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the
wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of
shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
6. Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the water control
installations required above must continue until use of the road is
discontinued and the road is put to bed by effective installation of
water bars or other adequate road drainage structures at appropriate
intervals, constructed to avoid surface water flowing over or under
the water bar, and extending a sufficient distance beyond the
traveled way so that water does not reenter the road surface.
7. Upgrading existing roads. Extension or enlargement of presently
existing roads must conform to the provisions for land management
roads. Any nonconforming existing road may continue to exist
and to be maintained as long as the nonconforming conditions are not
made more nonconforming.
8. Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads need
not conform to the setback requirements above if, prior to
extension of enlargement, the landowner or the landowner’s
designated agent demonstrates to the Code Enforcement Officer’s
satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate
techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the wetland.
Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of
settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief
culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the wetland.
9. Additional measures. In addition to the foregoing minimum
requirements, persons undertaking construction and maintenance of
roads and river, stream and tributary stream crossings must take
reasonable measures to avoid sedimentation of the wetland.
d. Slope Table. Filter strips, skid trail setbacks, and land management road
setbacks must be maintained as specified above, but in no case shall be
less than shown in the following table.
239
Average slope of land between exposed width of strip between exposed
mineral soil and the shoreline (percent) mineral soil and shoreline
(feet along surface of the ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
(Effective October 15, 2009)
G. Agriculture Standards
1. New Agricultural Activities
a. There shall be no new agricultural activities in a Resource Protection 1
Critical Wetland District or within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, of the Wetland Upland Edge.
b. New agricultural activities shall be permitted within a Resource
Protection 1 Critical Wetland District’s buffer area at distances greater
than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the Wetland Upland
Edge.
2. All Agricultural Activities
Where soil is tilled in a Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland District,
such tillage shall be carried out in compliance with the provisions of a
Conservation Plan which meets the standards of the State Soil and Water
Conservation Commission, and is approved by the Cumberland County Soil
and Water Conservation District. The plan shall be filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer. Noncompliance with the provisions of such
Conservation Plan shall be considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
Agricultural activities that exist in a Resource Protection 1 Critical Wetland
District (including buffers) on or before the effective date of the wetlands
provisions of this ordinance are a permitted use.
H. Exempted Water Bodies
240
The general maintenance and use of stormwater detention basins approved by the
Planning Board as part of an approved site plan or subdivision, existing golf course water
holes, and municipal skating ponds shall be exempt from the requirements for Resource
Protection Permits.
A Resource Protection Permit shall not be required for ponds used primarily for
agriculture or fire protection purposes, such as but not limited to irrigation, on active
farms as of May 9, 1990. Ponds on inactive farmland or where the agricultural or fire
protection use of the pond has been discontinued as of May 9, 1990, shall not be exempt
under this provision.
General maintenance and use shall include trimming of vegetation, removal of snow and
debris, repair of culverts, retaining walls and other drainage infrastructure, landscaping
and similar activities as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer. Activities that
change the size of a pond are not exempted.
SEC. 19-8-4. RESERVED
SEC. 19-8-5. EARTH MATERIALS REMOVAL STANDARDS
All removal of earth materials, including rock, sand, gravel, topsoil, and similar materials
shall comply with the following performance standards as applicable:
A. Applicability
The removal of thirty (30) or more cubic yards of rock, sand, gravel, topsoil, and/or
similar earth materials from a lot or parcel within any twelve (12) month period shall
be permitted only after the issuance of an Earth Materials Permit, except removal in
conjunction with an exempted activity.
This requirement shall apply to both existing and proposed extraction activities. Any
use or operation of an extraction site shall be carried out in accordance with the
provisions of this section and with any terms and conditions set forth in the Earth
Materials Permit.
Removal of earth materials in conjunction with the following activities shall be
exempt from the requirement for an Earth Materials Permit:
1. Construction of approved public or private ways;
2. Construction for which a building permit has been issued;
3. Normal maintenance or landscaping of a residential property;
241
4. The normal conduct of a farming business including the movement of
topsoil between different parcels under the common control of the farm or
its individual owners.
B. Earth Materials Permit
The Planning Board shall review an application for an Earth Materials Permit and shall
issue a permit only if it finds that the operation of the removal activities will comply with
the standards of this section.
C. Permit Procedures (Amended, Effective February 14, 2002)
The owner of the lot or parcel on which the removal activities are proposed to occur shall
make a written application for a permit to the Planning Board in accordance with the
following procedures.
1. The Planning Board shall process an application for earth material removal
activities in accordance with the procedures established for site plan review
in Sec. 19-9-4, Review Procedures.
2. The Planning Board shall review the submitted application and
accompanying materials. The Planning Board may require additional
material that, considering the probable cost and effects of the proposed
activity, it deems necessary for a full consideration of the proposal and its
effects, including more detailed plans.
3. The Planning Board in its review of an application may require a “peer
review” by a professional engineer or other relevant expert. The cost of all
such review, including the cost of review by the Town Engineer, shall be
taken from the application’s Review Escrow Account. If a Review Escrow
Account has not been established pursuant to the provisions of other
ordinances governing an aspect of the applicant’s proposed activity, the
Planning Board shall be authorized to require an applicant for an earth
materials permit to establish a Review Escrow Account under the terms of
Sec. 16-2-1c. of the Subdivision Ordinance. Any funds not disbursed from
the Review Escrow Account shall be promptly returned to the applicant
upon final disposition of his or her application. (Effective November 14, 2015)
4. Within thirty-five (35) days following the public hearing, or such longer
period as may be mutually agreeable to the Planning Board and the
applicant, the Planning Board shall render its decision to approve, to
approve with conditions or to disapprove in writing, specifying the reasons
therefore. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Ordinance, the
242
applicant, or any property owner entitled to notice of the public hearing,
who is aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board under this ordinance,
may appeal to the Superior Court as provided by the Maine Rules of Civil
Procedure.
5. The Planning Board may require the applicant furnish to the Town, before
the issuance of a permit, a performance guarantee in accordance with
Section 16-2-6.c. of the Subdivision Ordinance. The amount and the
conditions shall be consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance and shall
secure the proper performance of the alteration work. The amount shall be
based upon the estimated cost of completing or correcting any work
necessary to satisfy the conditions of the permit and the criteria of this
Ordinance plus the estimated costs of preventing or correcting any damage
to the subject or other property which the Planning Board considers
probable or of sufficient gravity to justify the expected expense of such
guarantee. (Effective November14, 2015)
6. The Earth Materials Permit must be utilized through conducting activities
provided for in the permit on the permitted site within one (1) year from the
date of Planning Board approval. If work has not commenced on the site
within one year, the permit holder or their designee may request an
extension for up to one (1) year for cause shown. Once a permit is activated
through activity on the site, the permit shall remain in place without
expiration. The Code Enforcement officer shall suspend any permit for
failure to comply with conditions placed upon the Earth Materials Permit,
failure to post any necessary performance guarantees, noncompliance with
any other permitting process or to address any other issues of earth
materials removal effecting the public health, safety and welfare.
D. Standards
All extraction operations and sites within the Town shall be conducted and maintained in
accordance with, and the Planning Board shall impose, such conditions upon any permit
issued under this Section as the Planning Board deems necessary or desirable to assure
compliance with the following requirements:
1. No part of any extraction operation shall be permitted within one hundred
(100) feet of any property or street line, and natural vegetation shall be left
and maintained on the undisturbed land.
2. No standing water shall be permitted in any extraction site during or after
extraction operations, except that during active extraction operations
standing water may be permitted under strict conditions with respect to
fencing, safe levels of coliform bacteria count and treatment to prevent
breeding of insects so as to assure the public health and safety.
243
3. No slopes steeper than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical shall
be permitted at any extraction site during or after extraction operations,
except that during any period of active operations steeper slopes shall be
permitted as long as, in locations where the excavation will be more than
fifteen (15) feet in depth with a slope steeper than 2:1, a fence at least three
(3) feet high is erected to limit access to such locations.
4. Before commencing removal of any earth materials, the owner or operator
of the extraction site shall present evidence to the Planning Board of
adequate insurance against liability arising from the proposed extraction
operations, and such insurance shall be maintained throughout the period of
operation.
5. The hours of operation at any extraction site shall be limited as the Planning
Board deems advisable.
6. Loaded vehicles shall be suitably covered to prevent dust and contents from
spilling or blowing from the load. All trucking routes and methods shall be
subject to approval by the Chief of Police.
7. All access roads leading from the extraction site to public ways shall be
treated with stone, calcium or other suitable materials to reduce dust and
mud.
8. No equipment debris, junk or other materials shall be permitted at an
extraction site except those directly relating to active extraction operations,
and any temporary shelters or buildings erected for such operations and
equipment used in connection therewith shall be removed within thirty (30)
days following completion of active extraction operations.
9. For the removal of rock, sand, gravel, and similar earth materials, any
topsoil and subsoil suitable for purposes of re-vegetation shall, to the extent
required for restoration, be stripped from the location of extraction
operations and stockpiled for use in restoring the location after extraction
operations have ceased. Following the completion of extraction operations
at any extraction site or at any one or more locations within any extraction
site, ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the
approved plans filed with the Planning Board; all debris, stumps, boulders
and similar materials shall be removed and disposed of in an approved
location or, in the case of inorganic material, buried and covered with a
minimum of two (2) feet of soil. Retained topsoil and subsoil shall be respread
over the disturbed area with any additional loam required to create a
minimum seed bed depth of six (6) inches, and the soil shall then be limed,
fertilized and seeded with a grass or legume mixture which meets the
minimum standards of the Technical Guide adopted by the Cumberland County
Soil and Water Conservation District. The foregoing restoration measures
244
shall be completed within such period as may be determined by the
Planning Board, not exceeding eight (8) months following completion of
extraction operations. The planted area shall be protected from erosion
during the establishment period using good conservation practices.
10. The applicant’s proposal shall adequately control erosion and stormwater
runoff, and upon completion of active extraction operations, the land shall
be left so that natural storm drainage and water courses leave the location at
the original natural drainage points and in a manner such that the amount of
drainage at any point is not increased.
11. The applicant shall preserve any areas containing artifacts of possible
archaeological significance, and shall promptly notify the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission in writing of such artifacts.
12. In the case of topsoil removal, the applicant shall also assure that:
a. The proposed removal operation will stockpile the upper six (6) inches
of topsoil and redistribute the same to a depth of six (6) inches
throughout the site. This restoration shall be assured by high intensity
soils surveys, and sieve analysis before and after the removal operation.
b. Where the proposed topsoil removal operation will have a duration
greater than one (1) year, the applicant shall initially present to the
Planning Board annual phasing plans. No permit shall be granted for a
subsequent phase until the removal site for all prior phases has been
restored and re-vegetated in accordance with the conditions of the
original permit.
13. For operations involving blasting, the owner shall maintain records of the
blasting operation, provide for supervision of the blasting activity by a
person qualified, experienced and regularly engaged in such work, and
provide the Town with prior notice of the drilling and blasting activity as
required by the Planning Board.
SEC. 19-8-6. ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES
A. Archaeological Resources
The following provisions are intended to prevent the disturbance of sites with potential or
identified archaeological significance until their importance is documented.
1. Identified Sites
245
No activity which disturbs the ground such as trenching, grading, or
excavating shall be commenced and no municipal permit or approval shall
be issued within any of the following archaeological resource potential
areas until the Maine Historic Preservation Commission has been notified
of the nature of the proposed activity in writing by the owner of the
property, a copy of the notice is provided to the Code Enforcement Officer,
and a reconnaissance level archaeological survey is conducted, unless the
Maine Historic Preservation Commission notifies the owner in writing that
such a survey will not be needed. The survey requirement will be deemed
satisfied if the Maine Historic Preservation Commission has not carried out
a survey or responded to the owner in writing within six (6) months or if the
owner of the property has a reconnaissance level survey completed by a
competent professional and provides a copy of the survey to the Maine
Historic Preservation Commission and the Code Enforcement Officer.
The archaeological resource potential areas as identified in the
Comprehensive Plan are:
• Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of Alewife Brook
• Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of Great Pond
• Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the high water
line at Hannaford Cove
• Richmond Island including the breakwater
• Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the Spurwink River
downstream of the Route 77 bridge
• Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the upland edge of the
Spurwink Marsh
2. Other Areas
If an artifact is uncovered during ground-disturbing activities in other areas
not identified above as archaeological resource potential areas, the activities
shall be halted and not recommenced until the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission has been notified in writing of the find by the owner of the
property, a copy of the notice provided to the Code Enforcement Officer,
and a written response received from the Commission. If no response is
received within forty-five (45) days from the date notification was provided
to the Commission, the Code Enforcement Officer shall authorize
recommencement of the activity.
B. Historic Resources
The following provisions are intended to establish a waiting period prior to the
demolition of an historically significant building or structure to allow for alternatives to
be explored.
1. Identified Resources
246
No permit for the demolition, in whole or in part, of a historical building or
structure listed in Appendix C shall be issued until forty-five (45) days after
notice has been provided to the Town Manager, Code Enforcement Officer,
and Maine Historic Preservation Commission and has been published in a
newspaper of general circulation within Cape Elizabeth. Upon the completion of
the forty- five (45) day notice period, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue the demolition permit subject to the normal review and standards
unless:
a. the applicant has withdrawn the request, or
b. a court of law has issued an injunction barring the issuance of the permit.
The forty-five (45) day notice period shall not apply to the demolition of accessory
buildings or structures other than barns that are part of the “historic character” of the site,
the removal of additions that are not part of the “historic character” of the building, or the
demolition of the remains of a building resulting from a fire or destruction by a natural
disaster.
SEC. 19-8-7. GREAT POND WATERSHED PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, all land within the watershed of
Great Pond shall conform to the following standards. These standards shall apply to all
new construction activities, including paving and the modification of existing uses:
1. Within five hundred (500) feet of the high water mark of Great Pond, no more
than thirty percent (30%) of the total lot area may be stripped at any given
time. Within other areas of the watershed, no more than fifty percent (50%) of the
total lot area may be stripped of existing vegetation at any given time. The
balance of the lot cannot be stripped of existing vegetation until the Code
Enforcement Officer verifies in writing that the area previously stripped has
been permanently stabilized by use of sod, seed, landscape vegetation, or
similar ground covers or riprap.
2. Not more than thirty-five percent (35%) of the total area of a lot may be covered
by impervious surfaces, including buildings, structures, and paved or graveled
surfaces.
3. Any area of disturbed ground resulting from construction or similar activities
shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized by use of riprap, seed, mulch,
and other similar ground cover within one (1) week from the time it was last actively
worked.
4. Vegetated buffer strips at least twenty-five (25) feet wide shall be maintained
adjacent to waterways, drainage ditches, manmade ponds, and swales.
247
Waterways, ditches, pond edges, and swales must be re-vegetated prior to
September 15 of the year in which the new construction is conducted.
Owners are encouraged to maintain these buffer strips in a naturally vegetated
state.
5. Silt fencing and hay bale barriers per the Cumberland County Soil and Water
Conservation District Standards shall be used during all phases of
construction projects including single family homes to control erosion on the
site.
6. New construction projects that require Site Plan Review may be required, if
deemed necessary by the Planning Board with the guidance of the Town
Engineer, to construct nutrient loading control devices such as sedimentation
ponds, wet ponds, swales, flow slips, or similar devices in accordance with
Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds: A Technical Guide for Evaluating
New Developments.
In addition, best management practices as set forth in Stormwater Management for
Maine: Best Management Practices shall be used for all current and future agricultural
land within the watershed.
As part of the process for obtaining a building permit, the owner of a parcel within the
watershed shall complete a Watershed Information Form (WIF) which provides the
following details: 1. percentage of existing vegetation to be cleared; 2. percentage of
impervious surface to be created; 3. description of erosion control measures; and 4. the
development’s approximate distance from the Great Pond shoreline.
SEC. 19-8-8. HOME DAY CARE AND DAY CARE FACILITY STANDARDS
In addition to all other requirements of this ordinance, home day care and day care
facilities shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. Approval of Home Day Care
A home day care shall be allowed in any zoning district in which it is a permitted use
only if it has received a home day care permit in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
The owner of the property where the home day care will be located shall apply to the
Code Enforcement Officer for a permit using forms provided by the Town. Upon receipt
of a permit application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify, in writing, the
abutters of the subject parcel of the pending application. The notice shall advise the
abutters that the permit will be issued if the application conforms to the standards of Sec.
19-5-5, Conditional Use Permits, and that the abutter can provide written information as
to the conformance of the request with these standards within thirty (30) days of mailing
248
of the notice. If the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the application conforms to the
standards and no information to the contrary is received during the thirty (30) day period,
the permit shall be issued.
1. If the Code Enforcement Officer receives information that the application may
not conform to the standards, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
a. notify the applicant of the information
b. refer the application to the Zoning Board of Appeals for consideration; and
c. notify the parties providing the information of the referral.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the application for a home day care
permit in accordance with the procedures for hearing conditional use
applications as set forth in Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional Use Permits. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall direct the Code Enforcement Officer to issue
the permit if it finds that:
a. the application conforms to the requirements of Sec. 19-8-8.C,
Requirements for Home Day Care and Day Care Facilities, and
b. the application conforms to the conditional use standards of Sec. 19-5-5,
Conditional Use Permits.
Any home day care receiving a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer shall not be
subject to site plan review.
B. Approval of Day Care Facilities
A day care facility shall be allowed in any zoning district in which it is a conditional use
only if it has:
1. received a conditional use permit in accordance with Sec. 19-5-5, Conditional
Use Permits, and
2. received site plan approval in accordance with Article IX. Site Plan Review.
C. Requirements for Home Day Care and Day Care Facilities
All home day care and day care facilities shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The facility shall not operate before the hours of 7:00 a.m. or after the hours of
7:00 p.m.
249
2. A fenced outdoor play area shall be provided with a minimum of 75 square feet
per child.
3. No outside play shall be allowed before 9:00 a.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, or
holidays.
4. Adequate lighting shall be provided at the vehicle drop-off and pickup area.
250
SEC. 19-8-9. BOAT REPAIR FACILITY STANDARDS
In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, a commercial boat repair facility
shall comply with the following additional standards:
1. No more than four (4) persons shall be engaged on a continuous basis in boat
construction or repair;
2. Front, side and rear setbacks of one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be maintained
from any public roads or from any abutting properties;
3. The visibility of the facility shall be minimized from abutting properties and
from any public roads;
4. The facility shall not have a commercial appearance;
5. No outside storage of boats or materials shall be visible from the public road;
6. The hours of operation shall be limited to between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.;
7. No boat shall be built or repaired at such facility to be transported over public
roads which will endanger the safety of the public or require the moving of
utility lines.
SEC. 19-8-10. AGRICULTURAL STANDARDS
In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, an agricultural use or the keeping
of livestock shall comply with the following additional standards:
1. Commercial piggeries and abattoirs are prohibited in all districts;
2. A poultry house or range containing more than twenty-five (25) birds shall be
located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any property line;
3. A temporary sawmill shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any
property line.
251
SEC. 19-8-11. USE OF RECREATIONAL CAMPING VEHICLE OR OTHER
TEMPORARY RESIDENTIAL UNIT
The use of a travel trailer, motor home, or other recreational camping vehicle as a
temporary or permanent dwelling is prohibited in all districts. A travel trailer, motor
home, or other recreational camping vehicle may be used on an occasional basis for
temporary occupancy by its owner. For the purpose of this section, occasional basis shall
mean occupancy on not more than three (3) nights in any thirty (30) day period.
Unoccupied travel trailers, motor homes, or recreational camping vehicles may be parked
or stored on a lot in any district provided the lot is owned by the owner of the unit.
SEC. 19-8-12. TOWER AND ANTENNA PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
(Effective April 15, 2000)
In addition to the other requirements of this ordinance, all land within the Tower Overlay
District shall conform to the following standards. These standards shall apply to the
erection of a tower and the installation of an antenna on a tower or an alternative tower
structure in any structure.
1. Procedure
a. Applicability. The erection of: (i) a tower providing commercial wireless
telecommunication services or (ii) a tower in excess of 50’ in height
serving as an amateur or governmental wireless telecommunication facility
shall be permitted with Site Plan Approval from the Planning Board in
accordance with Sec. 19-9, Site Plan Review and the standards of Sec. 19-
8-12.2. below. The installation of a commercial wireless
telecommunication service antenna on a tower or an alternative tower
structure shall be permitted with issuance of a building permit by the Code
Enforcement Officer in accordance with Sec. 19-3-3, Building Permits
and the standards of Sec. 19-8-12.2. below. The installation of a second
amateur wireless telecommunication facility antenna or additional
governmental wireless telecommunication facility antennas shall be
permitted with issuance of a building permit by the code Enforcement
Officer in accordance with Sec. 19-3-3, Building Permits and the
standards of Sec. 19-8-12.2. below.
b. Submission Requirements. In addition to the Submission requirements of
Sec. 19-9, Site Plan Review, or Sec. 19-3-3, Building Permits, as
applicable, the applicant shall be required to submit all information
necessary to demonstrate compliance with the Performance Standards
in Sec. 19-8-2.2, below. The applicant shall also provide a map showing
existing telecommunication coverage and anticipated cover age with
the installation of the proposed telecommunications. (Effective November 5,
2016)
252
2. Performance Standards
Where the following standards shall be applied during Site Plan Review, the
“Town” shall be the Planning Board. Where the following standards shall
be applied for the installation of an antenna on a tower or an alternative tower
structure, the “Town” shall be the Code Enforcement Officer.
a. Co-location. The applicant, owner and all other tower users shall allow
other commercial wireless telecommunication service providers using
functionally compatible technology to co-locate antennas, equipment
and facilities on a tower and site, unless satisfactory evidence is presented
and the Town concurs that technical constraints prohibit co-location.
Commercial wireless telecommunication service providers shall
provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of co-located
antennas and infrastructure and shall provide for reasonable sharing of cost
in accordance with industry standards. To ensure co-location, the Town may
require co- location on a tower in order to prevent the need for
commercial wireless telecommunication service providers to build new
towers, may deny an application for a tower because of inadequate
provisions and/or arrangements for co-location and may require an
existing tower to be extended in height to the maximum height allowed in
that district (provided that a structural analysis indicates that such extension
is structurally feasible and safe and the tower height does not exceed the
maximum limit in Sec. 19-6-13, Tower Overlay District in order to
provide for co-location.
b. Color. Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural
treatment, except in instances where the color is dictated by the federal or
state authorities.
c. Buffers. Unless existing vegetation provides a buffer strip, a vegetated
buffer shall be provided along all property lines along roadways or visible
to existing abutting or nearby buildings (within a ¼ mile radius) to be
landscaped as follows:
1. with 6’-8’ evergreen shrubs planted in an alternate pattern, 5’ on center
and within 15’ of the site boundary;
2. with at least one row of deciduous trees, no less than 2 ½ - 3” caliper
measured 3’ above grade, and spaced not more than 20’ apart and
within 25’ of the site boundary;
253
3. with at least one row of evergreen trees at least 4’ – 5’ in height when
planted, and spaced not more than 15’ apart within 40’ of the site
boundary; and
4. in lieu of the foregoing, the Town may determine that the existing
vegetation must be supplemented to meet an equivalent buffering
standard or may accept alternative means of achieving the desired goal
of minimizing the visual impact. To assist in making that
determination, the Town may require the applicant to provide an
analysis by a qualified professional of the visual impact of the
tower base.
d. Lighting. Towers hall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other Federal or State authority, and shall not display strobe lights.
If lighting is required, the Town may review the available lighting
alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to
the surrounding properties and views. When incorporated into the approved
design of the tower, light fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking
lots, and similar areas may be attached to the tower.
e. Structural. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner shall
ensure that the construction of a new tower or any alteration of a tower,
including the addition of antennas or other attachment, is designed,
constructed, and maintained in conformance with applicable Federal,
State, and Local building, electrical and safety codes and designed and
installed in accordance with the current standards of the Electronic Industries
Association ( (EIA) Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers
and Antenna Supporting Structures.
f. Security. A security fence or wall not less than 8’ in height from the
finished grade shall be provided around the tower. Access to the tower
shall be through a locked gate. Amateur wireless telecommunication
facilities that are located adjacent to the owner’s primary residence shall not
be required to meet this standard.
g. Advertising. No advertising or signage is permitted on towers or antennas
providing commercial wireless telecommunications services.
h. Non-interference. The applicant and owner shall include either a
preliminary or a certified statement that the construction of the tower,
including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the
radio, television, or telecommunication service enjoyed by the
community. In the event only a preliminary statement is submitted with the
application, a final certified statement of non-interference shall be
provided by a professional engineer and approved by the Town prior to
254
issuance of a building permit. The statement shall be prepared by an
engineer licensed to practice in the State.
i. Abandonment. All abandoned or unused towers and associated facilities
shall be removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at the
site unless a time extension is approved by the Town. A copy of the relevant
portions of a signed lease which requires the applicant to remove the tower
and associated facilities upon cessation of operations at the site shall be
submitted at the time of application. In the event that a tower is not
removed within 12 months of the cessation of operations at a site, the tower
and associated facilities may be removed by the Town and the costs of
removal assessed against the property.
j. Performance Guarantee. No building permit may be issued until the applicant
has provided a performance guarantee to the town in accordance with Sec. 16-2-6
(c), Subdivision Ordinance. (Effective November 14, 2-15)
SEC. 19-8-13. WIND ENERGY SYSTEM PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
(Effective October 8, 2008)
Prior to the issuance of a Building Permit for a Wind Energy System, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine that the following standards have been met. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall require that such other information needed to determine
compliance with the standards below be included in the Building Permit application.
1. Number. No more than 1 wind energy system shall be permitted per lot and
shall only generate energy for use for a main building and/or accessory
buildings located on the same lot. This standard is not intended to prohibit the
transfer of excess energy to the grid.
2. Tower. A wind energy system shall be mounted on a monopole or guyed wire
tower. The setback for guy wires shall be equivalent to the setback for a
principal structure.
3. Blade Clearance. The minimum distance between the ground and any
protruding blades shall be 20 feet as measured at the lowest point of the arc of
the blades.
4. Access. The tower shall be designed and installed such that public access via
step bolts or a ladder is prevented for a minimum of 12 feet above the
ground.
5. Appendages. No appendages shall be attached to the wind energy system tower
that is not incidental to its primary use.
6. Signs. The wind energy system shall not display any permanent or temporary
signs, writing, symbols, logos, or any graphic representation, except that
255
warning signs and manufacturers signs no to exceed 1 sq. feet. per
manufacturer may be permitted.
7. Lighting. No wind energy system shall be lighted.
8. Wiring. Wiring shall be installed underground and shall be approved by the
Code Enforcement Officer for compliance with the electrical code.
9. Removal. Any wind energy system which is deemed unsafe by the Code
Enforcement Officer, is not working or is not used for a period of one year shall
be removed by the property owner.
10. Noise. Wind energy systems shall not exceed 55 dB(a) at the property line.
11. Color. The wind energy system shall have a non-reflective, neutral color
surface.
SEC. 19-8-14. SHORT TERM RENTAL STANDARDS
(Effective December 14, 2012)
A. Purpose
Cape Elizabeth residents prize the peace and quiet of their residential neighborhoods.
Some property owners have capitalized on the desirability of their neighborhood by
renting out their property, especially during the summer months and holidays.
Neighborhood residents are concerned that short term rentals take on the character of a
business operating in a residential neighborhood. The purpose of this section is to
balance the desire of property owners to rent their properties to short term tenants and the
desire of residents to preserve the peaceful quiet and enjoyment of their residential
neighborhoods.
B. Applicability
A Short Term Rental is permitted only after the issuance of a Short Term Rental permit.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, a permit is not required for a Short Term Rental
which, with any prior Short Term Rental of the property, does not exceed in the
aggregate fourteen (14) days in any calendar year. For the purpose of determining
whether a permit is required, each rental of the property shall be deemed for a period of
not less than seven (7) days regardless if the actual number of days the property is
occupied is less than seven (7) days. Further, not more than one Short Term Rental
agreement shall be entered for any given property for any consecutive seven-day period.
C. Review Procedure
1. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue a Short Term
Rental permit.
256
2. The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide a Short Term Rental application to
be completed by the applicant and submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer accompanied by the Short Term Rental permit fee as established by the
Town Council. The form shall include a non-exclusive checklist of code
requirements that the property owner shall demonstrate compliance with.
3. The code Enforcement Officer shall determine if the form has been properly
completed before any permit is issued.
4. The first time that a Short Term Rental permit is submitted for a property, no
permit shall be issued until the Code Enforcement Officer has inspected the
proposed Short Term Rental property for compliance with the Short Term
Rental Standards and compliance with building code requirements.
Thereafter, renewal of a Short Term Rental permit shall require inspection by
the Code enforcement Officer of the Short Term Rental property no less than
once every five years. When the Code Enforcement Officer does not conduct
an annual inspection, the Short Term Rental owner shall certify that there
have been no material changes since the last inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer. Any third party inspection information submitted
with the completed form shall have been conducted within the twelve months
prior to the permit being issued.
5. The Code Enforcement Officer shall review the permit application for
compliance with the Short Term Rental Standards.
6. If the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the proposed Short Term
Rental application complies with the Short Term Rental Standards, a Short Term
Rental permit shall be issued. A permit shall be valid for one (1) year from date
of issuance. The permit may be subject to suspension by the Code
Enforcement Officer if the Short Term Rental property becomes noncompliant
with the Short Term Rental Standards, and may be revoked as provided
in 19-8-14.(F).
D. Submission Requirements
The Short Term Rental permit application shall include the following information:
1. Location. The street address and map/lot number of the Short Term Rental
property. If the property is not located on a public road, the form shall include
directions to the property from a public road.
2. Contact Person/Owner Responsibility. The name of the owner of the Short
Term Rental property and contact information, including address and telephone
number. In addition, if someone other than the owner is acting as the local
contact person, contact information for that person shall also be provided.
257
If there will be different contact persons for different time periods during the
year, the form shall include the applicable contact person for each time
period. Regardless of who enters the Short Term Rental agreement, or who
may be designated as the owner’s contact person, the property owner shall be
responsible for compliance with the Short Term Rental Ordinance
provisions.
3. Availability. The registration form shall include when, during the calendar year,
the Short Term Rental will be available for rental. If this changes, the owner
shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer.
4. All information needed to demonstrate compliance with the standards listed in
Subsection E below.
E. Standards
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a Short Term Rental permit upon the applicant
satisfying the above requirements if the following standards are met:
1. Code compliance. An applicant’s property, without limitation, comply with the
following building code sections of the International Residential Code (“IRC”)
and the International Building Code (“IBC”):
a. IRC Section R 314, Smoke Alarms;
b. IRC Section R 315, Carbon Monoxide Alarms;
c. IBC Section 906, Portable Fire Extinguishers. The building shall be
considered to be an R-1 Occupancy (Boarding House) for the purpose of
determining the type and location of portable fire extinguishers;
d. IBC Section 1006.2. 1006.3 and 1006.4. Means of Egress Illumination.
The applicant shall provide floor plans of the dwelling unit that shows the
location of the alarms, fire extinguisher(s) and emergency lighting.
2. Building evacuation plan. A building evacuation plan shall be prominently
posted in the Short Term Rental property during the rental period.
3. Sanitary waste disposal. The applicant shall submit information demonstrating
that adequate sanitary waste disposal is available in compliance with the
Town of Cape Elizabeth Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Ordinance, as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, or that the property is served by
public sewer.
The information shall include the total number of bedrooms included in the property,
any additional sleeping space, and the total number of tenants that the property
accommodates. The total number of tenants used to determine adequacy of sanitary
waste disposal shall not be less than the total number of tenants that the property is
258
advertised to accommodate. For the purpose of evaluating the adequacy of a
subsurface disposal system, every two tenants shall be equivalent to one bedroom.
4. Parking. The applicant shall include a depiction of how parking will be
provided on the same lot, and/or include a written agreement for off-site parking
at a specified location, to comply with the Off-Street Parking Standards, Sec.
19-7-8. Garage parking spaces not allowed for tenant use shall not be used
to meet the Short Term Rental parking requirement. No bus shall be parked at
the Short Term Rental property during any rental period.
5. Rental Agreement Addendum. The Short Term Rental permit application shall
be submitted with an addendum to be attached to Short Term Rental
agreement between owner and tenant that shall be provided to all tenants.
The Town shall not be responsible for enforcement of the rental agreement of
addendum. The rental agreement addendum shall include the following:
a. Contact person;
b. Emergency responder contact information;
c. Building evacuation plan;
d. Maximum number of tenants and guests;
e. Parking arrangements, including a prohibition of tenants and guests parking
in a manner that impedes access by emergency vehicles to the property
or any other dwelling in the neighborhood;
f. Maximum number of tenants and guests allowed at the property;
g. Good neighbor guidelines;
h. Copy of the Miscellaneous Offenses Ordinance.
6. Limit on rental intensity. If a Short Term Rental property is operated on a lot of
30,000 sq. ft. or less in size and property owner is not either living on an
abutting lot or in a separate dwelling in the same lot, the Short Term Rental
permit shall not allow more than two tenants per bedroom, shall not allow
use of non-bedroom areas for sleeping, and shall not allow occupancy by more
than eight tenants at any time. The number of short term Rental guests shall
be limited to eight at any time. On site parking shall be limited to four parking
spaces.
F. SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT
In addition to the provisions of Sec. 19-3-6. Violations, a permit for a Short Term Rental
may be suspended or revoked if the Code Enforcement Officer determines that one or
more substantiated complaints regarding Short Term Rentals of a property have been
made in a three-year period.
1. Complaint. Any individual or town official may file and/or initiate a complaint
against a Short Term Rental permit holder. If the Police Department or the
259
Code Enforcement Officer receives a complaint, they shall visit the
property. The Police Department shall generate a report of the facts its
officers have observed upon a visit, and statements made to them regarding
the Short Term Rental. The Police Department shall then forward the report
to the Code Enforcement Officer.
When the Code Enforcement Officer receives a report from the Police
Department, or the Code Enforcement Officer has responded to a complaint or
independently investigated, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the
property and shall collect information related to the complaint, including
notifying the property owner and requesting information regarding the
complaint. Within five days of receiving a Police Report or complaint, the
code Enforcement Officer shall determine if the complaint is substantiated.
A complaint is substantiated when the Code Enforcement Officer concludes
that one or more violations of the Short Term Rental provisions occurred.
2. First Substantiated Complaint. Once the Code Enforcement Officer has made a
finding of a substantiated complaint, the Code Enforcement Officer shall notify
the property owner in writing. The notification shall require the property owner
to meet with the Code Enforcement Officer within five (5) business days from
the date of the written notification, or such other time as is agreed upon by the
Code Enforcement Officer, to identify ways in which the violation(s) will be
corrected. The owner will agree to take all necessary measures to correct the
violation(s), which measures shall be memorialized in a written agreement at the
conclusion of the meeting and shall be fully implemented within one (1) week of
said meeting unless another date is agreed to by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Failure of the property owner to enter into such an agreement at the conclusion
of the meeting will be deemed a second violation of the Short Term Rental
provisions. In addition, the Code Enforcement Officer may suspend the short
Term Rental permit for a term not to exceed thirty days.
3. Second Substantiated Complaint. Once the Code Enforcement Office has made
a finding of two (2) substantiated complaints, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall notify the property owner in writing that the Short Term Rental permit
shall be suspended for a period of not less than thirty days, nor more than
one hundred twenty days.
The notification shall require the property owner to meet with the Code
Enforcement Officer within five (5) business days from the date of the written
notification, or such other time as is agreed upon by the Code Enforcement
Officer, to identify ways in which the violation(s) will be corrected. The
owner will agree to take all necessary measures to correct the violation(s),
which measures shall be memorialized in a written agreement at the
conclusion of the meeting and shall be fully implemented within one (1) week
of said meeting unless another date is agreed to by the Code Enforcement
Officer. Failure of the property owner to enter into such an agreement at the
260
conclusion of the meeting will be deemed a violation of the Short Term Rental
provisions.
4. Third Substantiated Complaint. Once the Code Enforcement Officer has made a
finding of three substantiated complaints, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
notify the property owner in writing that the Short Term Rental permit has
been revoked for one calendar year.
5. Appeal. An appeal to the zoning Board of Appeals as an Administrative Appeal
may be taken by any person aggrieved by a determination of the code
Enforcement Officer pursuant to Section 19-5-2.(A).
6. Effective Date. The Short Term Rental provisions of the ordinance shall be
fully effective as to all contracts for short Term Rentals executed on or after 30
days from date of enactment, and shall further apply to all contracts in effect on
such date to the extent the application of these provisions would not result in a
substantial impairment of such existing contracts.
SEC. 19-8-15. SPECIAL EVENT FACILITY STANDARDS
(Effective December 4, 2015)
This section establishes review standards for the development and operation of a special
event facility. These provisions are necessary to reduce impact on surrounding properties
and to protect town residents and event guests and staff. A special event facility shall
conform to the following standards.
1. Procedure
a. Applicability. Special event facilities, as defined in this ordinance, are
subject to Site Plan Review, Sec. 19-9, and the Special Event Facility
Standards of subsection 2., below.
b. Review. A special event facility shall be reviewed in accordance with the
Site Plan review procedures, Sec. 19-9-4.B, except that Site Plan
approval shall be valid for three (3) years from the date of the Planning
Board vote and expire if the applicant does not apply for a new approval
prior to the expiration date.
c. Submission requirements. In addition to the Submission requirements of
Sec. 19-9, Site Plan Review, the applicant shall be required to submit
all information that the Planning Board deems necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the Performance Standards in Sec. 19-8-15.2., below.
Information to be submitted shall include, but not limited to:
i. The maximum number of events to be held in a calendar year;
261
ii. The maximum number of attendees to be allowed at an event;
iii. Whether the special event facility will be operated seasonally, in
which case the beginning and end dates of the season, or if the
facility will operate year-round;
iv. The area(s) designated for temporary structures or features
including but not limited to tents, sanitary waste facilities,
performance stands and food preparation and service;
v. A description of the types of events that will be held at the special
event facility;
vi. For previously approved special event facilities seeking a renewal
approval, a record of the events that have been held, including
the date, duration and number of attendees, and any complaints
that have been received by the applicant or on file with the Police
Department.
2. Performance Standards
A special event facility must comply with the Site Plan Approval Standards,
Sec. 19-9-5, and the standards below.
1. Event scope. All events shall not exceed the following maximum limits and
may be further limited when needed to reconcile site constraints with Site
Plan Review standards.
i. A special event shall not exceed 275 attendees in size, including guests
and staff supporting the event.
ii. No more than 12 events shall be held in a calendar year.
iii. No amplification of music for the event shall commence earlier than
9:00 a.m. nor extend later than 10:00 p.m.
iv. No event shall exceed eight (8) hours in duration, excluding set-up and
break-down, in a calendar day.
2. Seasonal facilities. The Planning Board may find that temporary structures
and facilities are adequate to comply with the Site Plan standards when
the special event facility will only operate seasonally and the seasonal
needs are met. In particular, methods of providing parking and sanitary
waste disposal on a seasonal basis may be appropriate for the duration of
the special event season.
262
3. Building Code Compliance. Where any portion of a special event facility is
located within a structure, the structure shall be in compliance with
applicable building codes.
4. Additional requirements. The Planning Board may apply reasonable
restrictions on the operation of a special event facility related to the lot on
which the special event facility is located or to mitigate the impact of
the special event facility on the abutting neighborhood(s).
ARTICLE IX. SITE PLAN REVIEW
SEC. 19-9-1. PURPOSE
The site plan review provisions set forth in this section are intended to protect the public
health and safety, promote the general welfare of the community, preserve the
environment, and minimize improvements that must be paid for by the Town’s taxpayers
by assuring that nonresidential, multiplex residential, eldercare, and similar facilities are
designed and developed in a manner which assures that adequate provisions are made for:
traffic safety and access; emergency access; water supply; sewage disposal; management
of storm water, erosion, and sedimentation; protection of the groundwater; protection of
the environment; minimizing the adverse impact on adjacent properties; and fitting the
project harmoniously into the fabric of the community.
SEC. 19-9-2. APPLICABILITY
A. Activities Requiring Site Plan Review
The owner of a parcel of land shall obtain site plan approval prior to undertaking any
alteration or improvement of the site including grubbing or grading, obtaining a building
or plumbing permit for the activities, or commencing any of the following activities on
the parcel:
1. The construction of any nonresidential building or building addition.
2. Any nonresidential expansion or change in use except that changes of use within
the Town Center District shall be governed by the provisions of Sec. 19-6-4.E,
Site Plan Review and uses within the business A District shall be governed
by the provisions of Sec. 19-6-5.F. Site Plan Review. (Effective June 10, 2010)
3. Multiplex housing and eldercare facilities.
4. Any other activity or use requiring Planning Board review in the Zoning
Ordinance.
263
5. New construction involving more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
impervious surface, paving, clearing, or vegetative alteration, or any
combination thereof. (The Planning Board shall review the proposal for control
of storm water runoff under the terms of Chapter 25 Storm Water
Ordinance.) (Effective November 5, 2016)
B. Activities Not Requiring Site Plan Review
The following activities shall not require site plan approval (certain of these activities
may, however, require the owner to obtain a building permit, plumbing permit, or other
State and local approvals):
1. The construction, alteration or enlargement of a single family or two-family
dwelling unit, including accessory buildings and structures, except as
required in the Town Center Core Subdistrict. (Effective June 10, 2010)
2. The placement of manufactured housing or mobile home on individual lots.
3. Agricultural buildings as follows: (Effective June 10, 2010)
a. Any temporary agricultural building, where temporary shall mean that the
structure remains in place no more than 3 months in any 12-month
period.
b. If sales shall be conducted from the building, the structure must be a
temporary structure and sales shall not be conducted from the building for
more than 3 months in any 12-month period.
c. Any barn, greenhouse, or storage shed with a building footprint that does
not exceed 2,000 sq. ft. in size.
d. Any structure that shall provide housing, other than a single family home,
shall require Site Plan Review under Sec. 19-2-2.(A).(4), above.
e. Any structure which does not comply with subparagraphs a., b., and c.
above shall require Site Plan Review.
4. Temporary structures such as construction trailers or equipment storage sheds.
SEC. 19-9-3. REVIEW AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY
The Planning Board is authorized to review and act on all site plans for development
requiring site plan review as defined above. In each instance where the Planning Board is
required to review the site plan for a proposed use, it shall approve, deny, or conditionally
approve the application based on its compliance with the standards in Sec. 19-9-5,
264
Approval Standards, which action shall be binding upon the applicant. Where a proposed
use is subject to approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals, such approval shall be
obtained before the Planning Board considers the site plan for the proposed use.
SEC. 19-9-4. REVIEW PROCEDURES
The Planning Board shall use the following procedures in reviewing applications for site
plan review.
A. Workshop
Prior to submitting a formal application, the applicant shall schedule a pre-application
workshop with the Planning Board. The pre-application workshop shall be informal and
informational in nature. There shall be no fee for a pre-application review, and such
review shall not cause the plan to be a pending application. No decision on the substance
of the plan shall be made at the pre-application workshop. The applicant is encouraged to
meet informally with the Town Planner prior to the workshop.
1. Purpose
The purposes of the pre-application workshop are to:
a. Allow the Planning Board to understand the nature of the proposed use and
the issues involved in the proposal
b. Allow the applicant to understand the development review process and
required submissions
c. Identify issues that need to be addressed in future submissions.
2. Information Required
There are no formal submission requirements for a pre-application workshop.
However, the applicant should be prepared to discuss the following with the
Planning Board:
a. The proposed site, including its location, size, and general characteristics
b. The natural characteristics of the site that may limit its use and development
c. The nature of the proposed use and potential development, including a
conceptual site plan
265
d. Any issues or questions about existing municipal regulations and their
applicability to the project
e. Any requests for waivers from the submission requirements.
3. Planning Board Workshop
The Planning Board workshop shall be informational and shall not result in any
formal action. The Planning Board shall identify and issues or constraints which
need to be addressed in the formal site plan application.
B. Application Review Procedures
1. Completeness. After an application has been submitted with the requisite fees,
including establishment of a Review Escrow Account under the terms of
Sec. 16-2-1(c.) of the Subdivision Ordinance, and after any required Zoning
Board of Appeals approval has been obtained, the Town Planner shall accept and
date an application for Planning Board review. In consultation with the
Planning Board Chair or Vice Chair, the Town Planner shall review the site
plan application and accompanying materials to determine whether the
application is complete or incomplete. If, in consultation with the Planning
Board Chair or vice Chair, the application is preliminarily determined to be
incomplete, the Town Planner shall notify the applicant in writing and shall list
in the written determination the materials that must be submitted in order to
make the application complete. If the applicant fails to submit a complete
application within four (4) months of the written determination of
incompleteness, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. When the Town
Planner makes the preliminary determination that an application is complete,
the application shall be scheduled for consideration at the next available
Planning Board meeting. The Planning Board may require other information
in addition to that required in Sec. 19-9-4.C, Submission Requirements. The
Planning Board may also request an evaluation of specific aspects of the site
plan from the Conservation Committee, the Town Engineer, or others. In the
event that the Planning Board requires additional information or evaluation, it
may deem the application incomplete.
No action taken by the Town Planner, either alone or in consultation with the
Planning Board chair or vice Chair, with respect to reviewing a site plan
application, shall result in an application being deemed pending for the
purposes of 1 M.R.S.A. §302. The Town Planner, either alone or in consultation
with the Planning Board Chair or Vice Chair, shall have no authority to review
the substance of a site plan application to determine whether it complies with
the site plan review criteria. (Effective November 5, 2016)
266
2. Public Hearing. Upon certification by the Planning Board that an application is
complete, the Planning Board, at its discretion, may hold a public hearing.
If the Planning Board determines to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing
within thirty-five (35) days of the date that the application is deemed
complete and shall provide public notice in accordance with Sec. 16-2-1.(b).
of the Subdivision Ordinance. (Effective November 5, 2016)
The Planning Board shall conduct the hearing to assure full, but not repetitive,
public participation. The applicant shall be prepared to respond fully to
questions from the Planning Board or issues raised by the public that the
Planning Board deems significant. The Planning Board may, upon its own
motion, extend the hearing once for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days
and to a date that shall be announced. (Effective November 5, 2016)
3. Planning Board Decision. The Planning Board shall vote to approve, approve
with conditions, or disapprove the Site Plan upon the conclusion of review
of the development’s compliance with Sec. 19-9-5, Approval Standards. The
Planning Board decision shall include written findings of fact and shall be
provided to the applicant within seven (7) days of the Planning Board vote.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
4. Performance Guarantee/Post Approval. The Planning Board, at its discretion,
may require that a performance guarantee be established with the Town for
the cost of site improvements. Each performance guarantee shall comply with
Sec. 16-2-6.(c). of the Subdivision Ordinance. An inspection fee shall be
paid in accordance with Sec. 16-2-6.(d). When a project includes a
performance guarantee, the applicant shall schedule a pre-construction meeting
in accordance with Sec. 16-2-7.(a). of the Subdivision Ordinance. Upon
completion of construction, record drawings shall be submitted to the Town
in accordance with Sec. 16-2-7.(f). if any infrastructure has been installed in the
public right-of-way or easement conveyed to the Town. (Effective November 5, 2016)
5. Approval Expiration. Site plan approval shall be valid for a period of one (1)
year from the date of the Planning Board vote. Prior to the expiration of the
site plan approval, the applicant may request an extension of up to one year
from the Planning Board for cause shown. Site plan approval shall remain valid
if a building permit has been issued for the project prior to the expiration date.
Expiration of the building permit prior to completion of the project shall
render the site plan approval null and void. Failure to comply with conditions
placed upon site plan approval, to post any necessary performance guarantees,
to comply with any other permitting processes or to address any other issues
of site development, except pending litigation challenging the site plan approval,
shall render the approval null and void unless an extension is granted by the
Planning Board for good cause. (Effective November 5, 2016)
C. Submission Requirements
267
1. General Submission parameters.
The applicant shall submit thirteen (13) copies of building and site plans and
supporting information drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals fifty
feet (1”=50’). The size of plan sheets submitted to the Planning Board shall be
no larger than twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, but a smaller size may
be used with the permission of the Planning Board. A digital copy of the
complete application shall also be made available upon request. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
2. List of Submission items.
The application for approval of a Site Plan shall include all the following
information, unless waived by the Planning Board as described below.
Information that must be shown on a plan is in bold type. Submission
information shall be shown on the number of plans needed to depict the
information in a readable format and each plan shall be individually labeled with
a title generally based on the information depicted on the plan, with one plan
titled “Site Plan” (Effective November 5, 2016)
a. Right, Title or Interest. Evidence of right, title, and interest in the site of the
proposed project. (Effective November 5, 2016)
b. Written description. Written description of the proposed project including
proposed uses quantified by square footage, number of seats, number of
units or beds or number of students, and how development has been
placed on the portions of the site most suited for development; application
form; identification of the zoning district in which the property is located
and the location of any zoning district boundary that bisects or abuts the
property. (Effective November 5, 2016)
c. Name of Project/Applicant. Proposed name of the project; name and
address of record owner and applicant, names of adjoining property owners;
date of submission; north point; graphic map scale. (Effective November 5,
2016)
d. Survey. A standard boundary survey of the site, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a licensed
land surveyor in the State of Maine; a copy of the deed for the property
to be developed, as well as copies of any easements, restrictions or
covenants; location map, showing the relative location of the proposed
project in relation to surrounding neighborhoods or areas of Town.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
e. Existing Conditions. All significant existing physical features on the site
including streams, watercourses, watershed areas, existing woodlands
and existing trees at least eight (8) inches in diameter as measured four and
268
one- half (4 ½) feet above grade, and other significant vegetation; soil
boundaries and names in wetland locations and where subsurface wastewater
disposal systems are proposed; when applicable, any portion of the property
located in the floodplain, within two hundred and fifty (250) feet of the
Normal High Water Line, or in a Resource Protection 1, Resource
Protection 1 Buffer or Resource Protection 2 District. (Effective November 5,
2016)
f. Topography. Contour lines, existing and proposed, at intervals of two (2)
feet or at such intervals as the Planning Board may require, based on
United States Geological Survey datum, referenced to mean sea level.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
g. Buildings. Location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures
with the distance from the nearest property lines labeled; size in square
feet of existing and proposed building footprints and total size of building;
elevations of each vertical side of a new building with dimensions,
location of doors and windows, exterior materials and roof pitch labeled;
elevations of each side of an existing building proposed to be altered with
dimensions, location of doors and windows, exterior materials and roof
pitch labeled; floor plans; building footprints located on adjacent
properties within fifty (50) feet of the project property line. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
h. Traffic Access and Parking. Location and width of the nearest public road,
and if the project will have access to a private road or driveway, the
location and width of the private road or driveway; location of existing and
proposed driveways, parking areas and other circulation improvements; site
distances for all access points onto public roads; location of parking,
loading and unloading areas, which shall include dimensions, traffic
patterns, access aisles, parking space dimensions and curb radii;
calculation of parking required in conformance with Sec. 19-7-8, Off
Street Parking; existing and proposed pedestrian facilities including the
location, dimension and surface treatment of sidewalks and paths, and
description of high-demand pedestrian destinations within ¼ mile of
the development; improvements shall include design details, cross
sections and dimensions as needed. Estimated number of trips to be
generated based on the latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual of the
Institute of Traffic Engineers or equivalent quality information; For
developments which generate one hundred (100) or more peak hour trips
based on the latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual of the
Institute of Traffic Engineers, a traffic study shall be submitted measuring
current traffic, estimating traffic generated by the new development and
assessing impacts on adjacent roadways and nearby intersections. Where
the development may have a substantial traffic impact, the traffic study shall
also include recommended mitigation; information on proposed, funded
269
road improvements and town evaluation of road improvements.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
i. Storm water. Calculation of existing and proposed impervious surface; a
storm water management plan, with flow arrows, profiles, cross
sections, and invert elevations prepared, showing existing and design of
all facilities and conveyances, LID (Low Impact Development) methods,
and identification and location of known existing deficiencies that
result in storm water surcharge or flooding; location of proposed drainage
easements; narrative description of how storm water will be
managed; description of any Low Impact Development (LID) methods
incorporated into the plan; note on plan for maintenance of private storm
water infrastructure; storm water maintenance plan that lists
infrastructure that needs to be maintained, inspection frequency and
maintenance requirements. Where the property is located within the
great Pond Watershed, a description of how the Great Pond
Watershed Overlay District provisions will be met. (Effective November 5, 2016)
When the project increases impervious surface by an area of ten thousand
(10,000) sq. ft. or more, the storm water management plan must be
prepared, signed and stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the
State of Maine, pre- and post development calculations for the 2 and 25
year storm must be provided, and time of concentration path segments
shown. (Effective November 5, 2016)
When a project increases impervious surface by one (1) acre or more,
information shall be submitted as described in Sec. 25-1-4.(b). Storm Water
Ordinance. (Effective November 5, 2016)
270
(Effective November 5, 2016)
j. Erosion Control. An erosion control plan including details of erosion
control methods used; written erosion control plan with notes. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
k. Utilities.
i. Water. Ability to serve letter from the Portland Water District; location
and size of any existing and proposed water mains on the property, as
well as details showing proposed connections to water systems;
where public water is no to be provided, and alternative means of a
clean and adequate water supply shall be shown, with supporting
written documentation; nearest hydrant. (Effective November 5, 2016)
ii. Sewage Disposal. When the project will be served by public sewage,
and ability to serve letter from the Town of Cape Elizabeth Sewer
Superintendent; all existing and proposed public or shared sewage
facilities and connections to the public sewage system; when not
served by public sewer, evidence to demonstrate suitability of soils for
271
subsurface wastewater disposal; the location of the subsurface
wastewater system; all designs, specifications and details for a
clustered, private or public sewage system. (Effective November 5,
2016)
iii. Other utilities. Ability to serve letter from Central Maine Power;
location of existing and proposed above and below ground electrical
lines, other utility conduits and location of gas storage tanks and
fuel lines. (Effective November 5, 2016)
iv. Solid/Other Waste Disposal. Description of how solid waste will be
stored and removed from the site; location and details of solid
waste and recycling storage containers and screening; identification
of chemicals, chemical wastes, hazardous, special or radioactive
materials to be handled and/or stored onsite. (Effective November 5,
2016)
l. Landscaping. Location and description of existing vegetation to be
preserved; methods of preserving vegetation to be used during construction/
landscaping and buffering plan showing what will be planted, indicating
botanical and common names of plants and trees, fencing location,
type, material and size. (Effective November 5, 2016)
m. Lighting. Location and type of lighting to be installed; lighting fixture
details indicating type of standards wattage and mounting height; a
photometric study showing the footcandle lighting level at the property line
when new lights shall be installed. (Effective November 5, 2016)
n. Signs. Location, dimensions, materials, and details of signs. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
o. Noise. Statement of the typical activities, structures and equipment
proposed on the site that will generate exterior noise, and then identify the
unique activities, structures and equipment that are not generally
occurring on abutting or neighborhood properties; for the unique noises,
provide the decibel (dBA) level at the property line (decibel level source
information may e provided from equipment specifications, standard noise
tables or other sources); characterize the unique noise as recurring,
intermittent, or constant; the time of day the unique noise will occur.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
p. Exterior storage. Location of outside storage or display areas; screening.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
q. Financial and Technical Capability. Demonstration of technical and
financial capability to complete the project. If the applicant concludes that
public disclosure of confidential financial information may be
272
detrimental to the success of the project, the applicant may disclose such
financial information to the Town Manager, who shall explore with due
diligence, the applicant’s financial capability to complete the project as
proposed in a timely fashion and make a recommendation to the
Planning Board. (Effective November 5, 2016)
3. Waiver of Submission items.
Where the Planning Board finds that the submission of any information listed in
Sec. 10-4.C. Submission Requirements, is not required in the interest of
public health, safety, and general welfare, the Planning Board may waive such
requirements. Without limitation, the following circumstances may support
a waiver of certain submission requirements. (Effective November 5, 2016)
a. Existing conditions. When no change to existing site conditions for that
submission item is proposed, the Planning Board may designate a
submission item as not applicable. (Effective November 5, 2016)
b. Substitution. Alternative information has been submitted more suited to the
scope of the project. (Effective November 5, 2016)
c. Small project. The limited nature of the project allows the Planning Board
to apply the Approval Standards and safeguard public health, safety and
general welfare without submission of additional information. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
SEC. 19-9-5. APPROVAL STANDARDS
The following criteria shall be used by the Planning Board in reviewing applications for
site plan review and shall serve as minimum requirements for approval of the application.
The application shall be approved unless the Planning Board determines that the
applicant has failed to meet one or more of these standards. In each instance, the burden
of proof shall be on the applicant to produce evidence sufficient to warrant a finding that
all applicable criteria have been met.
1. Utilization of the Site
The plan for the development will reflect the natural capabilities of the site to
support development. Buildings, lots, and support facilities will be clustered in those
portions of the site that have the most suitable conditions for development.
Environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, steep slopes, flood plains, and
unique natural features will also be maintained and preserved to the maximum extent
feasible. Natural drainage areas will also be preserved to the maximum extent
feasible.
2. Traffic Access and Parking
273
a. Adequacy of Road System
Vehicular access to the site will be on roads which have adequate capacity to
accommodate the additional traffic generated by the development. For
developments which generate one hundred (100) or more peak hour trips
based on the latest edition of the Trip Generation Manual of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, intersections on major access routes to the
site within one (1) mile of any entrance road which are functioning at a Level
of Service C or better prior to the development will function at a minimum at
Level of Service C after development. If any such intersection is
functioning at a Level of Service D or lower prior to the development, the
project will not reduce the current level of service. A development not meeting
this requirement may be approved if the applicant demonstrates that:
i. Public improvement. A public agency has committed funds to construct the
improvements necessary to bring the level of access to this standard.
ii. Private improvement. The applicant will assume financial responsibility for
the improvements necessary to bring the level of service to this standard
and will assure the completion of the improvements with a financial
guarantee acceptable to the municipality, or
iii. Status quo. Town policy does not support the construction improvements.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
b. Access into the Site
Vehicular access to and from the development shall be safe and convenient.
i. Safety. All entrance and exit driveways are located to afford maximum
safety to traffic, provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress to
and from the site and to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
ii. Sight distance. Any exit driveway or driveway lane is so designated in
profile and grading and so located as to provide the maximum possible sight
distance measured in each direction. The sight distance available shall be
consistent with the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
iii. Corner. Where a site occupies a corner of two (2) intersecting roads, no
driveway entrance or exit is located within fifty (50) feet of the point of
tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius of that site. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
iv. Side property line. No part of any driveway shall be located within a
minimum of ten (10) feet of a side property line. However, the Planning
274
Board may permit a driveway serving two (2) or more adjacent sites to
be located on or within ten (10) feet of a side property line dividing the
adjacent sites. (Effective November 5, 2016)
v. Angle. Driveways intersect the road at an angle as near ninety degrees
(90°) as site conditions will permit. (Effective November 5, 2016)
vi. Construction. Road, driveway, and parking lot construction comply with
the construction and design standards in Sec. 16-3-2 of the Subdivision
Ordinance. (Effective November 5, 2016)
c. Internal Vehicular Circulation
The layout of the site shall provide for the safe movement of passenger, service,
and emergency vehicles through the site.
i. Deliveries. Nonresidential projects that will be served by delivery vehicles
will provide a clear route for such vehicles with appropriate geometric
design to allow turning and backing for a minimum of vehicles.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
ii. Emergency vehicles. Clear routes of access shall be provided and
maintained for emergency vehicles to and around buildings and shall be
posted with appropriate signage (fire lane – no parking). (Effective
November 5, 2016)
iii. Circulation. The layout and design of parking areas shall provide for safe
and convenient circulation of vehicles throughout the lot. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
iv. Topography. All roadways shall be designed to harmonize with the
topographic and natural features of the site. The road network shall provide
for vehicular, pedestrian, and cyclist safety, all season emergency access,
snow storage, and delivery and collection services. (Effective November 5,
2016)
d. Parking Layout and Design
Off-street parking shall conform to Sec. 19-7-8, Off Street Parking and the
following standards:
i. Street. Parking areas with more than two (2) parking spaces shall be
arranged so that vehicles do not need to back into the street. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
ii. Property lines. All parking spaces, access drives, and impervious surfaces
shall be located at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line,
275
except where standards for buffer yards require a greater distance. No
parking spaces or asphalt type surface shall be located within five (5) feet
of the front property line. Parking lots on adjoining lots may be
connected by accessways not exceeding twenty-four (24) feet in width.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
iii. Flow. In lots utilizing diagonal parking, the direction of proper traffic flow
shall be indicated by signs, pavement markings or other permanent
indication. (Effective November 5, 2016)
iv. Stacked spaces. Parking areas for nonresidential uses shall be designed to
permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking space
provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor
vehicles. “Stacked” parking may be permitted for resident parking in
conjunction with residential uses if both spaces in the stack are assigned to
the occupants of the same dwelling unit. (Effective November 5, 2016)
v. Bumpers. The “overhang” of parked vehicles shall be restricted when it
might restrict traffic flow on adjacent through roads, restrict pedestrian
or bicycle movement on adjacent walkways, or damage landscape
materials. (Effective November 5, 2016)
3. Pedestrian Circulation
The site plan shall provide for a system of pedestrian ways within the development
appropriate to the type and scale of development. This system shall connect the
major building entrances/exits with parking areas and with existing or planned
sidewalks in the vicinity of the project. The pedestrian network may be located
either in the street right-of-way or outside of the right-of-way in open space or
recreation areas. The system shall be designed to link the project with residential,
recreational and commercial facilities, schools, bus stops, and sidewalks in the
neighborhood.
4. Storm Water Management
Storm water is managed on and off-site without damage to streets, adjacent
properties, downstream properties, soils and vegetation. To the extent practical, the
plan will retain storm water on the site using the natural features of the site, except
that in the Town Center District, storm water management shall be consistent with
the Town Center Storm Water Management Plan, updated September 2015 or most
recent revision. A Low Impact Development (LID) method is incorporated into the
storm water management plan. The plan includes a note requiring a postconstruction
maintenance plan for private storm water infrastructure and a
maintenance plan has been submitted.
When the project increases impervious surface by ten thousand (10,000) sq. ft. in
area but less than 1 acre (43,560), the storm water management plan has been
prepared, signed and stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
276
Maine. Post-development peak flows do not substantially exceed pre-development
flows for the 2 and 25-year storm. LID measures have been used to treat a calculated
volume (referred to as Calculated Treatment Volume, (or CTV) such that it is not
less than one-half (1/2) inches multiplied by the net proposed new impervious
surface area. The CTV may be achieved by treating one-half (1/2) inches multiplied
by the new onsite impervious surface areas, or an equal existing on-site untreated
impervious surface area, or of an equivalent combination thereof of previously or
proposed untreated area. When the project increases impervious surface by one (1)
acre or more, storm water shall be reviewed for compliance with Sec. 25-1-4.c.
Storm Water Ordinance. (Effective November 5, 2016)
5. Erosion Control
All building, site, and roadway designs and layouts will harmonize with existing
topography and conserve desirable natural surroundings to the fullest extent possible.
Filling, excavation and earth moving activity will be kept to a minimum. Parking
lots on sloped sites will be terraced to avoid undue cut and fill, and/or the need for
retaining walls. Natural vegetation will be preserved and protected wherever
possible.
During construction, soil erosion and sedimentation of watercourses and water
bodies will be minimized by an active program meeting the requirements of the
Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices (BMP’s) as
prepared by the Bureau of Land and Water Quality of the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection, March 2003 or most recent edition. (Effective November 5,
2016)
6. Utilities
a. Water Supply. The development will be provided with a system of water supply
that is adequate in quantity and quality to the proposed use. An adequate supply
of water for fire protection purposes is provided. Connection to a public water
supply for drinking water and fire protection is encouraged. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
b. Sewage Disposal. The development will be provided with a method of
disposing of sewage which is in compliance with Chapter 15, Sewer Ordinance.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
i. Public Sewage System. All sanitary sewage from new or expanded uses s
hall be discharged into a public sewage collection and treatment system
when such facilities are currently available or can reasonably be made
available at the lot line and have adequate capacity to handle the
projected waste generation. (Effective November 5, 2016)
ii. Private Sewage System. If the public system cannot serve or be extended to
serve a new or expanded use, the sewage shall be disposed of by an on-site
277
sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the State
Wastewater Disposal Rules and Chapter 15, Article II, Private Sewage
Disposal Ordinance. (Effective November 5, 2016)
iii. Common ownership. When two or more lots or buildings in different
ownership share the use of a common subsurface disposal system, the
system shall be owned and maintained in common by an owners’
association and shall conform to the provision of Chapter 15, Article III,
Management of Cluster Disposal Systems. Covenants in the deeds for
each lot shall require mandatory membership in the association and
provide for adequate funding of the association to assure proper
maintenance of the system. (Effective November 5, 2016)
c. Other utilities. The development will be provided with electrical service
adequate to meet the anticipated use of the project. New utility lines and
facilities shall be screened from view to the extent feasible. If the service in the
street or on adjoining lots is underground, the new service shall be placed
underground. Except for propane tanks, no flammable or explosive liquids
or solids shall be stored in bulk above ground unless they are located at least
seventy-five (75) feet from any lot line, or forty (40) feet in the case of
underground storage. Propane tanks less than 500 gallons in size shall be
set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the property line and tanks of 500
gallons or more in size shall be set back twenty-five (25) feet from the property
line. All materials shall be stored in a manner and location that is in
compliance with appropriate rules and regulations of the Maine Department of
Public Safety and other appropriate federal, state, and local regulations.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
d. Solid Waste. The proposed development will provide for adequate storage and
disposal of solid wastes. (Effective November 5, 2016)
i. Screening. Any solid waste stored on the property prior to removal to an
authorized facility shall be secured and screened from public view.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
ii. Liquid/semi-solid wasted. All storage facilities for fuel, chemicals,
chemical or industrial wastes, and biodegradable raw materials, shall meet
the standards of the State Department of Environmental Protection and
the State Fire Marshall’s Office. (Effective November 5, 2016)
iii. Hazardous Materials. The handling, storage, and use of all materials
identified by the standards of a federal or state agency as hazardous, special
or radioactive shall be done in accordance with the standards of these
agencies. Any waste produced which is classified as a hazardous,
special or radioactive waste by either federal or state standards shall be
disposed of at a licensed disposal facility appropriate for the type of
278
waste and done in accordance with applicable state and federal
regulations. (Effective November 5, 2016)
7. Shoreland Relationship
The development will not adversely affect the water quality or shoreline of any
adjacent water body. The development plan will provide for access to abutting
navigable water bodies for the use of the occupants of the development if
appropriate.
The development will not adversely affect the water quality or shoreline of any
adjacent water body. The development plan will provide for access to abutting
navigable water bodies for the use of the occupants of the development if
appropriate. (Effective November 5, 2016)
8. Landscaping and Buffering
a. Preservation. The landscape will be preserved in its natural state insofar as
practical by minimizing tree removal, disturbance and compaction of soil, and
by retaining existing vegetation insofar as practical during construction.
Extensive grading and filling will be avoided as far as possible. Areas of
vegetation to be retained shall be designated on a preservation plan. Within
the drip line of trees to be preserved, activity and disturbance shall be
prohibited and a physical barrier shall be provided to separate these areas from the
construction area. (Effective November 5, 2016)
b. Landscaping Plan. The development plan will provide for landscaping that
defines street edges, mitigates the expanse of parking areas, enhances the
appearance of the development and reduces the impact of the development on
abutting properties. Landscaping materials shall be chosen for their ability
to thrive at the planting site, provide screening, create visual interest and
promote diversity of the community forest. (Effective November 5, 2016)
c. Screening. The development shall provide for screening of service and storage
areas. (Effective November 5, 2016)
9. Exterior Lighting
1. Safety. The proposed development shall provide for adequate exterior lighting
to provide for the safe use of the development in nighttime hours, if such
use is contemplated, without excessive illumination. Lighting may be used
which serves security, safety and operational needs but which does not
directly or indirectly produce deleterious effects on abutting properties or
which would impair the vision of a vehicle operator on adjacent roadways.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
279
2. Maximum level. Direct or indirect illumination shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles
at the lot line. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or hooded so that the
lighting elements are not exposed to normal view by motorists, pedestrians,
or from adjacent dwellings and so that they do not unnecessarily light the night
sky. All exterior lighting, except security lighting, shall be turned off
between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m. unless located on the site of a commercial or
industrial use which is open for business during that period. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
10. Signs
Signs shall meet the standards of the Sign Ordinance. Sign materials and lighting
shall be of high quality and compatible with the character of the development.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
11. Noise
The maximum permissible A-weighted decibel level of a continuous, regular or
frequent or intermittent source of sound produced by unique activities, structures or
equipment on the site shall be limited by the time period and by the abutting land use
as listed below. Sound levels shall apply at least four (4) feet above ground at the
property boundary of the source. Existing background sounds are excluded from the
decibel measurement and noise generated by construction of the site is exempt.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
Sound Pressure Level Limits Using the A-weighted decibel level (dBA)
Abutting Use 7 a.m. - 10 p.m. –
10 p.m. 7 a.m.
Residential 55 45
Residential located in a commercial-
Industrial district 65 55
Public, semipublic and institutional 60 55
Vacant or rural 60 55
Commercial 65 55
Industrial 70 60
(Effective November 5, 2016)
12. Storage of Materials
a. Outside Storage. Exposed nonresidential storage areas, exposed machinery, and
areas used for the storage or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts,
metals or other articles of salvage or refuse shall have sufficient setbacks
and screening (such as a stockade fence or a dense evergreen hedge) to
minimize their impact on abutting residential uses and users of public streets.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
280
b. Receptacles. All dumpsters or similar large collection receptacles for trash or
other wastes shall be located on level surfaces which are paved or graveled.
Dumpsters or receptacles shall be screened by fencing or landscaping.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
c. Secure from minors. All sites potentially hazardous to children shall require
physical screening sufficient to deter small children from entering the
premises. This screening shall be maintained in good conditions. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
13. Technical and Financial Capacity
The applicant has demonstrated the financial and technical capacity to carry out the
project in a timely fashion in accordance with this ordinance and the approved plan.
(Effective November 5, 2016)
SEC. 19-9-6. AMENDMENTS
Any alteration to a site which is inconsistent with the approved site plan shall require an
amendment to the site plan. Planning Board approval must be obtained prior to the
alteration.
A. De minimus Change
The intent of this section is to process minor deviations from the approved plan that
typically arises as a project moves from conception to completion of construction. De
minimus changes shall not include (1) a change to a public or private right-of-way or
easement, (2) a decrease in proposed buffering or landscaping, (3) any issue involving a
condition placed on the site plan approval, or (4) any change in a building footprint
greater than five (5) feet in any direction. Side plan changes which do not receive de
minimus approval shall be submitted to the Planning Board under Sec.19-9-6.B. (Effective
November 5, 2016)
1. Review. The applicant shall meet with the Town Planner and provide a written
description of the proposed amendments and all applicable plans impacted
by the amendments. The Town Planner shall review the submission with the
applicant and consult with appropriate town staff. The Town Planner will
make a preliminary determination that the proposed changes do comply with
the approval standards, do not comply with the approval standards, or that the
nature of the amendments merit review by the Planning Board. (Effective November
5, 2016)
2. Decision. The Town Planner shall forward the De Minimus Change application
and a recommendation to the Planning Board Chair. Notwithstanding Sec.
19-9- 4.B.1., the Planning Board Chair shall make the final determination to
281
approve a de minimus change or to forward the site plan amendment to the
Planning Board for review. (Effective November 5, 2016)
B. Amendment
Any change to a plan approved by the Planning Board must be submitted to the Planning
Board for review and approval; unless the amendment is a de Minimus Change. The
Planning Board shall review the amendments in accordance with the Review Procedures,
Sec. 19-9-4. Submission requirements may be limited to the information related to the
proposed amendments. Any Planning Board Decision to approve amendments to a
previously approved Site Plan shall incorporate the original Site Plan Approval, except as
specifically amended. (Effective November 5, 2016)
SEC. 19-9-7. APEALS OF PLANNING BOARD ACTIONS
Appeal of an action taken by the Planning Board regarding site plan review shall be to the
Superior Court in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
ARTICLE X. AMENDMENT/INTERPRETIVE PROVISIONS
SEC. 19-10-1. CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another
provision of the Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, administered by
the Town the more restrictive and specific provision shall control. (Effective October 15,
2009)
SEC. 19-10-2. SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
SEC. 19-10-3. AMENDMENTS
This ordinance may be amended and its regulations, boundaries, and district
classifications changed by the Town Council, provided that the following criteria are met:
A. Procedure
282
1. Amendments to the text or the zoning map shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan, and shall be consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance
as stated in Sec. 19-1-2, Purpose.
2. Amendments may be initiated by the Planning Board, the Town Council, any
landowner, persons having a written agreement to purchase the property, or
by a petition by registered voters of the Town in accordance with Article VIII.
Sec. 2. of the Town Charter.
3. All requests for amendment to the text of the Zoning Ordinance, or for changes
in district boundary lines, or other proposals to change the zoning map,
initiated by other than the Planning Board or the Town Council shall be
accompanied by a zone change fee.
4. The Town Council shall initially review all requests for zoning amendments. If
the Council determines that the request is legally faulty, that it conflicts
with State law, or that it is clearly contradictory to established Town policy,
the Council may deny the request without further action. Otherwise, the
Council shall initiate the formal review process.
5. Prior to the consideration of any proposed amendment or change by the Town
Council, it shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its
recommendations. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed amendment. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Town at least seven (7) days prior
to the date of the hearing. The Town Council shall not consider any
amendment or change until it has received the Planning Board’s recommendation
or not less than sixty (60) days has elapsed since the Council referred the item
to the Planning Board.
6. Changes in zoning boundaries shall be depicted on the Zoning Map within thirty
(30) days after the amendment has been approved by the Town Council. In
addition, changes made to the Shoreland Overlay District map boundaries shall
be made within thirty (30) days after the amendment has been approved by
the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. (Effective
October 15, 2009)
B. Change of Zone
All proposals for a change of zone shall include:
1. a map showing existing and proposed district boundaries
2. the exact location of the request
3. the name and address of the property owner and applicant
283
4. a statement describing fully the existing and proposed land uses
5. the existing and proposed zone classifications
6. a site plan drawn in compliance with the provisions of Sec. 19-9-4.C, Site Plan
Review Submission Requirements
7. material establishing the developer’s financial and technical capability to
complete the proposed development
The Planning Board shall review all proposed site plans accompanying zone change
proposals in accordance with Article IX. Site Plan Review and, after a public hearing,
shall make its recommendations to the Town Council regarding the land use implications
of the proposal. To recommend the zone change, the Planning Board must find that the
proposal will be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and have no adverse
effect on the value of adjacent properties. If the site plan and change of zone are
approved by the Town Council, development shall occur in conformity with the approved
site plan. No change or alteration in the approved site plan shall be made without
amending the plan in accordance with Sec. 19-9-6, Amendments. If an applicant fails to
begin substantial construction in accordance with the approved site plan within one (1)
year from the effective date of the rezoning, the Planning Board may recommend
rezoning to the original zoning classification by the Town Council.
No request for change of zone shall be considered within one year from the date of Town
Council denial of a similar request.
C. Amendments involving Resource Protection of Shoreland Performance Overlay
Districts
In the case of amendments to Section 19-4-4. Nonconformance within the Shoreland
Performance Overlay District, Section 19-6-9, Resource Protection Districts; Section 19-
6-11, Shoreland Performance Overlay Districts; Sec. 19-8-2, Shoreland Performance
Standards; or Sec. 19-8-3, Resource Protection Performance Standards that fall within the
regulations of the Mandatory Shoreland zoning Act, 38 M.R.S.A. Section 435 et. seq., the
change shall become effective and/or shall be depicted on the Zoning Map only after
approval by the Commissioner of the Department of environmental Protection. A
certified copy of the amendment, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be
forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act to approve
or disapprove the amendment within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the amendment,
then the amendment shall be automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted within the forty-five (45) day period shall be governed by the ordinance
amendment, if the amendment is approved by the Commissioner. (Effective October 15,
2009).
End of Ordinance. Note: The ordinance also contains several appendices relating to soil types, road
classifications, historic properties and a map demonstrating setbacks.
ZONING ORDINANCE
APPENDIX B
ARTERIAL
STREETS
COLLECTOR
STREETS
RURAL CONNECTOR
STREETS FEEDER STREETS LOCAL STREETS
Route 77 Mitchell Road Charles E. Jordan Road Broad Cove Road All other public roads
Scott Dyer Road Fowler Road
(south of Bowery Beach Road) Cottage Farms Road
Shore Road Old Ocean House Road Eastman Road
Sawyer Road Fessenden Rd.
Spurwink Avenue
Fowler Road
(Ocean House Road to Bowery
Beach Road)
Two Lights Road
(Wheeler Road to Beacon Lane) Hill Way
Wells Road Oakhurst Road
Preble Street
Woodland Road
APPENDIX C
Historic Resources
Map/Lot Structure Street Address
R03-59 N. Dyer (Superintendent's House) Two Lights State Park
R03-59 World War II Bunker Two Lights State Park
R03-59 World War II Observation Tower Two Lights State Park
R06-8 Spurwink Meeting House 533 Spurwink Avenue
U11-17 Town Hall 320 Ocean House Road
U21-12 Thomas Memorial Library 6 Scott Dyer Road
U21-12 Middle School Scott Dyer Road
U21-2 Community Center 343 Ocean House Road
U48-1 Goddard Mansion Fort Williams
U48-1 Field Officers Quarters Fort Williams
U48-1 Bachelor Officers Quarters Fort Williams
U48-1 Militia Storehouse Fort Williams
U48-1 Gun Shed Fort Williams
U48-1 Portland Head Light Fort Williams
The following buildings and structures are identified as historic resources and
are subject to the provisions of Sec. 19-8-6, Archaeological and Historic
Resources


1
2
3
4
5
6
Special Event Facility Overlay District
Zoning Map Amendment
in the area of Old Proprietor Rd, Winters Ln, and Lower River
Rd
(Lots R8-1-1, R8-1-2, R8-1-3, R8-1-4)
1
7


CHAPTER 20
COMMUNICATIONS
[Adopted Eff. 1/26/77 Under R.S.1964, T. 30, Sec. 2151
and Subsequent Amendments Through 1/12/94]]
CATV Ordinance
Sec. 20-1-1. Purpose 20-1
Sec, 20-1-2. Definitions 20-1
Sec, 20-1-3. Franchise Required 20-2
Sec. 20-1-4. Franchise Contract Procedures 20-2
Sec. 20-1-5. Franchise Contract Terms 20-3
Sec. 20-1-6. Performance Bond and Insurance Coverage 20-3
Sec. 20-1-7. Rules, Regulations and Procedures 20-3
Sec. 20-1--8. Construction; Separability 20-5
Article I
Sec. 20-1-1. Purposes. The purposes of this ordinance are to provide for
Town regulation and use of community antenna television systems, including their
construction, operation and maintenance in, along, upon, across, above, over and under
the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated, and all
extensions thereof and additions thereto in the Town of Cape Elizabeth, including poles,
wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the Town of Cape Elizabeth of community antenna
television systems; and to provide conditions accompanying the grant of franchises for
the construction, installation, maintenance and operation of community antenna
television systems.
Sec. 20-1-2. Definitions.
(a) "Community Antenna Television System", referred to in this Ordinance
as "CATV System", shall mean any facility that, in whole or in part, receives directly or
indirectly, over the air or otherwise, and amplifies or otherwise modifies signals
transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television or radio stations, or originates
its own signal or signals or broadcasts or re-broadcasts signals originating from any other
party, and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public
who pay for such services, but such term shall not include any such facility that serves
only the residents or apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or
management.
2
(b) "Cable Television Company" means any person, firm or corporation
owning, controlling, operating, managing or leasing a CATV System within the Town of
Cape Elizabeth, sometimes hereafter referred to as "the Company".
Sec. 20-1-3. Franchise Required. No person, firm, company, or corporation
shall construct, install, maintain or operate within the Town any equipment or facilities
for the operation of a CATV System unless a franchise authorizing the use of public
streets or other properties or areas has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of
this Ordinance and unless said franchise is in full force and effect.
Sec. 20-1-4. Franchise Contract Procedures
(a) The Municipal Officers of the Town of Cape Elizabeth may grant
exclusive or non-exclusive contracts, on such terms, conditions and fees as are in the best
interests of the Town of Cape Elizabeth and its residents, to one or more Cable Television
companies for the operation of CATV Systems throughout the Town, or any part or parts
thereof, granting a franchise or franchises for the installation, construction, maintenance
and operation thereof for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) years.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation desiring a franchise for the construction,
installation, maintenance and operation of a CATV System within the Town of Cape
Elizabeth shall make application therefor only in response to a Request for Applications
issued by the Town. Any such Request for Applications shall be in a form approved by
the Municipal Officers, shall be published, in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town, once in each of the three weeks next preceding the week in which applications
are to be received, and shall be posted at two conspicuous places within the Town. The
rules and conditions set forth by the Town in its Request for Applications shall govern all
bidding procedures. The Town may in its Request for Applications reserve the right to
waive any formalities in bidding procedure and to accept any particular bid, or to reject
any or all such bids, if it is deemed in the best interests of the Town to do so.
(c) Each applicant for a franchise shall pay a non-refundable filing fee to the
Town of Twenty-five Dollars ($25.00) to defray the costs of public notice, advertising
and the expenses of hearings relating to such application. All applications shall be filed
with the Town Clerk in such form, and containing such information, as the Municipal
Officers may require, including without limitation a general description of the applicant's
proposed operation, a statement of all television and radio signals to be provided, a
statement describing special services to be provided, a statement of its policy governing
extensions of service, a schedule of proposed subscriber rates, installation and hook-up
charges, and other charges, a statement detailing its business and corporate organization
including a list of all stockholders, owners or partners thereof and any affiliates or
subsidiaries thereof, a financial statement for the two previous fiscal years, an estimated
financial projection for its proposed CATV System for the term applied for, a statement
of the proposed annual Town franchise fee and the basis therefor, a statement detailing
the prior operational experience of the applicant in CATV services including that of its
3
officers, management and staff to be associated with the proposed operation, a list of all
existing franchises held by the applicant, and such other information as the Municipal
Officers deem reasonably necessary for its determinations.
(d) Upon receipt of all applications pursuant to its Request for Applications,
the Municipal Officers shall, with respect to each applicant, review the character and
competence of the proposed management, their financial and technical qualifications, the
adequacy and feasibility of their proposals to construct, maintain and operate a CATV
System within the Town, and the reasonableness of the fees to be paid by each applicant.
The Municipal Officers shall conduct a public hearing before the issuance of any
franchise contract, at which each applicant may make such brief presentation as it desires
and shall remain available for questioning by the public and the Municipal Officers;
notice of special public hearing shall be posted in two conspicuous places within the
Town and published in a newspaper having general circulation within the Town not less
than seven days prior to the hearing.
Sec. 20-1-5 Franchise Contract Terms.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions included in a franchise contract by
the Municipal Officers, all fees, rates, deposits or charges to subscribers including
without limitation monthly subscriber rates and installation and hook-up charges, shall be
fair and reasonable and shall be filed with the Municipal officers not less than 30 days
prior to becoming effective. [Revised Eff. 8/10/77.]
(b) Any franchise contract granted hereunder may require the company to file
such report or reports with the Municipal Officers in such form and at such times as the
Municipal Officers may determine, including without limitation annual financial reports,
annual facilities reports, annual service record reports, network maps, and certificates of
performance.
(c) In addition to any remedies or other methods of enforcement specified in
any contract franchise granted hereunder, any franchise may be revoked by the Municipal
Officers for cause after due notice to the company and public hearing thereon, with the
right to appeal such revocation to the Cumberland County Superior Court under Rule 80-
B of the Superior Court Rules of Civil Procedure.
Sec. 20-1-6. Performance Bond and Insurance Coverage
Upon approval by the Federal Communications Commission of any franchise
contract the Cable Television Company shall file and maintain a surety company
performance bond in the amount of $50,000 conditioned upon the faithful performance of
said contract and full compliance with any laws, ordinances and regulations governing
the same, so as to enable the Town to recover any loss, cost, damage or expense arising
out of any failure to perform faithfully said franchise contract, including reasonable
attorney fees and costs; when the Company commences customer service said bond shall
4
be reduced to $25,000. Further, in accordance with the terms set by the Municipal
Officers in said franchise contract, the Company shall file and maintain public liability
insurance covering its activities in constructing, installing, maintaining and operating a
CATV System in the Town. [Revised, Eff. 8/10/77]
Sec. 20-1-7. Rules, Regulations and Procedures. The Municipal Officers of Cape
Elizabeth may:
(a) adopt such rules and regulations as they deem necessary for monitoring
and regulating the construction, installation, maintenance and operation of CATV
Systems in the Town;
(b) make recommendations to the Cable Television Company concerning
educational and local interest programming and services;
(c) resolve any complaints, disputes or disagreements between subscribers
and the Company, or concerning the installation, maintenance or operation of a CATV
System; [Revised Eff. 8/10/77]
(d) conduct such public hearings and issue such appropriate orders as they
may deem necessary to correct any deficiencies in the operation of any CATV System.
The Municipal Officers' decisions and findings shall be final and binding upon all parties
including the Company, except such decisions or findings may be appealed to the
Cumberland County Superior Court under said Rule 80-B.
Sec. 20-1-8. Construction; Separability. All actions required or permitted
hereunder shall be taken, all regulations and decisions shall be adopted, and this
Ordinance shall be construed, in a manner consistent wherever possible with the
regulations and requirements of the Federal Communications Commission. If any section,
subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction or by any federal
regulatory agency, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
[Revised Eff. 8/10/77]
1
CHAPTER 21
SIGNS
(eff. 2/9/2017)
SEC. 21-1-1 Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by
providing for signage to direct safe and orderly traffic movement.1. Signs shall be
allowed to express the First Amendment right to free speech, and to promote local
businesses and events. Signs shall be regulated in a content neutral manner to preserve
community character and aesthetics.
SEC. 21-1-2 Definitions
Banner: A sign on a textile or plastic material, which is secured, to a pole or structure in
a fashion, which may allow movement by the atmosphere.
Electronic Message Board sign: A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, figures
or images utilizing a series or grid of lights that may be changed through electrostatic
means using light emitting diode (LED) display, plasma screen, or other similar
technology.
Flag: A temporary or permanent sign on a textile, which is secured to a pole on one end,
and allows movement by the atmosphere.
Freestanding sign: A sign in a fixed location supported by structure, supports, or the
ground and not attached to or dependent for support upon any building.
Message board sign: A sign designed for or operated with changeable copy.
Permanent Sign: A sign erected for a period of more than 8 weeks in a calendar year.
____________________________________________________________________________
1 Studies documenting the relationship between traffic safety and signs include:
Bendak, S. & Al-Saleh, K. (2010). The role of roadside advertising signs in distracting
drivers. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics 40(3), 233-236.
Austroads Ltd (2013). Impact of Roadside Advertising on Road Safety. Austroads,
Research Report AP-R420-13.
2
Permanent window display: A sign attached to, placed upon or painted on the interior
of a window or door of a building, which is intended for viewing from the exterior of a
building.
Private Traffic Control Sign: Any sign, permanent or temporary, erected on private
property to promote the safety of members of the public on the property and for the
sole purpose of providing direction regarding entrances and exits, parking, direction to
facilities, caution and keep out of the property to visitors and does not include any
advertising.
Projecting or suspending sign: A sign fixed at an angle or perpendicular to the wall of
any building in such a manner as to read perpendicular or at an angle to the wall on
which it is mounted.
Property Address sign: A sign located on private property to promote the safety of
members of the public seeking entrance to the property and depicting the property
address information A sign indicating the name of a neighborhood erected in a manner
to aid in traffic control and promotion of public safety during an emergency may also
be a property address sign.
Road Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by conveyance, reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road.
Roof sign: Any sign where more than 50% of the surface area extends directly above
the roof or parapet line of a building.
Sign: Any structure, display, logo, device or representation which is designed or used
to advertise or call attention to any item, business activity or place, or is an expression
of free speech, and is visible from outside a building.
Sign area: The entire area of a sign with a single continuous perimeter enclosing the
extreme limits of the sign surface. For a sign painted on or applied to a structure, the
area shall include any background of a different color than the color or finish of the
structure. For a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols without a
distinguishable background, the area shall be that of the smallest rectangle which
encompasses all of the letters and symbols. Total sign area shall be the aggregate of all
exposed faces. Dimensions of signs shall not include supporting structures but shall
include any frames.
Sign Height: The distance from the average grade of the land beneath the sign to the
top of the sign.
3
Temporary Sign: Any sign erected for a period of 8 weeks or less in a calendar year. For
the purpose of measuring length of time a temporary sign is displayed, use of a sign for
any length of time in a 24-hour period shall constitute 1 day.
Traffic Control Sign: Any sign, permanent or temporary, erected within the public
right of way or on municipal property for to promote the safety of members of the
public on the property by providing direction or information (wayfinding) to citizens
and visitors.
Visible: Any sign capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal visual
acuity who is not located on the property where the sign is located.
Wall Sign: Any sign affixed to a wall or printed on a wall in such a manner as to read
parallel to the wall on which it is mounted, but shall also include awnings and canopies.
SEC. 21-2-1 Location
Signs shall be regulated by the location in which the sign is installed.
A. Town wide signage. The following signs shall be permitted throughout the
Town and shall not require a permit. Upon request of the Code Enforcement
Officer, a property owner shall provide an inventory of the number and square
footage of signs erected on the property.
1. Traffic Control sign. The Town of Cape Elizabeth and the Maine
Department of Transportation may erect any traffic control sign within the
right-of-way of any public road or public property. This signage shall be
in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD) standards to the maximum extent feasible.
2. Private Traffic Control sign. Any private property owner may erect upon
his/her property traffic control signage. No sign shall exceed 6 sq. ft. per
side and no more than a total of 72 sq. ft. of permanent private traffic
control signage shall be allowed.
3. Property address sign. Any property owner may erect upon his/her
property a sign indicating the street address of the property. No sign shall
exceed 6 sq. ft. per side and no more than a total of 12 sq. ft. of signage
shall be allowed.
A property address sign may also be erected indicating the name of a
neighborhood. The sign may be erected within the road right-of-way with
the permission of the town or within a private road right-of-way with the
4
permission of the owner of the private right-of-way. No sign shall exceed
36 sq. ft. per side and no more than a total of 72 sq. ft. per entrance to the
neighborhood.
B. Residential and non-commercial zone signage. The following signs may be
allowed after issuance of a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer in the
Residence A, Residence B, Residence C, and all other noncommercial districts,
and as further defined by street frontage. For properties with frontage on more
than one street, the amount of signage allowed for one street shall be the total
signage allowed for the property.
1. Property with frontage on an Arterial, Collector or Rural Connector Road
(Appendix B, Zoning Ordinance). In addition to the town-wide signage
allowed in SEC. 21-2-1.A, a sign may be erected on a property located in a
residential or non-commercial zoning district and upon which permitted
non-residential uses are occurring. No sign shall exceed 32 sq. ft. per side
and no more than a total of 32 sq. ft. per property.
2. Property with frontage on a Feeder, Local or Private Rd (Appendix B,
Zoning Ordinance). In addition to the town-wide signage allowed in SEC.
21-2-1.A, a sign may be erected on a property located in a residential or
non-commercial zoning district and upon which permitted non-residential
uses are occurring. No sign shall exceed 12 sq. ft. per side and no more
than a total of 12 sq. ft. per property.
C. Business zone signage. The following signage may be allowed after issuance of a
permit from the Code Enforcement Officer in the Town Center District, Business
A District, Business B District and Business C District.
1. Permanent Signs. Permanent signage may be erected on a property
located in the Town Center, Business A, Business B and Business C
Districts. Excluding the Town wide signage allowed in SEC. 21-2-1.A,
permanent signage on the property shall not exceed a total of 75 sq. ft.
Individual sign square footage shall comply with the following table and
proposed signs shall be assigned the most applicable sign type category
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
5
D. Temporary Signage. Temporary signs shall be allowed based on their location
adjacent to roadways. The name, address and phone number or email address of
the sign owner and date the sign was placed shall appear on the sign. A
temporary sign may be installed for no more than 8 weeks per calendar year and
shall not be lighted.
1. Temporary signs adjacent to an Arterial, Collector or Rural Connector
Road.
a. Road Right-of-way. Within the right-of-way of an arterial, collector or
rural connector road, as classified in Appendix B of the Zoning
Ordinance, temporary signage may be placed. No temporary sign shall
exceed 8 sq. ft. per side and no more than a total of 16 sq. ft. The
maximum dimension of a temporary sign shall not exceed 4 feet and
the maximum sign height shall not exceed 3.5 ft. as measured from the
ground.
6
b. Private Property. On private property adjacent to an arterial, collector
or rural connector road, as classified in Appendix B of the Zoning
Ordinance, temporary signage may be erected on private property. No
temporary sign shall exceed 6 sq. ft. per side and no more than a total
of 12 sq. ft. The maximum dimension of a temporary sign shall not
exceed 4 feet and the maximum sign height shall not exceed 3.5 ft. as
measured from the ground.
2. Temporary signs adjacent to a Feeder, Local or Private Road.
a. Road right-of-way. Within the right-of-way of a feeder, local or private
road, as classified in Appendix B of the Zoning Ordinance, temporary
signage may be placed. No temporary sign shall exceed 8 sq. ft per side
and no more than a total of 8 sq. ft. The maximum dimension of
temporary sign shall not exceed 4 feet and the maximum sign height
shall not exceed 3.5 ft. as measured from the ground.
b. Private Property. On private property adjacent to a feeder, local or
private road, as classified in Appendix B of the Zoning Ordinance,
temporary signage may be erected on private property. No temporary
sign shall exceed 6 sq. ft. per side and no more than a total of 12 sq. ft.
The maximum dimension of a temporary sign shall not exceed 4 feet
and the maximum sign height shall not exceed 3.5 ft. as measured from
the ground.
SEC. 21-2-2 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are not permitted.
A. Projecting or suspending signs in excess of 6 sq. ft per side or 12 sq. ft. in
total area.
B. Roof signs, where more than 50% of the sign face is erected above the roof
or parapet line of the building.
C. Banners extending over the public right-of-way.
D. Signs with flashing lights, beacons, moving parts or are lighted in a
manner inconsistent with Sec. 21-3-1(C)(5).
E. Signs on parked motor vehicles that in the judgement of the Code
Enforcement Officer violate the intent of this ordinance.
7
F. Signs obstructing sight distance in a public or private right-of-way, as
measured in accordance with Sec. 16-3-2, Subdivision Ordinance.
G. Internally lit signs, including electronic message board signs.
SEC. 21-3-1 Sign Permit Procedure
A. Application. Prior to installing any sign that requires a permit, a
completed application to install the sign shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer. The application shall include the information listed in
subsection B below and a description of how the standards in subsection C
below are met.
B. Submission information. The application shall include the following
information:
1. Name, address and contact information of the applicant;
2. Proposed location of the sign;
3. Evidence of right, title or interest in the sign installation site;
4. Sketch of the sign showing dimensions, height as measured from the
ground and total square footage of the sign;
5. Methods and materials to construct and install the sign;
6. Impact of the sign on sight distance; and
7. Expected light levels if the sign will be lighted.
C. Review Standards. If the applicant demonstrates compliance with the
following standards, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a permit.
1. The sign will be installed in a public right-of-way or an area the
applicant has right, title or interest to erect a sign.
2. The sign will comply with the location and dimensional requirements
of this ordinance and is not a sign included in Sec. 21-2-2, Prohibited
Signs.
8
3. The sign will be constructed and installed in a manner that is
structurally sound, as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that the sign may not
be structurally sound, the sign shall be installed in a manner consistent
with the IBC Code Sign provisions.
4. The sign will not reduce sight distance below the minimum
requirements in Sec. 16-3-2, Subdivision Ordinance Road
Classifications Standards Table.
5. If the sign will be lighted, the light source shall be shielded to prevent
glare onto rights-of-way or private properties and to direct lighting on
to the sign. Sign lighting shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles more than
fifty (50) feet from the sign.
D. Permit Duration. Once issued, the sign permit shall be valid for one year,
or if the sign is installed, for the life of the sign.
SEC. 21-4-1 Maintenance
A. Standard of Maintenance. All signs permitted under this ordinance shall
be appropriately maintained. Appropriate maintenance consists of no
missing lettering, no peeling paint, no cracked or broken glass or plastic, a
solid foundation for fixed signs, all lighting being fully operational or
discontinued, and no unsafe conditions. Signs not intended to be
permanently affixed to the ground shall be weighted or secured to
withstand inclement weather.
B. Failure to Maintain. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine if a
sign is adequately maintained. If, in his/her judgment, a sign is not
adequately maintained, he/she shall give thirty days notice to have it
repaired or removed. The owner of the sign shall have the option to
repair or remove the sign. Anyone not complying with the order of the
Code Enforcement Officer may be subject to a fine as provided in Section
21-6-1.
SEC. 21-5-1 Nonconformance
A. Temporary Sign. Any temporary sign in place after February 9, 2017 that
is not in conformance with this ordinance may be removed by the Code
Enforcement Officer or a designee.
9
B. Permanent Sign. Any permanent sign erected after February 9, 2017 that
is not in conformance with this ordinance shall be removed by the owner
within seven business days of receiving notice from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
C. Nonconforming Sign. Any permanent sign in place prior to February 9,
2017 and not in conformance with this ordinance may remain in place.
The nonconforming permanent sign may also be replaced with a permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer, as provided for in SEC. 21-3-1. The
nonconforming sign permit application shall include documentation of
the location, dimensions and height as measured from the ground of the
existing nonconforming sign. If a nonconforming sign is removed and not
replaced within six (6) months from the date it is removed, any sign
installed must be in conformance with this ordinance.
D. Hazard. Any sign that poses an immediate hazard to public safety may be
removed by any authorized municipal agent.
SEC. 21-6-1 Administration
A. Enforcement/Penalties. Any person, or entity owning, occupying, or
having the control and the use of, any building, land, sign or part thereof,
who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance, shall be punished by
a fine of not less than $50.00 and not more than $100.00. Each day such
violation is permitted to exist after notification thereof by the Code
Enforcement Officer shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Substitution. A non-commercial sign may be substituted for any
permitted sign, except as provided in Sec. 21-2-1.A.
C. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be
declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any
other section or provision of the Ordinance.
D. Fees. Fees shall be as shown on the most recently adopted Fee Schedule
adopted by the Cape Elizabeth Town Council.
E. Hold Harmless. The Town of Cape Elizabeth shall be held harmless from
any damage to signs installed in the public right-of-way, nor for any sign
removed under this ordinance.
10
Addressing Ordinance
TOWN of CAPE ELIZABETH
CHAPTER 22
ADDRESSING ORDINANCE
Adopted Eff. 10/14/98
Section 22-1-1. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to enhance the easy and rapid location of properties by
law enforcement, fire, rescue, and emergency medical service personnel in the Town of
Cape Elizabeth. The Town recognizes that, in some instances, it will be necessary to
modify published and displayed addresses of certain resident locations to further the
intent and purpose of the addressing project. Whenever possible, the addressing
committee will mitigate disruption to town residents by changing only those addresses
where there is a compelling public safety need to do so, and by those other means
practicably available to it.
Section 22-2-1. Authority
Powers as provided for in Article VIII, Part 2, Section 1 of the Constitution of the State
of Maine and Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001.
Section 22-3-1. Administration
This ordinance shall be administered by the addressing coordinator, who shall be the
Chief of Police. The addressing coordinator is authorized to and shall assign property
numbers and recommend road names for consideration by the Town Council both on
existing and proposed roads, in accordance with the criteria in Sections 4 and 5. The
addressing coordinator shall be assisted in this effort by the enhanced 911 Street
Numbering Committee, as appointed by the addressing coordinator. The addressing
officer, who shall be the town tax assessor, shall be responsible for maintaining the
following official records of this ordinance:
A. A Town map for official use showing road names and numbers.
B. An alphabetical list of all property owners as identified by current assessment records,
by last name, showing the assigned numbers.
C. An alphabetical list of all roads with property owners listed in order of their assigned
numbers.
Section 22-4-1. Naming System
All roads that serve two or more properties shall be named regardless of whether the
ownership is public or private. A "road" refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane,
private way, or similar paved, gravel, or dirt thoroughfare. "Property" refers to any
property on which a more or less permanent structure has been erected or could be
placed. A road name assigned by the Town of Cape Elizabeth shall not constitute or
imply acceptance of the road as a public way. The enhanced 911 Street Numbering
Committee shall invite the involvement of those residents of affected neighborhoods in
determining new or modified street names necessary to establish enhanced 911
addressing protocols. The enhanced 911 Street Numbering Committee shall liaison with
members of the Cape Elizabeth Historic Preservation Society (or similar organization)
who may serve as an information resource to resident of affected neighborhoods, and to
the enhanced 911 Street Numbering Committee.
The following criteria shall govern the naming system:
A. No two roads shall be given (substantively) the same name or similar sounding name.
B. Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length.
Section 22-5-1. Numbering System
Where needed, numbers shall be assigned every 50 feet along both sides of the road, with
even numbers appearing on the left side of the road and odd numbers appearing on the
right side of the road.
The following criteria shall govern the numbering system:
A. All number origins shall begin from the intersection of the primary or secondary
through or cross street. For dead-end roads, numbering shall originate at the intersection
of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead-end.
B. The number assigned to each structure shall be that of the numbered interval falling
closest to the front door or the driveway of said structure if the front door cannot be seen
from the main road.
C. Every structure with more than one principal use or occupancy shall have a separate
number for each use or occupancy. For example, duplexes will have two separate
numbers.
D. Apartments will have one property number, followed by an apartment number, such as
235 Maple Street, Apt. 2.
E. On those streets accessed from either end, the property numbers shall begin and
originate from that end of the street egressing onto the adjoining street carrying the
greatest traffic volume.
F. Not withstanding the above, streets with the same name continuing into Cape
Elizabeth from another municipality shall be numbered consistently beginning with the
next consecutive number succeeding from those of the other municipality (to that extent
possible).
G. New Construction. Whenever any residence or other structure is constructed or
developed, it shall be the duty of the new owner to procure an assigned number from the
Addressing Officer. This shall be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
Section 22-6-1 Compliance
All owners of structures shall, by the date stipulated in Section 8, display and maintain, in
a conspicuous place on said structure, the assigned numbers in the following manner:
A. Number on Structure. Where the structure is within 50 (fifty) feet from the edge of the
road right-of-way and clearly visible, the assigned number shall be displayed on the front
of the structure in the vicinity of the front door or entry.
B. Number at the Street Line. Where the structure is over 50 (fifty) feet from the edge of
the road right-of-way, or not visible from the road, the assigned number shall be
displayed on a post, fence, wall, the mailbox, or on some other structure at the property
line adjacent to the walk or access drive to the numbered structure.
C. Size and Color of Numbers. Numbers shall be a minimum four inches high and be of a
contrasting color to its background.
D. Every person whose duty is to display the assigned street number shall remove any
different number from the structure, mailbox, post or stanchion which might be mistaken
for, or confused with, the number assigned in conformance with this ordinance.
E. Interior Location. All residents and other occupants are requested to post their
assigned street number and road name adjacent to their telephone for emergency
reference.
Section 22-7-1. Notification and Inspection
It shall be the duty of the addressing coordinator to notify by mail each property owner
and the Post office of their new address at least 60 (sixty) days prior to the effective date
of their use. It shall be the duty of each property owner to post new property numbers, in
accordance with this ordinance, on the state date of effective use. On new structures,
numbering will be installed prior to final inspection or when the structure is first
occupied, whichever comes first.
Section 22-8-1. Enforcement
Whoever violates any provision of this ordinance shall be punished in accordance with
those penalties identified in Chapter 1, Section 1-1-7 of the Revised Official Code of the
Town of Cape Elizabeth.
Town of Cape Elizabeth
Chapter 23
Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance
Effective January 12, 2011
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
Sec. 23-1-1 Purpose. By and through this Ordinance, the Town of Cape Elizabeth declares as
its public purpose the establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in
a Property Assessed Clean Energy (“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can
access financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in Cape Elizabeth.
The Town of Cape Elizabeth declares its purpose and the provisions of this Ordinance to be in
conformity with federal and State laws.
Sec. 23-1-2 Enabling Legislation. The Cape Elizabeth Town Council enacts this Ordinance
pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of the 124th Maine State Legislature -- “An Act To
Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses,” also known as “the
Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act” (codified at 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151,
et seq.).
ARTICLE II - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
Sec. 23-2-1 Title. This Chapter/Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “the Cape
Elizabeth Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).”
Sec. 23-2-2 Definitions. Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this
Ordinance shall have their customary meanings; as used in this Ordinance, the following words
and phrases shall have the meanings indicated:
1. Energy saving improvement. “Energy saving improvement” means an
improvement to qualifying property that is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property
and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy use
and:
(1) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental Protection
Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy Star program or similar
energy efficiency standards established or approved by the Trust; or
(2) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency improvements
of residential, commercial or industrial property in a manner approved by the
Trust; or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage system that
meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the trust.
2. Municipality. “Municipality” shall mean the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
3. PACE agreement. “Pace agreement” means an agreement between the owner of
qualifying property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on
qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying
property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. PACE assessment. “PACE assessment” means an assessment made against
qualifying property to repay a PACE loan.
5. PACE district. “Pace district” means the area within which the Municipality
establishes a PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s
boundaries.
6. PACE loan. “PACE loan” means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to
the owner(s) of a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving
improvements.
7. PACE mortgage. “PACE mortgage” means a mortgage securing a loan made
pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying
property.
8. PACE program. “PACE program” means a program established under State
statute by the Trust or a municipality under which property owners can finance energy
savings improvements on qualifying property.
9. Qualifying property. “Qualifying property” means real property located in the
PACE district of the Municipality.
10. Renewable energy installation. “Renewable energy installation” means a
fixture, product, system, device or interacting group of devices installed behind the meter
at a qualifying property, or on contiguous property under common ownership, that
produces energy or heat from renewable sources, including, but not limited to,
photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy
systems, geothermal systems, wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems
eligible for funding under federal Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean
Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. Trust. “Trust” means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103 and/or its agent(s), if any.
ARTICLE III - PACE PROGRAM
Sec. 23-3-1 Establishment; funding. The Municipality hereby establishes a PACE
program allowing owners of qualifying property located in the PACE district who so
choose to access financing for energy saving improvements to their property through
PACE loans administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds are available from
the Trust in municipalities that 1) adopt a PACE Ordinance, 2) adopt and implement a
local public outreach and education plan, 3) enter into a PACE administration contract
with the Trust to establish the terms and conditions of the Trust’s administration of the
municipality’s PACE program, and 4) agree to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its
administration of the municipality’s PACE program.
Sec. 23-3-2 Amendment to PACE program. In addition, the Municipality may from
time to time amend this Ordinance to use any other funding sources made available to it
or appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE program, and the Municipality
shall be responsible for administration of loans made from those other funding sources.
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
Sec. 23-4-1 Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents. If the
Trust adopts standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to
the Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and those standards, rules or model
documents substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the Municipality shall take
necessary steps to conform this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards,
rules, or model documents.
ARTICLE V – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
Sec. 23-5-1. Program Administration
A. PACE Administration Contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A.
§10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the Municipality will enter into a PACE administration
contract with the Trust to administer the functions of the PACE program for the
Municipality. The PACE administration contract with the Trust will establish the
administration of the PACE program including, without limitation, that:
i. the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the Municipality’s PACE district;
ii. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE
agreement in the appropriate County Registry of Deeds to create a PACE
mortgage;
iii. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner;
iv. the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner;
v. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
vi. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment;
vii. the Municipality, or the Trust or its agent on behalf of the
Municipality, promptly shall record the discharges of PACE mortgages
upon full payment of the PACE loan.
B. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program. In conjunction with
adopting this Ordinance, the Municipality shall adopt and implement an education
and outreach program so that citizens of the Municipality are made aware of
home energy saving opportunities, including the opportunity to finance energy
saving improvements with a PACE loan.
C. Assistance and Cooperation. The Municipality will assist and cooperate
with the Trust in its administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
D. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but
may be assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined by the Trust
and consistent with applicable law.
Sec. 23-5-2. Liability of Municipal Officials; Liability of Municipality
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, municipal
officers and municipal officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors and
tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust or to any other person for
claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or related to a PACE program,
including, without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected PACE
assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under Article VI, §1(A) above,
a municipality has no liability to a property owner for or related to energy savings
improvements financed under a PACE program.
1
CHAPTER 24
SHOOTING RANGE ORDINANCE
TOWN OF CAPE ELIZABETH, MAINE
Effective July 12, 2017
2
Table of Contents
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................. 3
ARTICLE II. INTENT .............................................................................................................................. 3
SEC. 24-2-1. PERMITTING, REGISTRATION, AND COMPLIANCE ........................................ 3
SEC. 24-2-2. SHOT CONTAINMENT ................................................................................................ 3
SEC. 24-2-3. NOISE MITIGATION ................................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................................. 3
ARTICLE IV. APPLICABILITY ............................................................................................................. 4
ARTICLE V. SHOOTING RANGE LICENSE PROCEDURE ........................................................... 4
SEC. 24-5-1. APPLICABILITY ........................................................................................................... 4
SEC. 24-5-2. REVIEW PROCEDURE ................................................................................................ 5
SEC. 24-5-3. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................... 6
SEC. 24-5-4. LICENSE STANDARDS OF REVIEW ......................................................................... 7
ARTICLE VI. LICENSE ADMINISTRATION ..................................................................................... 8
SEC. 24-6-1 ANNUAL INSPECTION ................................................................................................. 8
SEC. 24-6-2 RENEWAL ....................................................................................................................... 8
SEC. 24-6-3. ABANDONMENT AND DISCONTINUANCE ........................................................... 9
SEC. 24-6-4. LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY .................................................................................. 9
ARTICLE VII. EXCEPTIONS ................................................................................................................. 9
SEC. 24-7-1. EXCEPTIONS .................................................................................................................. 9
SEC. 24-7-2. ADDITIONAL FINDINGS ............................................................................................ 9
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES, AND PENALTIES .............................................. 10
SEC. 24-8-1. ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES ........................................................................... 10
SEC. 24-8-2. CIVIL PENALTIES ..................................................................................................... 10
3
ARTICLE I. PURPOSE
This Shooting Range Ordinance (this “Ordinance”) is intended to regulate the establishment and
operation of outdoor Shooting Range Facilities pursuant to 12 M.R.S.A. § 13201 (1), 25
M.R.S.A. § 2011 (3) and 30-A MRS § 301, as they may be amended, and 30-A M.R.S.A. §
3001 et seq. (Maine’s Home Rule Law). Due to their potential noise impacts and safety
concerns, Shooting Range Facilities merit careful review to minimize adverse effects on
adjoining properties. This Ordinance does not otherwise apply to the general discharge of
Firearms or the use of bows and arrows in accordance with all other applicable laws or
regulations.
ARTICLE II. INTENT
It is the intent of this Ordinance to accomplish the following:
SEC. 24-2-1. PERMITTING, REGISTRATION, AND COMPLIANCE
All Shooting Range Facilities shall be established and operated in accordance with a valid
license issued by the municipal officers.
SEC. 24-2-2. SHOT CONTAINMENT
Each Shooting Range Facility shall be designed to contain the bullets, shot, and ricochets of
same discharged at or within the Shooting Range Facility.
SEC. 24-2-3. NOISE MITIGATION
Each Shooting Range Facility shall be designed to minimize off-site noise impacts generated by
the activities conducted on the Shooting Range Facility.
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS
As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to
them:
dBA: The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured on a precision sound level meter on the
A-weighted scale.
EPA Lead Management Guidelines: Shall mean, at any given time, the latest edition of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency's Best Management Practices for Lead at
Outdoor Shooting Ranges.
Firearm(s): A weapon, including but not limited to pistols, rifles, and shotguns, capable of
firing a projectile using an explosive charge as a propellant.
4
NRA Range Source Book: Shall mean, at any given time, the latest edition of The Range
Source Book, as published by the National Rifle Association.
Occupied Dwelling(s): Shall mean any residential Structure which is legally occupied by
one or more Persons.
Person(s): Any individual, corporation, association, club, firm, or partnership.
Shooting Range(s): An area designed and improved to encompass shooting stations or firing
lines, Target areas, berms and baffles, and other related components.
Shooting Range Facility(ies): A public or private facility, including individual Shooting
Ranges, safety fans or Shotfall Zones, Structures, parking areas, and other associated
improvements, designed for the purpose of providing a place for the discharge of various types
of Firearms; provided, however, that a Shooting Range Facility shall not include incidental
Target practice areas on private property.
Shotfall Zone(s): An area within which the shot or pellets contained in a shotgun shell
typically fall.
Structure(s): A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground or any other
permanent,manmade facilities.
Surface Danger Zone: Any area that may reasonably expect projectile impact resulting from
direct fire, including misdirected and accidental discharges, and ricochets from any Firearm
which takes into consideration all mitigation efforts as submitted by the applicant and
determined by a certified engineer.
Target(s): Any object or area which is used as the intended recipient of the projectiles fired
from a Firearm.
Town: Shall mean the town of Cape Elizabeth, Maine.
ARTICLE IV. APPLICABILITY
This Ordinance is applicable to all existing and future Shooting Range Facilities in the Town.
ARTICLE V. SHOOTING RANGE LICENSE PROCEDURE
SEC. 24-5-1. APPLICABILITY
Any new or existing Shooting Range Facility shall obtain a Shooting Range license. If any
Shooting Range Facility is intended to be substantially changed or expanded to include types
of Shooting Ranges, operations, or activities not covered by an existing license, a license
amendment shall be secured in accordance with all of the provisions of Article V, Shooting
Range License Procedure. Further, any license issued hereunder does not relieve the licensee
of compliance with all other applicable Town ordinances.
Such license shall be secured prior to issuance of any grading, or any building permit or other
improvement permit by the Town, but any licensee may thereafter construct any Structure or
5
other improvement deemed necessary for the purpose of issuing said license.
SEC. 24-5-2. REVIEW PROCEDURE
The following procedures shall be used to review a Shooting Range license application. The
applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the Town for engineering and other professional
services needed to review the application.
1. Background Check. An application, which shall include 3 paper copies and one electronic
copy, for a Shooting Range license shall be submitted to the Police Chief. Upon receipt of
an application for a new Shooting Range Facility, the Town’s Police Department will
conduct a criminal records check on the owner and lessee, if any, of the property on which
the Shooting Range Facility is to be located and on the individual designated by the
owner to operate the Shooting Range Facility, if different from the owner, and on the
principals of a corporation or partnership or trustees of a trust, in the event such an entity is
the owner or lessee. Upon completion of the criminal records check, the Police
Department shall add its findings to the application.
2. Completeness. The Police Chief will review the application for completeness. If the
application is deemed incomplete, a list of the items needed to make the application
complete shall be provided to the applicant. If the application is deemed complete, review
of the application for compliance with the License Standards of review shall commence.
3. License review. Once the Police Chief finds the application complete, the Police Chief shall
review the application for compliance with the License Standards of Review. The review
shall be completed within thirty (30) days of the determination that the application is
complete. Upon conclusion of the review, the Police Chief shall provide a written
recommendation to the Town Council and to the applicant. The written determination shall
include one of the following findings:
a. Recommend that the license be approved with or without conditions, which
conditions may include specific findings regarding phasing for said application;
or
b. Recommend that the license be denied.
4. Municipal Hearing. Once the Police Chief has provided a recommendation to the Town
Council, the Town Council shall hold a public hearing. The public hearing shall be
scheduled for the next regular Town Council meeting for which the submission deadline
has not yet passed. Public notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the abutters in
accordance with the procedures in Sec. 16-2-1(b) of the Subdivision Ordinance.
5. Town Council decision. Once a public hearing has been held, the Town Council has
thirty-five (35) days to grant the license, with or without conditions, which conditions may
include specific findings regarding phasing of said application, or deny the license. A
decision to table the license vote to the next Town Council meeting may be considered
with the consent of the applicant.
6. Approval. If the license is approved by the Town Council, the license shall be valid for
three (3) years from the date of the Town Council vote for approval. Any conditions
placed on the approval shall be satisfied prior to use of the Shooting Range facility. The
Shooting Range Facility shall be used only as specified in the approval. The Town shall provide
6
a written notification of the Town Council decision, including the expiration date of the
license if the license has been granted. Denial of a license may be appealed to the Superior
Court pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure within thirty (30) days
of the Town Council decision.
7. Renewal. Prior to the license expiration, the Shooting Range facility may request a license
renewal, in accordance with Sec. 24-6-1, Renewals.
SEC. 24-5-3. SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
The Shooting Range License application shall include the following information:
1. Ownership. Information demonstrating that the applicant is the legal property owner(s) or
lessees (or their agent), and shall also include the contact information for the applicant.
2. Written description. Written description of the shooting range facility, its location and uses
abutting the property.
3. Survey. A standard boundary survey made and certified by a licensed land surveyor in the
State of Maine, a copy of the deed for the property and copies of any easements,
restrictions or covenants.
4. Site Plan. A site plan for the entire shooting range to a scale of no less than one (1) inch
equals one hundred (100) feet. The site plan shall depict the property lines for any parcel
upon which the shooting range is located, north arrow, plan scale, date, and ownership
information for the site. The complete layout of the shooting range facility, including
existing and proposed structures, shooting stations, firing lines, target areas, shot fall zones,
surface danger zone, berms, baffles and other significant elements of the shooting range. The site
plan shall also depict adjacent streets, access roads, and parking areas for the shooting
range facility. The Town may allow different site plan scales where it deems appropriate.
5. Occupied Dwelling. A map depicting Occupied Dwellings within one-half (1/2) mile (two
thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet)).
6. Secure Access. Fencing, gates, and other features used by the Shooting range facility to
control access to the facility.
7. Hours of Operation. A note shall be added to the site plan stating the hours of operation of
the shooting range.
8. Shot Containment. The license application shall include a plan describing how all of the
bullets, shot or other projectiles or any other debris shall be contained on the Shooting
Range facility. Structures or devices that shall be installed for shot containment shall be shown
on the site plan. Shooting Range rules of operation that promote shot containment shall be
provided when applicable.
9. Noise. A plan showing the projected dBA levels at the property line and at the sixty-five
(65) dBA level prepared by a professional noise expert. For existing shooting ranges, dBA
levels shall also be provided for any new firearm with a caliber not currently used or ammunition
not currently used.
10. Firearms. A detailed description of the types and uses of firearms and ammunition
7
used and proposed to be used at the site.
11. Lead. A plan describing how lead will be managed on the site and how that plan complies
with the EPA lead management guidelines.
12. Warning signs. Locations where warning signs will be installed, a detail indicating the size
and material of the warning sign, and a description of how the proposed signage compares
to the NRA Source Book.
13. Maintenance. A maintenance plan for the shooting range and a description of how the
maintenance plan compares with the NRA Range Source Book.
14. Safety Design. A description of how the proposed shooting range design compares to the
design standards in the NRA Range Source Book.
15. Insurance. Documentation of the insurance coverage of the shooting range facility.
SEC. 24-5-4. LICENSE STANDARDS OF REVIEW
The following standards shall be used to review a shooting range license application. The license
shall be issued unless the Town Council determines that one or more standards have not been met.
In each instance, the burden of proof shall be on the applicant to produce sufficient information to
warrant a finding that the standards have been met.
1. Surface Danger Zone. The Surface danger zone shall be contained within the property
boundary line. For new shooting ranges, the surface danger zone is satisfactory when all shooting
stations and targets on a shooting range facility shall be located a minimum of three hundred (300)
feet from any property line. For existing shooting ranges, no new shooting stations or targets shall
be placed within 300' of the property boundary, unless they can demonstrate that the surface danger
zone will be reduced in size. For existing shooting stations and targets, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the shooting range facility will contain the surface danger zone within the
property boundary.
2. Occupied Dwelling. For new shooting ranges, all shooting stations, targets and firing lines
shall be located at least one-half (1/2) mile (two thousand six hundred forty (2,640) feet) from any
existing Occupied Dwelling. For existing shooting ranges located closer than one-half (1/2) mile
from any existing Occupied Dwelling, shooting range facilities shall not be permitted to relocate or
enlarge said range to further encroach within said setback, unless they can demonstrate that shot
containment will be improved and the surface danger zone will be reduced in size.
3. Access. Access to the shooting range facility and shooting range shall be secured and
controlled, with ingress and egress permitted only during approved operating hours, except for
access to perform routine maintenance or other business that does not involve discharge of
firearms.
4. Hours of Operation. The Shooting range shall be allowed to operate between 8 a.m. to onehalf
hour before sunset Monday through Saturday and from noon to one-half hour before sunset on
Sundays.
5. Shot Containment. Shooting range facilities shall be designed to contain all of the bullets,
shot or other projectiles or any other debris within the Shooting range facility.
8
6. Noise. For new shooting ranges, noise levels measured at the property line where the
Shooting range facility is operated or, in the case of leased land, at the property line of any leased
parcel, shall not exceed sixty-five (65) dBA when said property line is located within one thousand
(1,000) feet of an Occupied Dwelling. For existing shooting ranges, noise shall be mitigated
where practicable and subject to the limitations of 30-A M.R.S.A.3011, as it may be amended,
regarding existing shooting ranges. Firearm types that have not previously been used at the
Shooting Range shall not produce noise that exceeds sixty-five (65) dBA at the property line.
7. Lead. Shooting range facilities shall provide a plan using best management practices for lead
management which meets or exceeds EPA lead management guidelines.
8. Warning Signs. Warning signs meeting or exceeding the standards set forth in the NRA
Range Source Book shall be posted at one-hundred (100) foot intervals along the entire perimeter
of the Shooting range and along the entire perimeter of the property boundary in the same intervals.
9. Maintenance. Shooting range facilities shall be operated and maintained in a manner that
shall meet or exceed the standards specified in the NRA Range Source Book.
10. Safety Design. Shooting range facilities shall meet or exceed the design standards for general
and utility type of range specified by the NRA Range Source Book, unless otherwise specified in
this ordinance.
11. Insurance. The shooting range facility shall be covered by a minimum one million dollar
($1,000,000) per occurrence of liability insurance. Such insurance shall name the Town as an
additional insured and shall save and hold the Town, its elected and appointed officials, and
employees acting within the scope of the their duties harmless from and against all claims,
demands, and causes of action of any kind of character, including the cost of defense thereof,
arising in favor of a Person or group's members or employees or third parties on account of any
property damage arising out of the acts or omissions of the licensee, his/her group, club, or its
agents or representatives. The Town shall be notified of any policy changes or lapses in coverage.
ARTICLE VI. LICENSE ADMINISTRATION
SEC. 24-6-1 ANNUAL INSPECTION
A licensed shooting range facility shall be inspected by the Town's Police Department at least once
during a calendar year for compliance with the license and general protection of public safety. The
code enforcement officer may also attend the inspection.
SEC. 24-6-2 RENEWAL
Prior to the expiration of a license, the Shooting Range Facility may request a three (3) year
renewal of the license. The request shall be submitted in writing to the Police Chief. The request
shall include an assertion that there have been no material changes to the Shooting Range Facility
that are not in compliance with the current license. Upon receipt of a request for a renewal, the
Police Chief shall inspect the Shooting Range Facility, and may request the attendance of the Code
Enforcement officer at the inspection. The Police Chief shall prepare a report of any complaints
received during the license period and a summary of the site inspection. Within thirty (30) days of
9
receiving a request for renewal, the Police Chief shall determine if the license will be renewed or if
there are facility concerns that warrant forwarding the renewal request to the Town Council. The
Police Chief shall provide the licensee with written notification that the license has been renewed
with the date of expiration of the renewal or that the renewal request has been forwarded to the
Town Council. Upon final decision of the Town Council, a written notification of the Town
Council's decision, including an expiration date if the license has been renewed, shall be provided
to the licensee. There shall be no limit on the number of renewals of a license that remains in good
standing.
A Shooting Range Facility which received a license prior to July 12, 2017 shall have thirty (30)
days from July 12, 2017 to submit a request for a renewal, at which time it shall be considered"
prior to the expiration of its license."
SEC. 24-6-3. ABANDONMENT AND DISCONTINUANCE
When an existing Shooting Range Facility is discontinued without the intent to reinstate the
Shooting Range use, the property owner shall notify the Town of such intent as soon as
practicable. In any event, the discontinuance of the Shooting Range Facility or non-use of the
Shooting Range Facility for a period in excess of one year shall create the presumption
said Shooting Range Facility is abandoned, and any current, valid permits issued shall
terminate. As established by 30-A M.R.S.A.§ 3011, if there has been no shooting activity for
a period of three (3) years, resumption of shooting shall require a license as a new Shooting
Range Facility for purposes of this Ordinance.
SEC. 24-6-4. LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY
A license issued pursuant to this Ordinance may not be transferred to another operator without the
written approval and consent of the Town Council.
ARTICLE VII. EXCEPTIONS
SEC. 24-7-1. EXCEPTIONS
The Town Council shall have the authority to accept phased applications and approve
exceptions from the terms of this Ordinance, including extending the deadlines for performance
where appropriate, when literal enforcement of provisions of this Ordinance will, in an
individual case:
1. Result in hardship;
2. The hardship results from an application of this Ordinance;
3. The hardship is related to the specific Shooting Range Facility involved and
predates the adoption of this Ordinance;
4. The hardship was not self-induced or self-created following the effective date of
this Ordinance; and
5. The hardship is peculiar to the specific Shooting Range Facility involved.
SEC. 24-7-2. ADDITIONAL FINDINGS
In granting an exception, the Town Council shall find in addition to the above hardship that
the requirements of this Section 24-7-1 also have been met and a written notice of the decision
10
shall be prepared and furnished to the applicant detailing the following:
1. There are unique conditions pertaining to the Shooting Range Facility in question
because of its history, size, shape or topography;
2. A literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the
applicant of its rights to operate an existing Shooting Range Facility;
3. The requested exception will not materially affect the safety of surrounding
neighborhoods or the general public welfare; and
4. The exception requested is the minimum needed to allow continued use of the
Shooting Range Facility in question.
ARTICLE VIII. ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES, AND PENALTIES
SEC. 24-8-1. ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
The Town’s Police Department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Ordinance.
Complaints, preferably in writing, regarding non-conformance with any license shall be
reported to the Police Department, which shall investigate the same and file a report of its
findings with the Town Council. Any violation of this Ordinance or of any condition or
requirement adopted pursuant to these provisions may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as
the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings as allowed by state law. Any
license issued under this Ordinance may be suspended or revoked following a public hearing
before the Town Council, which may include a review and recommendation by the Police Chief.
SEC. 24-8-2. CIVIL PENALTIES
Any Person who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be subject to a civil
penalty of not less than $100.00 per violation plus costs of prosecution, including but not
limited to attorney’s fees. No penalty shall be assessed until the Person alleged to be in
violation has been notified of the violation. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute
a separate violation and any such penalty shall be recovered for the use of the Town.
End of ordinance.
1
CHAPTER 25
STORM WATER
Article I. Storm water and Non-Storm water Control
Sec. 25-1-1 Purpose 1
Sec. 25-1-2 Applicability 2
Sec. 25-1-3 Definition 2
Sec. 25-1-4 Storm Water Runoff System Design 4
Sec. 25-1-5 System Responsibility 7
Sec. 25-1-6 Non Planning Board reviewed storm water runoff 7
Sec. 25-1-7 Design Adjustment 7
Sec. 25-1-8 Non-Storm Water Regulation 7
Sec. 25-1-9 Enforcement 9
Sec. 25-1-10 Severability 10
Article II. Post Construction Storm water Management
Sec. 25-2-1 Purpose 10
Sec. 25-2-2 Objectives 11
Sec. 25-2-3 Applicability 11
Sec. 25-2-4 Definitions 11
Sec. 25-2-5 Post-Const. Storm Water Management Plan 14
Sec. 25-2-6 Post-Const. Storm Water Management Plan Compliance 16
Sec. 25-2-7 Enforcement 17
Sec. 25-2-8 Notice of Violation 17
Sec. 25-2-9 Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief 18
Sec. 25-2-10 Consent Agreement 18
Sec. 25-2-11 Appeal of Notice of Violation 18
Sec. 25-2-12 Enforcement Measures 18
Sec. 25-2-13 Severability 18
Article I. Storm water and Non-storm water Control
Sec. 25-1-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is to require the disposal of storm water on the land at the site of
development through the wise use of the natural features of the site and to regulate storm water
and non-storm water Discharges to the Town Storm Water Runoff System as required by federal
and state law. Storm water and non-storm water shall be deposed of in a manner so that it does
not pose dangers of flooding, soil erosion, pollution of receiving waters, or otherwise constitute a
threat to public health, safety or welfare.
2
Sec. 25-1-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
a. Any proposed activity subject to Planning Board review and involving 43,560 square feet
or more of added impervious surface, paving, clearing, or vegetative alterations, or any
development requiring Subdivision Review (Chapter 16, Subdivision Ordinance)
b. Any Discharge of storm water or non-storm water from any premises into the Town
Storm Water Runoff System.
c. All extensions of the storm water runoff system must be constructed to comply with
minimum standards developed by the Enforcement Authority.
Sec. 25-1-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall
have the meanings given herein. All words not defined herein shall carry their customary and
usual meanings.
Best Management Practices ("BMP"): Any schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of
waters of the State of Maine. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures,
and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
Clean Water Act: The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., also
known as the “Clean Water Act”), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CFR: Code of Federal Regulations.
Developed area. "Disturbed area" excluding area that within one calendar year of being
disturbed is returned to a condition with the same drainage pattern that existed prior to the
disturbance and is revegetated, provided the area is not mowed more than once per year.
Discharge: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping, disposing or other
addition of Pollutants to Waters of the State.
Disturbed area. All land areas that are stripped, graded, grubbed, filled, or excavated at any
time during the site preparation or removing vegetation for, or construction of, a project.
"Disturbed area" does not include routine maintenance, but does include re-development and
new impervious areas. "Routine maintenance" is maintenance performed to maintain the original
line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of the facility. Paving impervious gravel
surfaces while maintaining the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity and original purpose of
the facility is considered routine maintenance. Cutting of trees, without grubbing, stump
removal, disturbance or exposure of soil is not considered "disturbed area." A disturbed area
3
continues to be considered as a "disturbed area" if it meet the definition of "developed area" or
impervious area" following final stabilization.
Direct Discharge: Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited
to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, container, concentrated animal feeding
operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which Pollutants are or may be discharged. (Also
known as Point Source.)
Enforcement Authority: The Town of Cape Elizabeth Public Works Director or his/her
designee.
Impervious Surface: The total area of a parcel that consists of buildings and associated
constructed facilities or areas that will be covered with a low-permeability material, such as
asphalt or concrete, and areas such as gravel roads and unpaved parking areas that will be
compacted through design or use to reduce their permeability. Common impervious areas
include, but are not limited to, rooftops, walkways, patios, driveways, parking lots or storage
areas, concrete or asphalt paving, gravel roads, packed earthen materials, and macadam or other
surfaces which similarly impede the natural infiltration of storm water. A natural or man-made
waterbody is not considered an impervious area, but is treated as an immediate runoff surface in
curve number calculations.
Industrial Activity: Activity subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR,
Section 122.26 (b)(14).
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge
Permit: A permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or by the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) that authorizes the Discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States.
Non-Storm Water Discharge: Any Discharge to the Town Storm Water Runoff System
that is not composed entirely of Storm Water.
Person: Any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, quasi-municipal corporation, State or
Federal agency or other legal entity.
Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse,
effluent, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological materials, oil,
petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, aggregate
materials, and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any
kind.
Premises: All or any part of a building, lot, parcel of land, whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking areas from which Discharges into the
Town Storm Water Runoff System that is created, initiated, originated or maintained.
Storm Water: Runoff resulting from snowmelt, rain, precipitation or groundwater on the
ground.
4
Storm Water Maintenance agreement. An agreement describing maintenance of storm water
runoff system for development reviewed by the Planning Board. All privately owned facilities
shall be included in the maintenance agreement. A maintenance agreement must include, at a
minimum, the party responsible for maintenance, a list of the storm water runoff system
components that require maintenance, inspection frequency, maintenance requirements, and
submission of an annual report to the Town. Storm water runoff system components that will be
privately owned until such time they are conveyed to the Town require a maintenance agreement
until they are conveyed.
Storm Water Runoff System: An element or array of elements that convey water from or
across land, including but not limited to natural elements.
Tidal Waters: Waters contiguous to the Atlantic Ocean where the surface rises and falls due to
gravitational pull.
Town: The Town of Cape Elizabeth.
Waters of the State: Any and all surface and subsurface waters that are contained within, flow
through, or under or border upon the State of Maine or any portion of the State of Maine,
including the marginal and high seas, except such waters as are confined and retained completely
upon the property of one person and do not drain into or connect with any other waters of the
State of Maine, but not excluding waters susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, or
whose use, degradation or destruction would affect interstate or foreign commerce.
Uncontaminated: Free of Pollutants.
Sec. 25-1-4. Storm Water Runoff System Design.
a. Applicability. This section shall be applicable to the following development:
1. Any development involving 43,560 sq. ft. or more of impervious surface and
which requires Site Plan (Chapter 19, Zoning Ordinance); and
2. Any development requiring Subdivision Review (Chapter 16, Subdivision
Ordinance) by the Planning Board.
b. Submission Requirements. The following information shall be submitted to the Planning
Board.
1. Professional Engineer. Designation of a professional engineer licensed in the
State of Maine who will design, sign and stamp the storm water runoff system.
2. Base information. The existing site information required for subdivision or site
plan review, including but not limited to standard boundary survey, topographic
contours, location of water bodies and water courses, shall be used as the base for
the storm water runoff system plan.
5
3. Impervious surface. On the storm water runoff plan and in the written materials,
the calculated square footage of existing impervious surface and proposed
impervious surface.
4. Pre- and post construction calculations. Storm water runoff calculations based on
the 2- and 25-year storm for the property.
5. Existing system. On the storm water runoff plan and in the written materials,
show and describe the existing storm water runoff system, including but not
limited to storm water infrastructure, drainage channels, culverts and other
conveyances, and deficiencies that result in storm water surcharge or flooding on
the property.
6. Proposed improvements. On the storm water runoff plan and in the written
materials, show and describe the proposed storm water runoff plan, including but
not limited to proposed storm water runoff system components, showing design of
all facilities and conveyances. The storm water runoff plan and written materials
shall include information describing the difference in the pre and postdevelopment
flows, infiltration on the site, storm water runoff discharge
downstream impacts, accommodation of upstream flows, and include all
necessary design details and components.
7. Easements. When storm water runoff plan components are not located in the
public right-of-way, executable easement deeds providing the Town with access
and maintenance rights.
8. Maintenance. When all or part of the storm water runoff system infrastructure will
not be conveyed to the Town, provide a draft maintenance agreement and include
the following note on the plans: The site requires (a) a Maintenance Agreement
for the storm water runoff system to be executed with the Enforcement Authority
and filed with the Cumberland County Registry of Deeds, and (b) after
construction is complete, provide annually a certification to the Enforcement
Authority that the storm water runoff system has been inspected and maintained
in accordance with the Post Construction storm water runoff system management
plan approved for this site.
9. Record drawings. On the storm water runoff plan a note that "a reproducible set of
record drawings, as well as digital files in a format used by the project engineer
during project design or other format approved by the Public Works Director
suitable for import into the Town Geographic Information System (GIS),
indicating the storm water runoff work constructed and how the record drawings
were compiled shall be provided to the Enforcement Authority upon completion
of construction."
6
c. Review Standards.
1. Professional Engineer. The storm water runoff system shall be prepared by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of Maine.
2. 2 and 25 year storm. The storm water runoff system shall be designed for a storm
of intensity equal to the 2 and 25-year storm. No non-storm water structures shall
be permitted in areas of the site that flood or surcharge during the 2 and 25-year
storm. Where state or federal law is more restrictive, such provisions shall
supersede this section.
3. Infiltration. The storm water runoff system shall maximize to the greatest extent
practical the amount of storm water infiltrating on the site during storm events,
except that development located in the Town Center District shall design a storm
water plan that is consistent with the Town Center Storm water Management
Plan, updated September 2015 or most recent version.
4. Downstream impacts. The storm water runoff system shall provide for the
discharge of storm water from the site without damage to streets and storm water
infrastructure, adjacent properties, downstream properties, soils and vegetation.
When post-development flows exceed pre-development flows, the development
shall demonstrate that either (1) storm water runoff will be stored on-site and
released at a rate not to exceed pre-development flows or (2) that the storm water
runoff system has sufficient capacity to carry the increased flow without adverse
impacts. Direct discharge to tidally influenced areas shall be considered sufficient
capacity to carry increased flow.
5. Upstream flows. The storm water runoff system shall be designed to
accommodate all existing up stream flows that pass through the site.
6. System components. The storm water runoff system shall be completely designed
and include built structures and natural channels, technical specifications and
design details. Where components of the storm water runoff system are located
outside of public right-of-way, easements shall be provided to the town for access
and maintenance.
7. Maintenance. A permanent routine maintenance plan shall be prepared for the
storm water runoff system. The note requiring maintenance of the storm water
runoff system is on the plan.
8. Record Drawings. The storm water runoff system plans shall include a note that,
upon completion of the storm water runoff system installation, a reproducible set
of record drawings indicating the storm water runoff system work accomplished
and how the record drawings were compiled will be submitted to the Enforcement
Authority.
7
Sec. 25-1-5. System Responsibility.
The developer shall maintain all components of the Storm Water Runoff System until they are
formally accepted by the Town or transferred to a property owners association whose charter and
powers for financing and maintaining the Storm Water Runoff System shall be approved by the
Town Attorney. Storm Water Runoff System components within proposed public ways shall
become Town property upon formal acceptance. Storm Water Runoff System components
outside of public ways may be accepted by the Town but shall otherwise be deeded to a property
owners association, as required by the Planning Board or as agreed by the Town and the
developer prior to project approval. In all cases the Town shall have the right to access and enter
the Storm Water Runoff system to conduct emergency maintenance, as it deems necessary.
Sec. 25-1-6 Non Planning Board reviewed storm water runoff
Any Discharge of storm water or non-storm water into the Town Storm Water Runoff System for
which the Planning Board has not conducted a storm water runoff system review shall be subject
to Best Management Practices for Erosion and Sedimentation control. The Enforcement
Authority may direct additional erosion control measures to be taken if there is a reasonable
expectation that storm water runoff will cause erosion and sediment to leave the development
site.
Sec. 25-1-7. Design Adjustment.
The Planning Board may waive any filing or design requirements unnecessary for full
consideration of any proposed Storm Water Runoff System, such as data relating to site features
and runoff rates downstream of the entrance to a piped Discharge directly to tidal waters. The
Planning Board may also reduce or waive any requirements of this Ordinance where it finds
from the basic site data furnished under Section 25-1-4.b that the estimated costs of construction
and long-term maintenance resulting from compliance with the design requirements in any
instance clearly outweigh the downstream benefits to be achieved by compliance.
Sec. 25-1-8. Non-Storm Water Regulation.
a. Objectives. The objectives of this section are:
1. To regulate Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Water Runoff System; and
2. To set forth the legal authority and procedures to carry out all inspection,
monitoring and enforcement activities necessary to ensure compliance with this
Ordinance.
b. General Prohibition. Except as allowed in this Section, no Person shall create, initiate,
originate or maintain a Non-Storm Water Discharge to the Storm Water Runoff System.
Such Non-Storm Water Discharges are prohibited notwithstanding the fact that the Town
may have approved the connections, drains or conveyances by which a Person discharges
unallowed Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Water Runoff System.
8
c. Allowed Non-Storm Water Discharges. The creation, initiation, origination and
maintenance of the following Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Water Runoff
System are allowed:
1. Landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters;
uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20));
uncontaminated pumped ground water; uncontaminated flows from foundation
drains; air conditioning and compressor condensate; irrigation water; flows from
uncontaminated springs; uncontaminated water from crawl space pumps;
uncontaminated flows from footing drains; flows from riparian habitats and
wetlands; residual street wash water (where spills/leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred, unless all spilled material has been removed and
detergents are not used); dechlorinated hydrant flushing discharges and
firefighting activity runoff; water line flushing and discharges from potable water
sources; individual residential car washing; lawn watering runoff, and
dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
2. Discharges authorized by the Enforcement Authority as being necessary to protect
public health and safety; and
3. Dye testing, with authorization from the Enforcement Authority prior to the time
of the test.
d. Suspension of Access to the Town Storm Water Runoff System. The Enforcement
Authority may, without prior notice, physically suspend Discharge access to the Storm
Water Runoff System when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
Non-Storm Water Discharge to the Storm Water Runoff System that presents or may
present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of
persons, or to the Storm Water Runoff System, or that may cause the Town to violate the
terms of its environmental permits. Such suspension may include, but is not limited to,
blocking pipes, constructing dams or taking other measures, on public ways or public
property, to physically block the Discharge to prevent or minimize a Non-Storm Water
Discharge to the Storm Water Runoff System. The Enforcement Authority may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the Storm Water Runoff
System, or to minimize danger to persons, provided, however, that in taking such steps
the Enforcement Authority may enter upon the Premises that are the source of the actual
or threatened Non-Storm Water Discharge to the Storm Water Runoff System only with
the consent of the Premises’ owner, occupant or agent, except in an emergency when
consent shall not be required.
e. Monitoring of Discharges. In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance, the
Enforcement Authority may enter upon and inspect Premises subject to this Ordinance at
reasonable hours with the consent of the Premises’ owner, occupant or agent, to inspect
the Premises and connections thereon to the Storm Water Runoff System; and to conduct
monitoring, sampling and testing of the Discharge to the Storm Water Runoff System.
9
Sec. 25-1-9. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Ordinance.
a. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has
violated this Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may order compliance with this
Ordinance by written Notice of Violation to that Person indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including, without limitation:
1. The elimination of Non-Storm Water Discharges to the Storm Water Runoff
System, including, but not limited to, disconnection of the Premises from the
Storm Water Runoff System;
2. The cessation of Discharges, practices, or operations in violation of this
Ordinance;
3. At the Person’s expense, the abatement or remediation in accordance with best
management practices in DEP rules and regulations of Non-Storm Water
Discharges to the Storm Water Runoff System and the restoration of any affected
property; and/or
4. The payment of fines, of the Enforcement Authority’s remediation costs and of
the Enforcement Authority’s reasonable administrative costs and attorneys’ fees
and costs, in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A Sec. 4452. If abatement of a
violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set
forth a deadline within which such abatement or restoration must be completed.
b. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief. Any Person who violates this Ordinance shall be
subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible for the
Town’s attorney’s fees and costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day
such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any Person who
violates this Ordinance also shall be responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages
and costs, including, but not limited to attorneys’ fees and costs, incurred by the Town for
violation of Federal and State environmental laws and regulations caused by or related to
that Person’s violation of this Ordinance; this responsibility shall be in addition to other
penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under this Section.
c. Consent Agreement. The Enforcement Authority may, with the approval of the
municipal officers, enter into a written consent agreement with the violator to address
timely abatement of the violation(s) of this Ordinance for the purposes of eliminating
violations of this Ordinance and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
d. Appeal of Notice of Violation. Any Person receiving a Notice of Violation or suspension
notice may appeal the determination of the Town to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The
notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of receipt of the Notice of
Violation. The Board of Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30
days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The Board of Appeals may affirm,
reverse or modify the Notice of Violation. A suspension under Section 18-2-8(d) of this
10
Ordinance shall remain in place unless or until lifted by the Board of Appeals or by a
reviewing court. A party aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may
appeal that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of the date of the Zoning
Board of Appeals decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
e. Enforcement Measures. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the
requirements set forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the
Board of Appeals, within 45 days of a decision of the Board of Appeals affirming the
Enforcement Authority’s decision, then the Enforcement Authority may file an
enforcement action in a Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
f. Ultimate Responsibility of Discharger. The standards set forth in this Ordinance are
minimum standards. Compliance with this Ordinance does not ensure that a Person will
not have contaminated, polluted or unlawfully discharged Pollutants into waters of the
U.S. This Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Town, or any officer,
agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from a Person's reliance on or
compliance with this Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made under this
Ordinance.
Sec. 25-1-10 Severability.
If any part or parts, section or subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance or the
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder is for any reason declared to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions
of this Ordinance or the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
Article II. Post Construction Storm water Management
Sec. 25-2-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this "Post-Construction Storm Water Management Ordinance" (the "Ordinance")
is to provide for health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the Town of Cape Elizabeth
through review and approval of postconstruction storm water management plans and monitoring
and enforcement of compliance with such plans as required by Federal and State law. This
Ordinance establishes methods for post-construction storm water management in order to
comply with minimum control measure requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, of federal
regulations, of Maine's Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems General Permit, and the
Town’s Storm Water Program Management Plan. The Town of Cape Elizabeth enacts this Post-
Construction Storm Water Management Control Ordinance (the "Ordinance") pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 3001 (municipal home rule ordinance authority), 38 M.R.S.A. § 413 (the
"Wastewater Discharge Law"), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. (the "Clean Water Act"), and 40 CFR
Part 122 (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's regulations governing the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System ("NPDES")). The Maine Department of Environmental
Protection, through its promulgation of the "General Permit for the Discharge of Storm Water
11
from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems," has listed the Town of Cape Elizabeth as
having a Regulated Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System ("Small MS4"); under this
General Permit, listing as a Regulated Small MS4 necessitates enactment of this Ordinance as
part of the Town's Storm Water Management Program in order to satisfy the minimum control
measures required by Part IV D 5 ("Post-construction storm water management in new
development and redevelopment").
Sec. 25-2-2. Objectives.
The objectives of this Ordinance are:
a. To reduce the impact of post-construction discharge of storm water on receiving waters;
and
b. To reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source
pollution, wherever possible, through use of Best Management Practices as promulgated
by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to its most current rules
as may be updated or amended including its Chapters 500 and 502 Rules, and ensure that
these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety.
Sec. 25-2-3. Applicability.
This Ordinance applies to all New Development and Redevelopment within the Town that
discharges storm water to the Town's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) and to
associated storm water management facilities, which are considered to be an element or array of
elements that convey water from or across land, including, but not limited to, natural elements,
roads, parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention basins and ponds, pipes, conduits,
and related structures that are part of the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan for a
New Development or Redevelopment. This ordinance does not apply to any development which
has obtained subdivision approval and begun construction prior to the date this ordinance
becomes effective. Construction shall mean (1) posting of a performance guarantee, (2)
disturbance of soil, and (3) inspection by a town official.
Sec. 25-2-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings given herein.
All words not defined herein shall carry their customary and usual meanings.
Applicant: Any Person with requisite right, title, or interest or an agent for such Person who has
filed an application for New Development or Redevelopment that requires a Post- Construction
Storm Water Management Plan under this Ordinance.
Best Management Practices ("BMP"): Any schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of
waters of the State of Maine. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures,
and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
12
Clean Water Act: The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., also
known as the "Clean Water Act"), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
Construction Activity: Any Construction Activity including one acre or more of Disturbed
Area. Construction Activity also includes activity with less than one acre of total land Disturbed
Area if that area is part of a subdivision that will ultimately disturb an area equal to or greater
than one acre.
Discharge: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emptying, dumping, disposing, or other
addition of Pollutants to Waters of the State.
Direct Discharge: Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited
to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation or vessel or other floating craft, from which Pollutants are
or may be discharged (Also known as Point Source).
Disturbed Area: Any clearing, grading, and excavation. Mere cutting of trees, without
grubbing, stump removal, disturbance or exposure of soil is not considered "Disturbed Area."
"Disturbed Area" does not include routine maintenance but does include Redevelopment.
"Routine Maintenance" is maintenance performed to maintain the original line and grade,
hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of land or improvements thereon.
Enforcement Authority: The Town Manager or his/her designee who is the person(s) or
department authorized by the Town to administer and enforce this Ordinance.
Town: The Town of Cape Elizabeth.
Town Permitting Authority: The Town official or body that has jurisdiction over the land use
approval or permit required for a New Development or Redevelopment.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or MS4: Conveyances for storm water, including,
but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters,
ditches, human-made channels or storm drains (other than publicly owned treatment works and
combined sewers) owned or operated by any municipality, sewer or sewage district, fire district,
State agency or federal agency or other public entity that discharges directly to Waters of the
State.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge
Permit: A permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") or by
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection ("DEP") that authorizes the Discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group, or general area-wide basis.
New Development: Any Construction Activity on unimproved Premises and for purposes of this
ordinance includes "Redevelopment" defined below.
13
Person: Any individual, firm, corporation, municipality, town, quasi-municipal Corporation,
State or Federal agency, or other legal entity.
Pollutant: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, junk, incinerator residue, sewage, refuse, effluent,
solid waste , sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological or radiological materials, oil,
petroleum products or by-products, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, aggregate materials,
and industrial, municipal, domestic, commercial or agricultural wastes of any kind.
Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan: BMPs and associated inspection and
maintenance procedures for the Storm Water Runoff System employed by a New Development
or Redevelopment to meet the standards of this Ordinance and approved by the Town’s
Permitting Authority.
Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or
unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips, located within the Town from
which Discharges into the Town Storm Water Runoff System are or may be created, initiated,
originated, or maintained.
Qualified Post-Construction Storm Water Inspector: A person who conducts
postconstruction inspections of Storm Water Runoff Systems and meets the following
qualification:
a. The Inspector shall not have any ownership or financial interest in the property being
inspected nor be an employee or partner of any entity having an ownership or financial
interest in the property, and
b. The Inspector shall also meet the following criteria as approved by the Town’s
Enforcement Authority:
1. Someone who has received the appropriate training for such inspection from DEP
and holds a valid certificate from DEP for such inspection or;
2. Have a working knowledge of the most current Maine DEP Storm Water
Management Laws including but not limited to Chapter 500 and Chapter 502
Rules, Storm Water Management Rules and Maine's Storm Water BMP Manual,
have a college degree in environmental science, civil engineering, or comparable
expertise, or any combination of experience and training; have a demonstrated
practical working knowledge of Storm Water hydrology and Storm Water
management techniques, including the maintenance requirements for Storm Water
Runoff Systems; and have the ability to determine if Storm Water Runoff Systems
are performing as intended;
Redevelopment: Any Construction Activity on Premises already improved with buildings,
structures, or activities or uses, but does not include such activities as exterior remodeling of
structures.
14
Regulated Small MS4: Any Small MS4 regulated by the State of Maine "General Permit for the
Discharge of Storm Water from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems" ("General
Permit"), including all those located partially or entirely within an Urbanized Area (UA) and
those additional Small MS4s located outside a UA that as of the issuance of the General Permit
have been designated by the DEP as Regulated Small MS4s.
Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, or Small MS4: Any MS4 that is not already
covered by the Phase I MS4 Storm Water program including municipally owned or operated
storm sewer systems, State or federally-owned systems, such as colleges, universities, prisons,
Maine Department of Transportation and Maine Turnpike Authority road systems and facilities,
and military bases and facilities.
Storm Water: Runoff resulting from snowmelt, rain, precipitation, groundwater on the ground
and drainage.
Storm Water Runoff System: An element or array of elements that convey water from or
across land, including, but not limited to, natural elements.
Urbanized Area ("UA") means the areas of the State of Maine as defined by the latest
decennial census by the U.S. Bureau of the Census.
Sec. 25-2-5. Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan.
a. General Requirement
1. Except as provided in Sec. 25-2-3 b. above, no Applicant for a building permit,
subdivision approval, site plan approval or other zoning, planning or other land
use approval for New Development or Redevelopment to which this Ordinance is
applicable shall receive such permit or approval for that New Development or
Redevelopment unless the Town Permitting Authority for that New Development
also determines that the Applicant's Post- Construction Storm Water Management
Plan for the New Development meets the requirements of this Ordinance.
2. At the time of application, the Applicant shall notify the Town Permitting
Authority if its Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan includes any
BMP(s) that will discharge to the Town's MS4 and shall include in this
notification a listing of which BMP(s) will so discharge.
b. Performance Standards
1. DEP Chapter 500 Quality and Quantity Standards apply. The Applicant shall
make adequate provisions for the management of the quantity and quality of all
storm water generated by a New Development or Redevelopment through a Post-
Construction Storm Water Management Plan. This Post-Construction Storm
Water Management Plan shall be designed to meet the standards contained in the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection's most current rules as may be
15
updated or amended including its Chapters 500 and 502 Rules and shall comply
with the practices described in the manual Storm Water Management for Maine,
published by Maine Department of Environmental Protection, latest edition,
which hereby are incorporated by reference pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3003.
2. Use of Onsite or Offsite Treatment Facilities. The Applicant shall meet the
quantity and quality standards above either onsite or off-site. Where off-site
facilities are used, the Applicant must submit to the Town documentation,
approved as to legal sufficiency by the Town's attorney, that the Applicant has a
sufficient property interest in the property where the off-site facilities are located
– by easement, covenant or other appropriate legal instrument – to ensure that the
facilities will be able to provide post-construction storm water management for
the New Development or Redevelopment and that the property will not be altered
in a way that interferes with the off-site facilities.
3. Maintenance Agreement Required. Where the Applicant proposes to retain
ownership of the Storm Water Management Facilities shown in its Post-
Construction Storm Water Management Plan, the Applicant shall submit to the
Town documentation, approved as to the legal sufficiency the Town's attorney
that the Applicant, it successor, heirs and assigns shall have the legal obligation
and the resources available to operate, repair, maintain and replace the Storm
Water Management Facilities. Applications for New Development or
Redevelopment requiring Storm Water Management Facilities that will not be
dedicated to the Town shall enter into a Maintenance Agreement with the Town.
A sample of this Maintenance Agreement is available from the Town.
4. Easements and Access. Whenever elements of the Storm Water Runoff System
are not within the right-of-way of a public street and the facilities will not be
offered to the Town for acceptance as public facilities, the Town Permitting
Authority may require that perpetual easements conforming substantially with the
lines of existing natural drainage, and providing adequate access for maintenance
in a form acceptable to the Town's attorney, shall be provided to the Town
allowing access for maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of the
Storm Water Runoff System. When an offer of dedication is required by the Town
Permitting Authority, the Applicant shall be responsible for the maintenance of
these Storm Water Runoff Systems under this Ordinance until such time (if ever)
as they are accepted by the Town.
5. Other Standards and Conflicts. In addition to any other applicable requirements of
this Ordinance and the Town's Municipal Code, any New Development or
Redevelopment which also requires a storm water management permit from the
Maine Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) under 38 M.R.S.A. 420-D
shall comply with the rules adopted by DEP under 38 M.R.S.A. 420-D(1), as the
same may be amended from time to time, and the Applicant shall document such
compliance to the Town Permitting Authority. Where the standards or other
provisions of such storm water rules conflict with Town ordinances, the stricter
(more protective) standard shall apply.
16
Sec. 25-2-6. Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan Compliance.
a. General Requirements. Any Person owning, operating, leasing or having control over
Storm Water Runoff Systems required by a Post-Construction Storm Water Management
Plan approved under this Ordinance shall demonstrate compliance with that Plan as
follows:
1. Annual Inspection. A Qualified Post-Construction Storm Water Inspector , shall,
at least annually, inspect the Storm Water Runoff Systems, including but not
limited to any roads, parking areas, catch basins, drainage swales, detention
basins and ponds, pipes, conduits, and related structures, in accordance with all
Town and State inspection, cleaning and maintenance requirements of the
approved Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan.
2. Corrective Actions. If the Storm Water Runoff Systems require maintenance to
function as intended by the approved Post-Construction Storm Water
Management Plan, that Person shall take corrective action(s) to address the
deficiency or deficiencies.
3. Annual Reporting to Town. A Qualified Post-Construction Storm Water Inspector
shall provide, on or by August 1 of each year, a completed and signed
certification to the Town Enforcement Authority in a form prescribed by the
Town or in a similar form approved by the Town Enforcement Authority,
certifying that the Storm Water Runoff Systems have been inspected, and that
they are adequately maintained and functioning as intended by the approved Post-
Construction Storm Water Management Plan, or that they require maintenance or
repair, describing any required maintenance and any deficiencies found during
inspection of the Storm Water Runoff Systems. If the Storm Water Runoff
Systems require maintenance or repair of deficiencies in order to function as
intended by the approved Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan, the
Person shall provide a record of the required maintenance or deficiency and
corrective action(s) taken.
4. Fee. In addition, any persons required to file an annual certification under this
Sec. 25-2-6 of this Ordinance shall include with the annual certification a fee
established by the Town Council in accordance with the Town Fee Schedule. The
purpose of this fee is to pay the administrative and technical costs of review of the
annual certification.
b. Right of Entry. In order to determine compliance with this Ordinance and with the Post-
Construction Storm Water Management Plan, the Town Enforcement Authority may
enter upon property at reasonable hours with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent
to inspect the Storm Water Runoff Systems.
c. Annual Report. Each year the Town shall include the following in its Annual Report to
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection:
17
1. The cumulative number of sites that have Storm Water Runoff Systems
discharging into their MS4;
2. A summary of the number of sites that have Storm Water Runoff Systems
discharging into their MS4 that were reported to the Town;
3. The number of sites with documented functioning Storm Water Runoff Systems;
and
4. The number of sites that required routine maintenance or remedial action to
ensure that Storm Water Runoff Systems are functioning as intended.
Sec. 25-2-7. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to violate any provision of or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan.
Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated this Ordinance or the
Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may enforce this
Ordinance in accordance with 30-A
M.R.S.A. § 4452.
Sec. 25-2-8. Notice of Violation.
Whenever the Enforcement Authority believes that a Person has violated this Ordinance of the
Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan, the Enforcement Authority may order
compliance with this Ordinance or with the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan by
written notice of violation to that Person indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the
action necessary to correct it, including, without limitation:
a. The abatement of violations, and the cessation of practices, or operations in violation of
this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan;
b. At the Person's expense, compliance with BMPs required as a condition of approval of
the New Development or Redevelopment, the repair of Storm Water Runoff Systems
and/or the restoration of any affected property; and/or
c. The payment of fines, of the Town's remediation costs and of the Town's reasonable
administrative costs and attorneys' fees and costs. If abatement of a violation, compliance
with BMPs, repair of Storm Water Management Facilities and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such abatement,
compliance, repair and/or restoration must be completed.
18
Sec. 25-2-9. Penalties/Fines/Injunctive Relief.
Any Person who violates this Ordinance of the Post-Construction Storm Water Management
Plan shall be subject to fines, penalties and orders for injunctive relief and shall be responsible
for the Town's attorney's fees and costs, all in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. § 4452. Each day
that such violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Moreover, any Person who
violates this Ordinance or the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan also shall be
responsible for any and all fines, penalties, damages and costs, including, but not limited to
attorneys' fees and costs, incurred by the Town for violation of federal and State environmental
laws and regulations caused by or related to that Person's violation of this Ordinance or of the
Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan; this responsibility shall be in addition to any
penalties, fines or injunctive relief imposed under this Section.
Sec. 25-2-10. Consent Agreement.
The Enforcement Authority may, with the approval of the municipal officers, enter into a written
consent agreement with the violator to address timely abatement of the violation(s) of this
Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Storm Water Management Plan for the purposes of
eliminating violations of this Ordinance or of the Post-Construction Storm Water Management
Plan and of recovering fines, costs and fees without court action.
Sec. 25-2-11. Appeal of Notice of Violation.
Any Person receiving a Notice of Violation or suspension notice may appeal the determination of
the Enforcement Authority to the Zoning Board of Appeals. The notice of appeal must be
received within 30 days from the date of receipt of the Notice of Violation. The Board of
Appeals shall hold a de novo hearing on the appeal within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
notice of appeal. The Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the
Enforcement Authority. A party aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Appeals may appeal
that decision to the Maine Superior Court within 45 days of that date of the Board of Appeals
decision pursuant to Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
Sec. 25-2-12. Enforcement Measures.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the Notice of
Violation, or, in the event of an appeal to the Board of Appeals, within 45 days of a decision of
the Board of Appeals affirming or modifying the Enforcement Authority's decision, then the
Enforcement Authority may recommend to the municipal officers that the Town's attorney file an
enforcement action in a Maine court of competent jurisdiction under Rule 80K of the Maine
Rules of Civil Procedure.
Sec. 25-2-13. Severability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause,
sentence, or paragraph of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any person, establishment,
or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions,
clauses, sentences, or paragraphs or application of this Ordinance.

1 TOWN OF CAPE ELIZABETH
2 PROPERTY TAX ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
3
4 Sec. 1. Purpose
5 The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish a program to provide property tax assistance to persons 65 years of
6 age and over who reside in the Town of Cape Elizabeth.
7
8 Sec. 2. Definitions
9 Homestead: A homestead is a dwelling owned or rented by the person seeking tax assistance under this
10 Ordinance or held in a revocable living trust for the benefit of that person. The dwelling must be occupied by
11 that person as a home.
12
13 Qualifying applicant: A qualifying applicant is a person who is determined by the Tax Assessor or her/his
14 designee, after review of a complete application submitted under Section 5 of this Ordinance, to be eligible for a
15 payment under the terms of this Ordinance.
16
17 Sec. 3. Creation of the Program Fund
18 The Town Council may annually appropriate funds for the Senior Tax Relief Program. The Assessor shall
19 determine the total amount of property tax relief sought by qualified applicants. The Tax Assessor shall then
20 align the total funds appropriated with the total amount of qualified applications as follows:
21
22 1. Fund Surplus
23 In the event that funds appropriated by the Town Council are more than the amount for which applicants are
24 eligible under the terms of this ordinance, then surplus monies available, after all payments have been made,
25 shall revert to the Property Tax Assistance Reserve Account. Funds will be used the following fiscal year if
26 approved by the Town Council.
27
28 2. Fund Deficit
29 In the event that funds appropriated by the Town Council are less than the amount for which applicants are
30 eligible under the terms of this ordinance, then funds shall be proportionally disbursed. The Tax Assessor shall
31 calculate a difference ratio between the fund appropriation and the total amount of tax relief sought of qualified
32 applications. This ratio shall be used to adjust each individual benefit for qualified applicants. In the event that a
33 lack of funding results in no payment or less than the full payment to a qualifying applicant, the difference in
34 partial payment will not carry over to the next year.
35
36 Sec. 4. Criteria for Participation
37 In order to participate in the Property Tax Assistance Program, an applicant shall demonstrate all of the
38 following:
39
40 a. The applicant shall be 65 years of age or more by the last day on which an application may be filed under
41 Section 5 ofthis Ordinance.
42
43 b. The applicant shall have been a resident of the Town of Cape Elizabeth with a Homestead therein for the ten
44 years immediately preceding the last day on which an application may be filed under Section 5 of this
45 Ordinance.
46
47 c. The applicant shall have a HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION benefit, in accordance with Title 36 M. R.S. Sec. 681-689,
48 already established on the property.
1
1
2 d. The federal adjusted gross income of the applicant and any other adult members of the applicant's household
3 combined (total household income) does not exceed $60,000.
4
5 e. Payment of the immediately preceding fiscal year property taxes have been paid in full for the subject
6 property.
7
8 Sec. 5. Application and Payment Procedures
9 Persons seeking to participate in the Property Tax Assistance Program shall submit an application due to the Tax
10 Assessor no later than February 15, 2019. Starting July 1, 2019, all applications are due by November 15th of that
11 year. The Tax Assessor shall provide an application form for the program, which shall include the applicant's
12 name, homestead address and contact information.
13
14 At the time of application, applicants must provide adequate evidence of eligibility. The Assessor may accept a
15 statement under oath. No confidential income records, including tax returns, will be kept by the Town. The Tax
16 Assessor shall review and determine if the application is complete and accurate and if the applicant is eligible to
17 participate in the Program. The Tax Assessor shall notify an applicant if an application is determined to be
18 incomplete. The Tax Assessor's decision on eligibility to participate in the Program shall be final.
19
20 Sec. 6. Determination of eligibility and amount of eligibility
21 If the Tax Assessor determines that the applicant is eligible to participate in the Program, he/she shall determine
22 the amount of the benefit paid. The amount shall be the least of the following:
23
24 1. Eligibility for Homeowners
25 a. The amount, if any, by which the taxes assessed for fiscal year of the Town beginning on July 1 of the
26 preceding calendar year exceeds 5% of the federal adjusted gross income of the applicant and any other adult
27 members of the applicant's household combined (total household income); or
28
29 b. A pro-rata share of the available monies in the Program Fund, including any amount in the Property Tax
30 Assistance Reserve Account, allocated based on the amount of the refunds determined under sub-section a for
31 all eligible applicants; or
32
33 c. $500.00.
34
35 In the case of applicants who did not file federal income tax returns, the Tax Assessor, upon presentation of
36 adequate information returns and other information, shall calculate the federal adjusted gross income.
37
38 2. Eligibility for Renters
39 a. The amount, if any, by which the taxes assessed for fiscal year of the Town beginning on July 1 of the
40 preceding calendar year exceeds 18% of the federal adjusted gross income of the applicant and any other adult
41 members of the applicant's household combined (total household income). The Tax Assessor, upon presentation
42 of adequate documents and other information, shall determine the amount of rent, which shall include rent
43 paid from own funds by the applicant, and any other adult members of the applicant's household combined
44 (total household income) in the preceding calendar year.
45
46 b. A pro-rata share of the available monies in the Program Fund, including any amount in the Property Tax
47 Assistance Reserve Account, allocated based on the amount of the refunds determined under sub-section a for
48 all eligible applicants; or
2
1
2 c. $500.00.
3
4 Sec. 7. Timing of Payments ,,,_ : ! .
5 A person who qualifies for payment under this Program shall be mailed a check for the full amount no later than
6 March 15th for the year in which participation is sought.
7
8 Sec. 8. Limitations upon payments
9 Only one qualifying applicant per household shall be entitled to payment under this Program each year. The
10 right to file an application under this Ordinance is personal to the applicant and does not survive the applicant's
11 death, but the right may be exercised on behalf of an applicant by the applicant's legal guardian or attorney-in-
12 fact. If an applicant dies after having filed a timely complete application that results in a determination of
13 qualification, the amount determined by the Tax Assessor shall be disbursed to another member of the
14 household as determined by the Town Assessor in consultation with the Town Manager. If the applicant was the
15 only member of a household, then no payment shall be made under this Ordinance.
16
17 Sec. 9. Annual Report to the Town Council
18 The Tax Assessor shall report in writing to the Town Council no later than December 31st of each year the
19 projected payments, number of eligible applicants requesting assistance for the program fund, and any surplus
20 or shortage of program funds as described in Sec. 3.
21
22
23
24
3




