{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
CHAPTER 1
THE CITY SEAL
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
Section 101. The City Seal.
The design hereto annexed shall be the device of the City Seal, and the inscription shall be as
follows, to wit:
“CITY OF ELLSWORTH, STATE OF MAINE, 1869”
City Seal
City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 2
Building Code
This ordinance was repealed on 7/1/2012.

CHAPTER 3
HARBOR ORDINANCE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noël Grindle
City Clerk
Repealed and replaced March 18, 2013
Amended November 18, 2013
Amended April 16, 2018
Repealed/Replaced Article 1 Section 5 May 21, 2018
Amended November 8, 2019
Amended December 16, 2019
2
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. HARBOR ORDINANCE ADOPTION
Pursuant to title 38, M.R.S.A., Subchapter 1 and 30-A M.R.S.A. § 3001, as amended, the
City Council of Ellsworth, Maine, hereby adopts the following ordinance, entitled
“HARBOR ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY OF ELLSWORTH,” and establishes the
boundaries for the harbor.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE
This ordinance is to establish regulations for marine activities within the harbors,
waterways, and tidal waters of the City of Ellsworth, Maine to insure safety to persons
and property, to promote availability and use of a valuable public resource. This
ordinance shall be subordinate to existing Federal and State laws governing the same
matters and is not intended to preempt other valid laws.
SECTION 3. INNER AND OUTER HARBOR LIMITS
“Harbors and waterways” shall include the following:
The Harbor shall be divided into an inner and an outer harbor.
A. Inner Harbor: Beginning on the easterly side of the Union River at Tinker’s Wharf
so called, high water line; thence proceeding northerly along the shore to the Union
River Bridge; thence proceeding westerly along said bridge to the westerly shore of
the Union River; thence southerly along the high water mark of the western shore of
the Union River to N 44o 31’ .703”, W 068o 25’ .551”; thence proceeding easterly to
the point of beginning.
B. Outer Harbor: “Beginning on the easterly side of Union River, at Tinker’s Wharf
so called, high water line; thence proceeding southerly along the shore to the
Ellsworth City line; thence proceeding westerly to the Ellsworth/Surry line; thence
northerly along the high water mark of the western shore of Union River to N 44o 31’
.703”, W 068o 25’ .551”; thence proceeding easterly to the point of beginning.
Tidal waters shall include all waters which ebb and flow between high tide and mean low
water within the harbor and waterway of the City of Ellsworth.
SECTION 4. HARBORMASTER
(a) The Harbormaster will be recommended by the Harbor Commission and
appointed by the City Manager. The term will be for one year and run from July 1
through June 30. Certain duties and responsibilities of this office are prescribed
by Title 38, M.R.S.A. The Harbormaster has the additional duty to administer and
enforce the provisions of this ordinance with the authority granted by law and
through his appointment as Harbormaster. The Harbormaster will provide
technical assistance and submit periodic reports as requested to the Harbor
Commission.
3
(b) A Deputy Harbormaster may be appointed upon recommendation of the
Harbormaster. The compensation of the Harbormaster and Deputy shall be
established by the City Council.
(c) In addition to the duties prescribed under Title 38, M.R.S.A., the Harbormaster
and Deputy shall be the overseers of the City’s waterfront facilities such as
moorings, floats, docks, ramps, parking areas, picnic areas, and any buildings or
structures in the harbor area. They shall make recommendations to the Harbor
Commission for maintenance and improvements to all city-owned waterfront
facilities. They shall have full authority to enforce all harbor regulations affecting
the waterfront to the fullest extent permitted by law.
(d) The Harbormaster, and all law enforcement officers, shall have the authority
and power to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and all other laws and
ordinances that are applicable to the harbor, waterfront and watercraft.
(e) No person shall assault, intimidate or in any manner willfully obstruct,
intimidate or hinder the Harbormaster or his Deputy in the lawful performance of
their duties.
(f)The Harbormaster shall not carry a sidearm.
(g) The Harbormaster will attend such training as recommended by the Harbor
Commission and as directed by the City Manager.
SECTION 5: THE ELLSWORTH HARBOR COMMISSION
1. Duties and Powers of the Harbor Commission:
The Duties of the Harbor Commission shall consist of harbor planning, operation,
and regulation. The Commission shall make recommendations to the City
Manager and City Council in matters that directly concern the waterfront area,
marina, and Harbor Park including the duties and responsibilities of the Harbor
Master and Deputy Harbormaster.
2. Appointment:
a. Commission Members shall be appointed by the City Council upon
recommendation from the Harbor Commission and sworn in by the City Clerk
or other person authorized to administer oaths.
b. The Board shall consist of seven (7) Fulltime Members and three (3) Alternate
Members.
c. The terms of the Fulltime Members shall be three (3) year staggered terms with
two member terms expiring each year on June 30 except that every third year
three member terms shall expire. Alternate Members shall serve a one (1) year
term which ends on June 30.
3. Qualifications:
4
Members shall be either a resident or real estate property owner of the City of
Ellsworth.
4. Organization and Rules:
a. Officers: The board shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson, and secretary
from among its members in January of each year. The term of each of these
officers shall be for a maximum of one (1) year with eligibility for re-election.
b. Meetings: Meetings shall be held once a month. If a meeting is to be
cancelled or the date is to be changed proper notice must be given to the
public by posting notice at City Hall. Special meetings may be called by a
majority of the full time members or Chairman with proper notice to the
membership and the general public.
c. Quorum: The board shall not act without a quorum of at least four (4)
members.
d. Alternates: Alternate members shall attend all meetings of the Commission
and participate in its proceedings but may vote only when there are fewer than
seven (7) voting Fulltime Members present. Alternate Members shall be
designated by the Chairperson to participate and vote when a member is
unable to act because of conflict of interest, physical incapacity, absence, or
any other reason satisfactory to the Chairperson. Designated participation
shall be based on seniority.
e. Public Record: The Secretary, or designee, shall keep a record of its
resolutions, transactions, correspondence, findings, and determinations shall
be filed with the City Clerk upon approval by the Commission.
SECTION 6. INVALIDITY PROVISION
If any provision of this ordinance is held invalid or inoperative, the remainder shall
continue in full force and effect as though such invalid or inoperative provision had not
been made.
SECTION 7. ORDINANCE DISTRIBUTION
Copies of all harbor ordinances and amendments will be available to the public at the
Harbormaster’s office.
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
1. Anchorage: Shall mean an area of the harbor set aside for permanent moorings or
for the temporary anchoring of boats and vessels.
2. Auxiliary: Shall mean any vessel having both sails and either an inboard or
outboard motor and which may be propelled by its sails or by its motor or both.
3. Basin: Shall mean a naturally or artificially enclosed or nearly enclosed body of
water where small craft may lie.
4. Commercial Vessel: Shall mean any vessel used or engaged for any type of
commercial venture, including but not limited to fishing or carrying cargo and/or
passengers for hire.
5
5. Distress: Shall mean a state of disability of a present or obviously imminent
danger which, if duly prolonged could endanger life or property.
6. Emergency: Shall mean a state of imminent or proximate danger to life or
property in which time is of the essence.
7. Float: Shall mean any floating structure normally used as a point of transfer for
passengers and goods and/or for mooring purposes.
8. Illegally Berthed: Shall mean docking a vessel without permission or permit
from the Harbormaster.
9. Mooring: Shall mean any appliance used by a craft for anchoring purposes and
which appliance is not carried aboard such craft when underway as regular
equipment.
10. Mooring, Abandoned: Shall mean a mooring that remains unused for a year.
11. Nonresident: Shall mean all persons without a residence in the City of Ellsworth.
12. Resident: Shall mean any person owning or renting real property in the City of
Ellsworth who uses that property as a residence.
13. Riparian Owner: Shall mean an owner of a parcel of land located in the City of
Ellsworth which borders upon the harbor as described in Article 1, Section 3.
14. Shore: Shall mean that part of the land in immediate contact with a body of
water, including the area between the high and low water lines.
15. Shall and May: “Shall” is mandatory. “May” is permissive.
16. State: Shall mean the State of Maine.
17. Stray Vessel: Shall mean (1) an abandoned vessel; (2) a vessel the owner of
which is unknown; (3) a vessel underway without a competent person in
command.
18. To Anchor: Shall mean to secure a vessel to the bottom within a body of water
by dropping an anchor or anchors or some other ground tackle.
19. Underway: Shall mean the condition of a vessel not at anchor; without moorings;
and not made fast to the shore nor aground.
20. Vessel: Shall mean a watercraft of any kind including boats, scows, dredges, and
barges but excluding floats and shellfish cars, other structures permanently
attached to moorings.
21. Vessel, Derelict: A vessel shall be considered “derelict” if any of the following
circumstances exist: a. the vessel is fastened to neither a mooring nor an anchor;
b. the vessel lacks any license or registration, from any authority, the possession
of which is a prerequisite to the operation of such a vessel; 3. the vessel is
submerged to a level substantially above its normal water line, and remains so for
a period of at least fourteen (14) consecutive days without reasonable explanation;
4. the vessel is damaged to such an extent that it cannot be moved under its own
power.
22. Visiting Vessel/Transient: A vessel will be considered visiting or transient if
the vessel is not normally moored or does not have a permanent mooring in the
harbor.
23. Waterway: Shall mean any water area providing access from one place to
another, principally a water area providing a regular route for water.
24. Regular Season: May 15th through October 15th.
25. Extended Season: April 2 through May 14th and October 16th through December
5th.
ARTICLE III
6
GENERAL BOATING AND TRAFFIC CONTROL
SECTION 1. TRAFFIC CONTROL AUTHORITY
The Harbormaster or his Deputy shall have the authority to control waterborne traffic in
any portion of the harbor under his jurisdiction by use of authorized State regulatory
markers, signal, orders or directions and/or at any time preceding, during and after any
race, regatta, parade or other special event held in any portion of the waters of the harbor
or at any time when the Harbormaster deems it necessary in the interest of safety of
persons and vessels or other property and it shall be unlawful for any person to willfully
fail or refuse to comply with any authorized State regulatory marker utilized by the
Harbormaster, or with any signs, orders or direction of the Harbormaster.
SECTION 2. BASIC SPEED LAWS
The operation of any vessel within the harbor area in excess of posted speed limits or, in
the absence of such limits, in a manner to create a wash which endangers persons or
property, shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance; provided that special written
permission may be granted to conduct or engage in water sports and regattas in specific
designated areas.
ARTICLE IV
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION 1. LIABILITY
Boat Owner: Any person using the facilities within the limits of the harbor area shall
assume all risk of danger or loss of his property, and the City of Ellsworth assumes no
risk on account of fire, theft, act of God, or damages of any kind to vessels within the
harbor or on land facilities.
SECTION 2. LAUNCHING AND RECOVERY OF VESSELS
None other than the driver may occupy a motor vehicle while it is present upon the area
known as a launching ramp located within the City of Ellsworth.
SECTION 3. PERMITS AND REGISTRATON PROCEDURE
A. All permits granted under the authority of this Ordinance shall be valid only for
such period as may be determined by the Harbor Commission and permits of unqualified
duration or validity shall not be granted. Separate permits and payment of fees are
required for the Regular Season and the Extended Season.
B. Each mooring owner will annually submit a mooring permit application and pay a
fee set by the Ellsworth City Council. This fee shall be paid to the City Treasurer on or
before May 15th of each year. Failure to comply will incur late fees and may result in
removal of mooring and loss of berth. Mooring applications are located at Ellsworth City
Hall.
7
C. Each year, a waiting list for mooring space shall be created. New applicants must
fill out and return a mooring waiting list application with payment to the Harbormaster.
The applicant shall pay an annual waiting list fee set by the City Council to remain on a
waiting list until a mooring space is approved or denied by the Harbormaster. Mooring
spaces shall be approved or denied on a first come, first serve basis.
SECTION 4. DAMAGE TO HARBOR OR OTHER PROPERTY
It shall be unlawful to willfully or carelessly destroy, damage, disturb or interfere with
any public or private property in the harbor area.
SECTION 5. TAMPERING WITH OR BOARDING VESSELS WITHOUT
PERMISSION
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person to willfully board, break into,
move or tamper with any vessel or part thereof, located within the harbor unless
authorized by the rightful owner of such vessel. Violation of this provision shall
constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by the penalties herein above provided for
violations of this Ordinance and to additional penalties not to exceed the aggregate of
$1,000 and six months imprisonment for each offense. Any person violating this
provision shall, in addition, be responsible to the rightful owner of any such vessel for
any damage caused by such violation and to the reasonable cost of any attorney’s fees
incurred as a result thereof.
SECTION 6. SIGNS AND MAINTENANCE
The Harbor Commission, through the Harbormaster, may place and maintain, cause to be
placed and maintained, either on land or water such signs, notices, signal buoys or control
devices as they deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance, or to secure
public safety and the orderly and efficient use of the harbor or facilities.
SECTION 7. GENERAL RESTRICTIONS
For the safety of the vessels and the general public the following activities are not
allowed:
a) casting stones, rocks or other material into the waters of the harbor
b) swimming from the floats or from any watercraft that are secured to the floats.
c) All types of fishing, with the exception of fly fishing, are permitted from the
floats however, the fishing lines shall in no way hamper the tying up of
vessels and of those approaching the floats.
d) the use the launching ramp for more than twenty (20) minutes without the
permission of the Harbormaster.
e) tying a boat to the floats or wharf for more than two (2) hours on the front
(western) side and four (4) hours on the back (northeastern) side without
permission of the Harbor Master. The southeastern side is reserved for
dinghies and tenders.
8
f) grounding out, tying up or permitting to be grounded out, any watercraft on
the launching ramp.
g) The placing of any skid, trailer, boat or any other craft on the waterfront
grounds are allowed in designated areas only, or by permission of the
Harbormaster.
SECTION 8. HARBORMASTER’S BOAT
Any vessel provided by the city shall be for the safety and maintenance of Ellsworth
Harbor. Any other use is forbidden without the approval of the City Manager.
The vessel shall be under the direct control of the Harbormaster. No person shall use the
Harbormaster’s vessel without express permission of the Harbormaster.
SECTION 9. DATES AND HOURS OF OPERATION
A. The Ellsworth Harbor will be open from May 15th through October 15th of each
year (the “Regular Season”). Normally, the Harbormaster or designee will be on duty
between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. Boats must be removed from the Ellsworth Harbor on or
before October 22nd of each year unless an Extended Season permit has been obtained.
B. The Harbor park shall be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
except for those boat owners staying on board overnight, loading or unloading boats
and/or with written permission of the Harbormaster.
C. The City of Ellsworth may provide dockage in Ellsworth Harbor to vessel owners
from October 16th through December 5th and April 2nd through May 14th (the “Extended
Season”). The Harbormaster will not have regular duty hours during the extended season
but will be on-call as needed. Boats with an Extended Season permit must be removed
from the Ellsworth Harbor on or before December 10th of each year.
SECTION 10. EXTENDED SEASON DOCKAGE
A. The City of Ellsworth may, but is not required to, provide dockage in Ellsworth
Harbor to vessel owners during the Extended Season.
B. The use of moorings during this period shall not be permitted.
C. The Harbormaster will not have regular duty hours during the Extended Season
but will be on-call as needed.
D. All boats tied up to the City’s docks/slips shall have valid insurance. Evidence of
insurance will be required in the application process.
E. The owner or designee shall check on the vessel on a weekly basis and shall
inform the Harbormaster each week.
9
F. No permit for Extended Season dockage will be issued unless the owner agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the City of Ellsworth and its employees for any damage,
harm, or injury due to equipment failure, inclement weather, or dock system failure.
G. The Harbormaster at all times retains the right to require an owner to remove a
vessel.
ARTICLE V
ANCHORING, MOORING AND SECURITY OF VESSELS
SECTION 1. PLACEMENT OF PRIVATE MOORINGS OR FLOATS
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to place any mooring or float in the harbor
without a permit from the Harbormaster.
SECTION 2. MINIMUM MOORING REQUIREMENTS
Size of Boat Below 16’ 17’to25’ 26’to35’ Over36’
Weight of Block 500# 1000# 1500# 2000#
Size of Chain 16 1/2” ½” ½” ½”
Size of Nylon ½” ½” ½” ¾”
All mooring buoys shall conform to Coast Guard regulations and are to show at all tides.
All mooring gear is to be inspected by the Harbormaster before setting.
Vessels being moored or berthed at the Ellsworth Harbor cannot exceed 39.5 feet (length
overall) or a beam exceeding 12 feet.
The Harbormaster shall maintain a plot plan of all mooring locations showing depth of
water at mean low tide for each mooring and owner of each mooring.
The minimum number of days that a vessel must occupy the designated mooring or slip is
45 days. Any exceptions to the time requirement must be recommended by the
Harbormaster and approved by the Harbor Commission. Failure to satisfy this
requirement shall result in the loss of the mooring or slip space and if not removed from
the Harbor by November 1st of that year, shall be deemed abandoned. It is the
Harbormaster’s responsibility to document the noncompliance of this requirement.
A vessel owner may only occupy either a slip or a mooring during the season. A
household cannot occupy or hold both a mooring and a slip.
The owner of a mooring that has been set in the harbor shall not sublet the mooring or
mooring space to any other, except with permission of the Harbormaster.
An abandoned mooring shall become the property of the City of Ellsworth after an
attempt has been made to notify the owner. The abandoned mooring will be removed and
disposed of in accordance with the City’s policy on the sale of surplus property.
10
SECTION 3. USE OF A CITY MOORING OR FLOATS
a) Permission may be granted by the Harbormaster for a private vessel to use a
city mooring temporarily without charge for up to 24 hours. Private vessels
docked at City facilities for a period in excess of 4 hours shall pay docking
fees as hereinafter provided or as posted.
b) Docking is limited to fourteen (14) consecutive days followed by an absence
of fourteen (14) consecutive days.
c) No person shall store traps, bait, fishing gear, boats or waste material on the
floats at any time. Said gear may be loaded and unloaded only in a speedy
fashion.
SECTION 4. VESSELS MAKING FAST
No person shall make fast or secure a vessel to any mooring already occupied by another
vessel, or to a vessel already moored except a rowboat, dinghy or yacht tender regularly
used by such a larger vessel. If tied within a slip, such rowboat, dinghy or tender shall not
extend into the fairway beyond the larger vessel if such larger vessel is also occupying
the slip or otherwise beyond the larger vessel if such larger vessel is also occupying the
slip or otherwise beyond the slip itself.
The owner of any vessel moored or anchored within Ellsworth harbor shall be
responsible for causing such vessels to be tied and secured with proper care and
equipment and in such manner as may be required to prevent breakaway and/or
dragging of mooring and resulting in damage to other watercraft and property,
and shall thereafter provide for inspection of the placement and adjustment of the
vessel’s mooring by August 1. In addition, every two years, each owner shall
allow visual inspection by the Harbormaster, or his qualified designee, of each
vessel’s mooring and the mooring’s related equipment including, but not limited
to, floats, chains and staples. If the mooring is assigned an odd number, that
mooring will require inspection on an odd year. If the mooring is assigned an
even number, that mooring will require inspection on an even year. It is the
Harbormaster’s responsibility to retain and maintain inspection documentation. If
an inspection has not been performed by August 1, the vessel is considered
illegally berthed, the Harbormaster may proceed with an enforcement action as
described in Article 10 Section 4. Before removing the mooring, the
Harbormaster shall notify the master or owner, if ownership can be determine, by
mail at the last known address of the action desired of him, the fact that the
mooring will be removed and the fine. The Harbormaster shall also notify the
City Manager and the Harbor Commission of such intended action. If the matter is
not settled to his satisfaction within two weeks, the Harbormaster may take the
action provided for in this section.
SECTION 5. MOORING VESSELS TO BUOYS
No person shall moor any watercraft to any buoy, beacon or other marker placed in the
harbor to mark and define the harbor channels, or in any manner to make said watercraft
fast thereto or to willfully destroy any such buoy, beacon or other marker.
11
SECTION 6. SKIFFS AND DINGHIES
Skiffs and dinghies may be secured to designated areas provided they comply with the
following:
a. Each skiff or dinghy shall be clearly and visibly marked with at least the
corresponding mooring number;
b. Skiffs or dinghies shall not be secured to the face of the Harbor’s main float;
c. All skiffs and dinghies shall be properly secured, maintained, and bailed and
shall be secured at the bow only;
d. Skiffs and dinghies secured in the designated areas may be no longer than 10
feet (LOA) and no wider than a maximum beam of 5 feet;
e. Dinghies shall not be left on the launching ramp, floats or piers.
SECTION 7. MOORING REPLACEMENT
a. If the Harbormaster determines that a mooring needs to be removed or
replaced with one of a different character, the Harbormaster may so direct the
master or owner of the vessel whose mooring it is to do so.
b. If the owner or master of the vessel neglects or refuses to comply with the
Harbormaster’s order, the Harbormaster may, subject to subsection C, cause the
entire mooring to be removed or the buoy removed and the chain dropped to the
bottom or shall make such change in the character of the mooring as required and
collect from the master or owner of that boat or vessel the sum of $100 for either
of those services rendered and the necessary expenses.
c. Before removing a mooring or a buoy, the Harbormaster shall notify the master
or owner, if ownership can be determine, by mail at the last known address of the
action desired of him, the fact that the mooring will be removed and the fine. The
Harbormaster shall also notify the City Manager and the Harbor Commission of
such intended action. If the matter is not settled to his satisfaction within two
weeks, the Harbormaster may take the action provided for in this section.
ARTICLE VI
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
No person shall tie up or permit to be tied up to the City Dock any watercraft for any
commercial purpose except with the permission of the Harbormaster.
12
ARTICLE VII
SANITATION REGULATIONS
SECTION 1. DISCHARGE OF REFUSE
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to discharge or permit the discharge into the water
of the harbor of any refuse, waste matter from toilets, petroleum or petroleum matter,
paint, varnish or any other foreign matter, including dead animals, fish and bait.
SECTION 2. RESPONSIBILITY FOR SANITATION OF VESSELS
The owner, lessee, agent, captain or person in charge of a vessel within the Ellsworth
harbor shall be responsible for any costs of clean-up. Should the Harbormaster find that
any vessel or watercraft is not complying with this Ordinance he shall, in writing, notify
the said owner, lessee, agent or captain or other person in charge of said vessel to
immediately halt such action and commence to prosecute to completion of the correction
or the unsanitary condition to the satisfaction of the Harbormaster. Failure to do so with
reasonable dispatch shall be in violation of this Article, and the Harbormaster may then
cause the condition to be corrected and the cost of such correction shall be charged to
said owner, lessee, captain or any other person in charge.
ARTICLE VIII
SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE
SECTION 1. FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS AND/OR MATERIALS
Within the harbor area boundary, including parking areas, etc., no person shall sell, offer
for sale or deliver in bulk any class of flammable liquid or combustible material, nor
dispense any flammable or combustible liquids in the fuel tanks of a vessel except when
in compliance with all requirements of the N.F.P.A. Code 31, fire code and any other
laws or regulations applicable thereto.
SECTION 2. OBSTRUCTION TO DOCKS AND WALKWAYS
Obstruction to docks and walkways within the harbor area by mooring lines, water hoses,
electrical cables, boarding ladders, permanently fixed stairs or any other materials is
strictly prohibited.
SECTION 3. MOTOR VEHICLES
Motor vehicles are not to be left unattended on or near the launching ramp. All motor
vehicles are to be parked only in designated areas, unless otherwise notified by the
Harbormaster. Motor vehicle operators are to comply with all parking regulations as
posted by the City of Ellsworth.
SECTION 4. OBSTRUCTING CHANNELS
It shall be a violation of the Ordinance to knowingly or willfully obstruct the free use of
any channel or waterway within the harbor or to fail to report to the Harbormaster any
13
collision between vessels or other accident or incident causing damage to persons or
property.
SECTION 5. UNSAFE BERTHING
If any vessel shall be found, in the judgment of the Harbormaster, to be anchored or
moored within the harbor facility in an unsafe or dangerous manner, or in such a way as
to create a hazard to other vessels or to persons or property, the Harbormaster shall order
and direct measures to eliminate such unsafe or dangerous condition. Primary
responsibility for such compliance with such orders and directions shall rest with the
owner of the improperly anchored or moored vessel or his authorized agent. In the
absence of such owner or agent, said responsibility shall rest with the authorized operator
of the facility at which the vessel is anchored or moored. In an emergency situation in the
absence of any such responsible person, the Harbormaster shall forthwith board such
vessel and cause the improper situation to be corrected, and the owner of the vessel shall
be liable for any costs incurred by the City of Ellsworth in effecting such correction.
ARTICLE IX
FEES
Upon recommendation of the Harbor Commission, the City Council shall approve all fees
pertaining to the Ellsworth Harbor.
All fees shall go into the General Fund of the City of Ellsworth.
ARTICLE X
ENFORCEMENT
Except where stricter penalties are provided for elsewhere in this Ordinance, or under
state or federal law, any violation of this Ordinance shall be a civil offense punishable
pursuant to 30-M.R.S.A. 4452(5)(R), as amended. Each day that such violation continues
to exist shall constitute a separate violation. Any fines collected for the benefit of the City
of Ellsworth shall be deposited in the General Fund. The Harbormaster and any law
enforcement officer vested with the authority to carry a weapon and make arrests shall
have the authority to enforce this Ordinance. All civil prosecutions under this Ordinance
shall be prosecuted by the City Attorney pursuant to the Charter of the City of Ellsworth
(Article V, part 4).
SECTION 1. NON-PAYMENT OF FEES
If the Harbormaster determines that a fee, charge for service, or forfeiture or penalty
imposed by the City of Ellsworth under this ordinance has not been paid, the
Harbormaster shall notify the master or owner of a vessel by mailing the notice to the last
known address by first class mail, or if no current address is known, by leaving a copy of
the notice on the vessel if the vessel is in the Ellsworth Harbor.
If the Harbormaster determines that a fee, charge for service, or forfeiture or penalty
imposed by the City of Ellsworth under this ordinance has not been paid from a previous
season, the Harbormaster may refuse to assign mooring privileges to any vessel, boat
owner, or master until all such arrears are paid in full.
14
SECTION 2. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS
A violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or of any other applicable Ordinance by
any permittee, including the non-payment of all fees and charges for service, shall be
grounds for suspension or revocation of such permits.
The Harbormaster will notify the City Manager and Harbor Commission if the
Harbormaster recommends suspension or revocation to the City Council.
The City Council shall convene a hearing to suspend or revoke the owner’s permits. A
notice to the owner shall be provided that includes instructions and rights to have a
hearing with the Ellsworth City Council.
SECTION 3. REMOVAL AND CUSTODY OF ILLEGALLY BERTHED OR
ABANDONED VESSELS
The Harbormaster may assume custody of a vessel and cause it to be removed when:
a. Any unattended vessel shall be found to be secured, moored illegally, or moored
without permission or permit within the harbor.
b. The mooring has not been inspected per Article 5 Section 4, or
c. If the Harbormaster has reasonable cause to believe that a vessel has been
abandoned within the harbor.
d. If the Harbormaster concludes that a vessel poses an immediate threat to the
health, safety, or welfare of persons using either the Harbor or lands adjoining the
Harbor, the Harbormaster has directed the master or owner of such vessel to
immediately move the vessel and the master or owner of such vessel has refused.
e. Upon receiving a complaint from the owner of a vessel that another vessel is
obstructing the free movement or safe anchorage or owner’s vessel, the
Harbormaster shall direct the master or owner of such vessel to move the vessel to
a position to be designated by the Harbormaster and the master or owner of such
has refused.
f. If the Harbormaster finds any vessel anchoring within the channel lines as
established by the City of Ellsworth, the Harbormaster shall direct the master or
owner of such vessel to remove such anchorage and the master or owner of such
vessel has refused.
The City of Ellsworth and its officials shall not be held liable for any damage to such
vessel or liable to its owners before or after assuming custody. Vessels so taken into
custody shall be released to the owner by the Harbormaster only after satisfactory proof
of ownership has been presented and full reimbursement made to the City for all costs
incident to recovery, movement and/or storage.
15
SECTION 4: PROCEDURES FOR IMPOUNDING VESSELS
If a vessel has no crew on board or if the master or other person in charge neglects or
refuses to move such vessel as directed by the Harbormaster, the Harbormaster may put a
suitable crew on board and move that vessel to a suitable berth at a wharf or anchorage at
the cost and risk of the owners of the vessel and shall charge $100 to be paid by the
master or owner of that vessel, which charge, together with the cost of the crew for
removing that vessel the Harbormaster may collect by civil action.
Within 24 hours of such action, the Harbormaster shall notify the master or owner of the
vessel, the City Manager, and the Harbor Commission of such action.
ARTICLE X
ENACTMENT
When duly enacted upon and approved by the Harbor Commission and the Ellsworth
City Council, this Ordinance shall supersede any and all ordinances pertaining to the
harbor and/or the Union River in the City of Ellsworth previously enacted.
1 Harbor Fee Schedule:
Annual Waiting List Application Fee $10 per year
Annual Slip Waiting List Application $25 per year2
Resident Mooring Fee, Inner Harbor $150 per mooring, per year3
Non-Resident Mooring Fee, Inner Harbor $150 per mooring, per year4
Outer Harbor Mooring Fee $10 per mooring, per year
Float Mooring Fee $25.00 per year5
Guest Mooring Fee $20 per night
Dinghy fees None
Power fee – Transient Vessels $5 per night6
Floating Dock $17 per foot * per season7
Main Dock Fee: $1.50 per foot, per day, after 4 hours or at the discretion of
the Harbormaster.
Dock “B” Extension $30 per foot, per season8
Harbor Slips 30’ $1,600 per season 9
Harbor Slips 25’ $1,350 per season 10
Harbor Slips ½ $ 1,000 per season11
Weekly Slips Rental $150 per week12
After hour events and compensation $30 per hour, minimum of two hours.13
Transient Slip Cost $2 per foot per night14
Mooring/Slip Application Late Fee $50 per application15
Harbor Park Event (Ellsworth Taxpayer/
Mooring or Slip Owner) $50 per event 16
Harbor Park Event (Non Taxpayers) $100 per event17
To be reviewed annually as deemed necessary by the Harbor Commission18
Extended Season (pro-rated) $140 per month19
*Per overall length of the boat including bow sprit and swim platforms
Approved at the November 8, 2019 Special Council Meeting.
A True Copy
Attest:_________________________________
Heidi-Noël Grindle
1 Approved 10/18/2010
2 Approved 3/18/2013
3 Approved 2/8/2016
4 Approved 2/8/2016
5 Approved 4/16/2018
6 Approved 3/18/2013
7 Approved 2/8/2016
8 Approved 3/21/2016
9 Approved 2/8/2016
10 Approved 2/8/2016
11 Approved 1/11/2016
12 Approved 5/16/2011
13 Approved 7/18/2011
14 Approved 3/18/2013
15 Approved 3/18/2013
16 Approved 8/19/2013
17 Approved 8/19/2013
18 Approved 3/18/2013 as part of the motion for CO#031307
19 Approved 11/8/2019 Special Council meeting
PAGE 1........04-18-2017
CHAPTER 4
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted 7/21/2008
Effective date 9/1/2008
Amended 6/20/2011
Amended 4/15/2013
Amended 4/17/2017
PAGE 2........04-18-2017
Chapter 4
Fire Protection and Prevention
Table of Contents
Art. I. Ordinance Authority Page 3
Art. II. Adopted codes and references Page 3
Art. III. Fire Prevention Page 6
Art. IV. Ventilation and Fire Extinguishing Systems Page 13
Art. V. Fire Alarm Systems Page 15
Art. VI. Sprinkler Systems Page 19
Art. VII. Water Supplies for Fire Fighting Page 24
Art. VIII. Definitions Page 28
Art. IX. Penalties and fines Page 30
Appendix Page 31
PAGE 3........04-18-2017
Article I
Ordinance Authority
Sec. 1.1 This Ordinance shall be effective September 1, 2008.
*Amended 6/20/2011
*Amended 4/15/2013
*Amended 4/17/2017
Sec. 1.2 Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are in conflict with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation, ordinance, the more
restrictive requirements shall govern.
Sec. 1.3 If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of this Ordinance shall be held to
be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions
of this ordinance and to that end, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared
to be severable.
Article II
Adopted Codes and References
Sec. 2.1 The City of Ellsworth adopts all Codes, Standards, Rules, and Statues
including admissions and omissions as adopted by the State of Maine Fire Marshal’s
Office and Title 25, chapters 313-321 as the basis for inspection, plans review and
enforcement for buildings other than one and two family dwellings. (Standards,
Rules, Codes and Maine Revised Statues adopted by the State Fire Marshal’s Office
appear in appendix attached hereto as amended)
Sec. 2.2 Municipal plans review for fire and life safety
The City of Ellsworth shall review construction projects of public buildings as
described in MRS Title 25 section 2448.
Sec. 2.2.1 Fire and Life Safety Plans Review FEE SCHEDULE
The City of Ellsworth, in accordance with requirements of the Maine
Administrative Procedure Act, establish a schedule of fees for the examination of
all plans for construction, reconstruction or repairs submitted to the City of
Ellsworth. The fee schedule for new construction or new use is 5¢ per square foot
for occupied spaces and 2¢ per square foot for bulk storage occupancies, except that
a fee for review of a plan for new construction by a public school may not exceed
$450. The fee schedule for reconstruction, repairs or renovations is based on the
cost of the project and may not exceed $450. For projects reviewed by the City of
Ellsworth that include occupied spaces, a 1¢ fee per square foot must be remitted
to the Department of Public Safety and a 4¢ fee per square foot shall be retained by
the municipality.
The City of Ellsworth shall not charge a developer a fee that is in excess of the 4¢
fee per square foot for fire and life safety plans review construction permits. This
limitation does not prohibit the City of Ellsworth from charging fees for other
construction-related permits.
PAGE 4........04-18-2017
Sec. 2.2.2 Surcharge fee for Uniform Building Codes and Standard
In addition to the fees established in Section 2.2.1, a surcharge of 4¢ per square
foot of occupied space shall be levied for new construction, reconstruction, repairs,
renovations or new use. The surcharge fee is for the sole purpose of funding the
activities of the Technical Building Codes and Standards Board with respect to the
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code.
Sec 2.2.3 Barrier-Free Construction Permits
All projects applying for a Barrier-Free Permit are also required to apply for a
Construction Permit. Barrier-Free permits are issued in conjunction with a
construction permits. The Office of State Fire Marshal issues Barrier Free permits.
A Design Professional, licensed with the State of Maine, is required on projects
over $75,000 to certify compliance with state and federal accessibility laws. (This
applies whether the project is new construction or an alteration.)
The builder shall provide the certification to the Office of the State Fire Marshal
with the plans of the facility.
The builder shall also provide the certification to the municipality where the
facility exists or will be built.
Sec. 2.2.3.1 New Construction projects.*
Regardless of cost or size, the following occupancies require a Barrier-Free
permit:
• State, municipal or county
• Education
• Health care, residential care nursing homes or any facility licensed by the
Department of Health and Human Services
• Public assembly
• Hotel, motel, inn or rooming or lodging house
• Restaurant
• Business occupancy of more than 3,000 square feet or more than one story
• Mercantile occupancy of more than 3,000 square feet or more than one
story
*An alteration is considered to be new construction by the Maine Human
Rights Act if the cost of the alteration is 75% or more of the replacement cost
of the completed facility.
PAGE 5........04-18-2017
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT AND BARRIER-FREE PERMIT FEE SCHEDULES
New Construction
Permit Fee:
$.05/ square foot of occupied space
$.02/ square foot for bulk storage occupancies
Renovations exceeding 80% of occupied space are considered to be new construction.
Note: All public school projects (K – 12) follow the renovation fee schedule below.
Renovations
Permit Fee based on estimated Construction Cost of the entire project
$25.00……………………………………………..For
under………………………………………….....$10,000.00
$50.00……………………………………………….From…………………………………………….....$10,000.00
but less than…………………………………………...$20,000.00
$75.00……………………………………………….From…………………………………………….....$20,000.00
but less than…………………………………………...$50,000.00
$100.00………………………………………………From……………………………………………....$50,000.00
but less than………………………………………….$100,000.00
$150.00………………………………………………From……………………………………………..$100,000.00
but less than………………………………………….$500,000.00
$200.00………………………………………………From……………………………………………..$500,000.00
but less than………………………………………..$1,500,000.00
$250.00………………………………………………From…………………………………………...$1,500,000.00
but less than………………………………………..$2,250,000.00
$350.00………………………………………………From…………………………………………...$2,250,000.00
but less than………………………………………..$3,000,000.00
$450.00………………………………………………From…………………………………………...$3,000,000.00
BARRIER-FREE PERMIT FEES
Permit Fee based on estimated Construction Cost of the entire project
$25.00……………………………………………..For under…………………………………………...$100,000.00
$50.00……………………………………………….From……………………………………………...$100,000.00
but less than………………………………………….$350,000.00
$150.00……………………………………………...From……………………………………………...$350,000.00
but less than………………………………………….$600,000.00
$200.00……………………………………………...From……………………………………………...$600,000.00
but less than………………………………………..$2,000,000.00
$250.00……………………………………………...From……………………………………………$2,000,000.00
PAGE 6........04-18-2017
Article III
Fire Prevention
Sec. 3.1 Fire Prevention Code
The City of Ellsworth Fire Protection and Prevention Code shall be administered and
enforced by the Ellsworth Fire Chief or designee and the city of Ellsworth Code
Enforcement officer or designee.
Sec. 3.2 Fire Inspector
The position of Fire Inspector shall be established within the Fire Department and the
Fire Chief may detail fulltime employees as inspectors, as shall be necessary for the
enforcement of said codes. The inspector(s) shall work under the supervision of the
Fire Chief and serve as the Fire Chiefs’ designee for issues related to this code.
Sec. 3.3 Indoor Open-Flame Devices and Pyrotechnics
The use of indoor open flame devices and indoor pyrotechnics shall be prohibited
within the City of Ellsworth.
Exception:
A. Candles on Tables; Candles must be securely supported on substantial
noncombustible bases and the candle flame must be protected.
B. Candles are allowed in religious ceremonies if under the control of the
facility management
Sec. 3.4 Permits and Approvals
3.4.1 The Fire Chief or designee shall have the authority to issue permits for the
following operations within the jurisdiction:
A. Ventilation and Fire Extinguishing Systems for Commercial Cooking
operations.
Installation of, replacement of, or modification to any ventilation
control and automatic fire extinguishing system for commercial
cooking operations; Required periodic maintenance performed in
accordance with NFPA 96 and manufacture specifications is not
considered a modification and does not require a permit.
B. Fire Extinguishing Systems.
Installation of, replacement of, or modification to any dry chemical,
wet chemical or clean agent automatic fire extinguishing systems;
Required periodic maintenance performed in accordance with NFPA
and manufacture specifications is not considered a modification and
does not require a permit.
PAGE 7........04-18-2017
C. Fire Alarm Systems and Related Equipment.
Installation, of, replacement of, or modification to any fire alarm and
detection systems and related equipment; Required periodic
maintenance performed in accordance with NFPA 72 and
manufacture specifications is not considered a modification and does
not require a permit.
D. Sprinkler Systems and Related Equipment.
Installation of, replacement of, or modification to sprinkler systems
and all related equipment; Required periodic maintenance performed
in accordance with NFPA 25 and manufacture specifications is not
considered a modification and does not require a permit.
E. Outdoor Open Fires
Open burning permit required. No person shall kindle, maintain or
assist in maintaining any outdoor fire within the City without
obtaining a permit from the Fire Chief or designee. The use of
outdoor grills and fireplaces for recreational purposes such as
preparing food is permissible without a permit provided that no fire
hazard is created thereby.
3.4.2 Applications for permits shall be made to the Fire Chief or designee on forms
provided by the Ellsworth Fire Department. Applications for permits shall be
accompanied by additional information as required by the Fire Chief or designee.
3.4.3 The Fire Chief or designee shall review all applications submitted and issue
permits as required. If an application for a permit is rejected, the applicant shall
be advised in writing of the reasons for such rejection.
Exception: Open Burning Permits
3.4.4 A copy of the permit shall be posted or otherwise readily accessible at each
activity site.
3.4.5 Any activity authorized by any permit issued under this Ordinance shall be
conducted by the permittee or the permittee's agents or employees in compliance
with all applicable requirements of this Ordinance and in accordance with the
previously reviewed plans and specifications. No permit issued under this
Ordinance shall be interpreted to justify a violation of any provision of this
Ordinance or any other applicable law or regulation. Any addition to or alteration
of previously reviewed plans or specifications shall be re-evaluated and reviewed in
advance by the Fire Chief or designee, as evidenced by the issuance of a new or
amended permit.
PAGE 8........04-18-2017
3.4.6 Any application for, or acceptance of, any permit requested or issued
pursuant to this Ordinance shall constitute agreement and consent by the person
making the application or accepting the permit to allow the Fire Chief or designee
to enter the premises at any reasonable time to conduct such inspections as
required by this Ordinance.
3.4.7 Any attempt to defraud or otherwise deliberately or knowingly design, install,
service, maintain, operate, sell, offer for sale, falsify records, reports, or
applications, or other related activity in violation of the requirements prescribed by
adopted Codes shall be a violation of this Ordinance. Such violations shall be
cause for immediate suspension or revocation of any related licenses, certificates,
or permits issued by this jurisdiction and may be subject to civil legal action per
Article IX.
3.4.8 The Fire Chief or designee shall have the authority to require an inspection of
the activity site prior to the issuance of a permit.
3.4.9 A permit issued under this Ordinance shall continue until revoked or for the
period of time designated on the permit. The permit shall be issued to one person
or business only and for the location or purpose described in the permit. Any
change that affects any of the conditions of the permit shall require a new or
amended permit.
3.4.10 The Fire Chief or designee shall have the authority to grant an extension of
the permit time period upon presentation by the permittee of a satisfactory reason
for failure to start or complete the work or activity authorized by the permit.
Sec. 3.5 Certificate of Occupancy
For new construction, a Certificate of occupancy may not be signed by the Fire Chief
or designee until all the equipment, devices or systems that were reviewed and
permitted to be installed, have been installed and are operational, and have been
tested by the installer and the testing witnessed by the Fire Chief or designee.
Sec. 3.6 Knox Box ©
The Ellsworth Fire Department utilizes the Knox Box© system. All facilities that are
required to have a fire alarm or a sprinkler system or have an existing fire alarm or
sprinkler system shall have a secure Knox Box©, containing keys to the entire
building and current contact information. Multiple Knox Boxes may be required for
larger structures or where there are multiple secured occupancies within a building or
complex.
3.6.1 Complex with Mixed, Multiple Occupancies or Buildings
A complex with mixed or multiple occupancies or buildings shall have a Knox Box©
located at each main entrance of the buildings or in a location that is approved by
the Fire Chief or designee.
PAGE 9........04-18-2017
3.6.2 Single Buildings with Mixed and Multiple Occupancies
When two (2) or more occupancies are located in one common building, each
individual occupancy shall have their own Knox Box© located at the front entrance
of the occupancy or in a location as approved by the Fire Chief or designee.
3.6.3 Limited Fire Department Access Knox Box© Locations
When a building or buildings that provide limited fire department access due to the
size of the building or buildings, location of the building or buildings on the
property, property size or obstructions to fire apparatus or fire department
personnel, Knox Box© or boxes shall be located as determined by the Fire Chief or
designee.
3.6.4 Knox Box© Installation
The Knox Box© or boxes shall be installed as approved by the Fire Chief or
designee, outside of the entrance with the closest access to the fire alarm panel,
remote annunciator and/or the main entrance of the building or both. The Knox
Box© or boxes shall be installed so as to be clearly visible to approaching fire
apparatus. The Knox Box© or boxes shall be located at a height of 48 inches to 60
inches from the closest finished grade of the building.
3.6.5 Knox Box© Size
The Knox Box© shall be sized according to the number of keys required to gain
entry into and throughout the building or individual occupancy. The number of
keys shall not exceed the Knox Box© specifications for key storage. If changes to
the building or individual occupancy require adding additional keys to the Knox
Box© and the number of keys exceed the manufactures’ specifications for key
storage, then a new Knox Box© of the proper size shall be required to be installed.
3.6.6 Knox Box Use
All private, residential, non-residential, mixed-use, commercial or industrial,
buildings or developments that utilize a key box rapid entry system shall utilize key boxes
manufactured by the Knox Box © Company.
Sec. 3.7 Door Numbering
Occupancies with a gross area in excess of 3,000 square feet shall have all exterior
doors numbered, sequentially in a clockwise manner from the main entrance on both
the exterior and interior of the doors. The numbers shall be a minimum of 5 inches in
height with a 6-inch background so as to be readily visible. Signs shall have white
reflective numbers on a blue reflective background
Exception: One and Two family dwellings
PAGE 10........04-18-2017
Sec. 3.8 E-911 Road Naming System
All roads that serve two or more private, residential, non-residential, mixed-use,
commercial or industrial, buildings or structures shall be named regardless of whether
the ownership is public or private. A "road" refers to any highway, road, street,
avenue, lane, private way, service road or similar paved, gravel, or dirt thoroughfare.
Road names shall be assigned by the City of Ellsworth E-911 Addressing Officer and
approved by the Fire Chief, Police Chief, and Public Works Director or their designee.
A road name assigned by the municipality shall not constitute or imply acceptance of
the road as a public way.
The following criteria shall govern the naming system:
A. No two roads shall be given the same name (ex. Pine Road and
Pine Lane).
B. No two roads shall have similar-sounding names (ex. Beech Lane
and Peach Lane).
C. Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire
length.
3.8.1 Building Numbering
Buildings with a gross area of 3,000 square feet or more shall have numbers affixed
to their exterior that identifies the building’s assigned address. The number(s) will
be located at the direction of the Fire Chief or designee. The size of the numbers
shall be 11 inches in height with a 12-inch background to be readily visible. Signs
shall have white reflective numbers on a blue reflective background.
Exception: One and Two family dwellings
3.8.2 Apartment Identification
Individual apartment identification of a multiple unit apartment building or
complex of buildings shall be identified by utilizing capital letters, starting with
“A”. Letters size shall be no less than 3 inches and no more than 6 inches or as
approved by the Fire Chief or designee. Apartment letter identification shall be
assigned from left to right or “counter-clockwise.” Letters shall be white reflective
numbers on a blue reflective background.
3.8.3 Multi-Unit Commercial Building Individual Suites
Individual commercial units within a multi-unit commercial building shall be
identified as “Suites” and by utilizing capital letters to identify the suite, starting
with “A”. Letter size shall be no less than 3 inches and no more than 6 inches or as
approved by the Fire Chief or designee. Suites and their respective letter
identification shall be assigned from left to right or “counter-clockwise.” Letters
shall be white reflective on a blue reflective background.
PAGE 11........04-18-2017
Sec. 3.9 One and Two Family Residence Address Numbering
One and Two family dwellings shall be numbered according to The City of Ellsworth
Unified Development Ordinance, Article 8 Performance Standards, and Section 815.1.
The number(s) will be located at the direction of the Fire Chief or designee. The
numbers shall be a minimum of 3 inches in height to be readily visible. Numbers shall
be white reflective numbers on a blue reflective background.
Sec. 3.10 Building Truss Signage
The owner of any commercial or industrial structure utilizing truss assemblies shall
be required to mount warning signs meeting the following minimum requirements.
A. A sign of five (5) inches by four (4) inches; consisting of a piece of
aluminum shall be used. In the center of the sign shall be a series of letters
of white reflective lettering "R-T" or “F-T” or “R/F-T” which is 2 1/2 inches in
height on a blue reflective background
1. R-T = Roof Truss
2. F-T = Floor Truss
3. R/F-T = Roof and Floor Truss
B. A sign shall be mounted directly to the right of each series of entrance
doors (front, rear and sides of the building or structure) at a height of five (5)
feet up from finished grade. Additional signs may be required by the Fire
Chief or designee when the distance between entrance doors or the length of
a series of entrance doors would require additional warning signs for
visibility by Fire Department personnel. If the property has a Knox Box© on
site then a sign shall be located directly above the Knox Box©
C. It shall be the responsibility of each property owner to mount, maintain
and prevent obstruction of the warning sign mounted on the building or
structure.
Sec 3.11 Features of Fire Protection Systems Documentation
Before requesting final review of the installation, the installing contractor(s) shall
furnish a written statement stating that the Fire Protection system has been installed
in accordance with reviewed plans and tested in accordance with the manufacturer’s
published instructions and the appropriate NFPA requirements.
3.11.1 A lockable documentation cabinet with a key supplied to the fire department
to be located in the Knox Box©, shall be installed at an approved location at the
protected premises. The size of the documentation cabinet shall be determined by
the Fire Chief or his designee. Documentation cabinets shall be red in color. The
documentation cabinet shall be prominently labeled “Fire Department Documents.”
For security reasons the location of the cabinet shall be determined by the Fire
Chief or designee and the occupancy stakeholders.
PAGE 12........04-18-2017
3.11.2 All Fire Protection System documentation records (3.11.4) shall be stored in
the documentation cabinet. The contents of the cabinet shall be accessible to the
Ellsworth Fire Department and authorized personnel only.
3.11.3 Where the documentation cabinet is not in the same location as the fire
alarm system control unit or the remote annunciator the location of the
documentation cabinet shall be identified at the system control unit.
3.11.4 Final written documentation including floor plans as required by the
Ellsworth Fire Department and appropriate NFPA standards shall represent the
minimum documentation required for new systems and additions or alterations to
existing systems.
A. Floor plan drawings shall be provided to the owner and the Ellsworth
Fire Department.
A. Contractors Certificates, Record of Completion and any other supporting
documentation for the occupancy Fire Protection Systems.
B. Occupancy contacts
C. Fire Protection Systems contacts
D. All signs and plaques are properly installed on all Fire Protection
systems
Sec. 3.12 Elevator Numbering and Floor Recall
Prior to any elevator being designed and/or installed, the elevator contractor shall
meet with the Fire Chief or designee and plans reviewed of the elevator. Numbering
of floors and /or levels shall be reviewed and preapproved by the Fire Chief or
designee. Elevator floor recall shall be reviewed and preapproved by the Fire Chief or
designee.
Sec.3.13 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Piping and Fire rated walls
LPG piping shall not be installed or mounted within enclosed chase cavities of
common fire rated firewalls, fire barrier walls and party walls of any rating.
Sec.3.14 Fire Apparatus Access Roads
1. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the
imposed live and dead loads of fire apparatus and shall be provided with a surface
as follows and be in compliance with City Ordinance; Chapter 56 Unified
Development Ordinance, Article 9.
A. Commercial, Industrial developments and Multiple Family subdivisions
(Apartments / Townhouses): shall have a paved all-weather driving surface.
B. Single and Duplex family residential subdivisions: shall have an Allweather
driving surface.
PAGE 13........04-18-2017
2. The turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be as follows:
A. Not less than a thirty-two (32’) foot inside turning radius.
B. Not less than a forty (40’) foot outside turning radius.
Sec.3.15 Marijuana Facilities; Growing, Processing, Extraction, Testing
This section shall apply to all new facilities and occupancies engaging in marijuana
(i.e. cannabis and extract derivatives) growing, processing, extraction, and/or testing.
All new facilities and occupancies engaging in marijuana (i.e. cannabis and extract
derivatives) growing, processing, extraction, and/or testing, shall comply with the
adopted ordinances and codes of the City of Ellsworth, Maine and shall comply with
the minimum requirements of the 2018 Edition of NFPA 1 Chapter 38.
Extraction processes, and/or testing include but are not limited to the act of
extraction of the oils and fats by use of a solvent, desolventizing of the raw material
and production of the miscella, distillation of the solvent from the miscella and
solvent recovery. The requirements set forth in this article are requirements specific
only to marijuana processing and extraction and testing facilities.
Article IV
Commercial Cooking Ventilation
And
Fire Extinguishing Systems
Sec. 4.1 General
This article is intended to reduce the potential fire hazard from cooking operations,
irrespective of the type of cooking equipment used and whether used in public or
private facilities.
Sec. 4.2 Commercial Cooking Exhaust Hood Permit
No person shall install, alter, or replace a commercial cooking exhaust hood within the
City of Ellsworth without first obtaining a permit from the Fire Chief or designee.
4.2.1 Commercial Cooking Exhaust Hood Plans and Specifications
Shop drawings and manufactures’ specifications of the commercial cooking exhaust
hood system shall be submitted for review with the permit application to the Fire
Chief or designee. Drawings and specifications shall comply with NFPA 96.
4.2.2 Design and Maintenance
All systems shall comply with NFPA 96 “Standard for Ventilation Control and Fire
Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations” as adopted by the State of Maine.
This standard shall not apply to facilities where all of the following are met:
PAGE 14........04-18-2017
A. Only residential equipment is being used.
B. Fire extinguishers located in all kitchen areas in accordance with NFPA
10, Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers.
C. Facility is not an Assembly occupancy.
D. Subject to inspection and approval by the Fire Chief or designee.
Sec. 4.3 Commercial Cooking Hood Fire Extinguishing Systems Permit
No person shall install, alter, or replace a fire extinguishing system in public facilities
or in public buildings within the City of Ellsworth without first obtaining a permit
from the Fire Chief or designee.
4.3.1 Commercial Cooking Hood Fire Extinguishing Systems Plans
Shop drawings and manufacture specifications of the commercial cooking hood fire
extinguishing systems shall be submitted for review with the permit application to
the Fire Chief or designee. Drawings and specifications shall comply with NFPA
96 and NFPA 17A.
4.3.2 Design and Maintenance
All systems shall comply with the current NFPA Standards adopted by the State of
Maine for wet chemical fire extinguishing systems.
4.3.3 Extinguishing System Service Technician Certification
Service technicians shall possess a certification issued by the manufacturer or
testing organization in accordance with NFPA 17A for the type of commercial
cooking hood fire extinguishing system being installed, serviced, maintained or
replaced.
Sec. 4.4 Application Procedures
Application for a commercial cooking exhaust hood and/or commercial cooking hood
fire extinguishing system permit shall be made to the Fire Chief or designee using
forms provided by the Ellsworth Fire Department by the owner of the premises to be
protected, or by the owner’s authorized agent. The application form shall at a
minimum require the name, telephone number and address of the owner of the
premises to be protected, a designated agent if applicable and the installers of the
commercial exhaust hood and/or commercial cooking hood extinguishing systems. The
application form shall also require a description of the principal use of the premises to
be protected, a description of the proposed system and the location of its installation
and such other data as the Fire Chief or designee may reasonably require.
Sec. 4.5 Permit Revocations
The Fire Chief or designee may revoke the installation permit for any system. Such
revocation shall not be effective until the Fire Chief or designee has given the permit
holder or his designated agent written notice concerning the following:
PAGE 15........04-18-2017
A. Any deficiency identified during the installation and reported to the
owner that is not corrected within 48 hours, or such longer time as the Fire
Chief or designee may permit.
B. Any data provided in the application form for such system found to have
been falsified willfully or through gross negligence of the applicant.
Sec. 4-6 Civil Violations
In addition to the foregoing grounds for revocation of an installation permit
hereunder, the following events shall each constitute a civil violation, punishable as
set forth in Article IX Penalties and Fines Sec. 9-4:
A. The installation, alteration or replacement of a commercial cooking
exhaust hood system or commercial cooking hood fire extinguishing System
in the absence of an effective permit signed by the Fire Chief or designee.
B. The falsification of any data provided on an installation permit
application form for a commercial cooking ventilation system or any type of
commercial cooking exhaust hood fire extinguishing system, done willfully
or through gross negligence.
Article V
Fire Alarm Systems
Sec. 5.1 General
This article recognizes the need for regulation of the installation and use of Fire Alarm
Systems:
A. To avoid use of improper equipment,
B. To assure compliant installation of equipment,
C. To minimize accidental or malicious alarms,
D. To compensate for response of municipal resources in response to
nuisance alarms,
E. To clarify the rights and responsibilities of the property owner and of the
City.
Sec 5.2 Permit Required
No person shall install, alter, or replace a Fire Alarm System within the City of
Ellsworth without obtaining a permit from the Fire Chief or designee.
PAGE 16........04-18-2017
5.2.1 Application Procedure
Application for an Alarm System shall be made to the Fire Chief or designee using
forms provided by the Ellsworth Fire Department by the owner of the premises to
be protected, or by the owner’s authorized agent. The application form shall at a
minimum require the name, telephone number and address of the owner of the
premises to be protected a designated agent if applicable and the installers of the
alarm system and if a monitored system, the name, address and phone number of
the central receiving station that will monitor the alarm.
Sec 5.3 Design
All systems shall comply with NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, the Maine Uniform
Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) and NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm and Signaling
Code as adopted by the State of Maine.
5.3.1 Minimum Requirements
Fire alarm system designs shall meet the minimum requirements of NFPA 72, as
adopted by the State of Maine. Fire alarm control panels shall be of the
addressable design with a Point Source Identification Communicator; Digital
Alarm Communicator Transmitter (ID DACT).
5.3.2 Design plans Submission
Plans, diagrams, system information, and device information shall be submitted to
the Fire Chief or designee for review prior to issuance of a permit for the
installation of the fire alarm system.
5.3.3 Drawings and Schematics
Shop drawings and manufacture specifications of the fire alarm system shall be
submitted with the application. Drawings and specifications shall be in compliance
with NFPA 72 and shall include:
A. A description of the principal use of the premises to be protected.
B. A description of the proposed system and the location of its installation.
C. And such other data as the Fire Chief or designee may reasonably require.
5.3.4 Monitoring of Fire Alarm Systems:
All fire alarm systems shall be monitored by a U.L. Listed central receiving station
Exception: One and Two family dwellings
5.3.5 Audio Visual Notification and Voice Announcement Programming:
When activating the silencing mode of the fire alarm system, audio notification
and/or voice announcement; the programming of the fire alarm system shall allow
the audio notification and/or voice announcement to be canceled immediately and
the visual strobe notification shall continue operating until the system is fully reset
and restored.
PAGE 17........04-18-2017
Sec 5.4 Installation Testing and Maintenance
Only qualified technicians shall perform installation, testing and maintenance of fire
alarm systems. Technicians shall meet the minimum qualification requirements of
NPFA 72, as adopted by the State of Maine. When a new alarm system is installed,
the Fire Chief or designee shall be notified 48 hours prior to the final testing of the fire
alarm system. The Fire Chief or designee will schedule to be at the site of the
installation to witness the test and receive training on the operation of the fire alarm
system by the qualified fire alarm technician. A written copy of the test results shall
be maintained on the premise and available to the Fire Chief or designee.
5.4.1 Location of FACP and Remote Annunciator
The fire alarm control panel or fire alarm remote annunciator shall be located by
the building main entrance or as approved by the Fire Chief or designee.
5.4.2 Smoke detectors and Air supplies
Smoke detection devices shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from any air
supply diffuser or return air opening. Smoke detectors shall not be located directly
in the air stream of any return and supply registers of high velocity air supplies
diffusers.
5.4.3 Exterior Weatherproof Horn /Strobe
A direct viewing type exterior weather proof horn /strobe shall be installed outside
all individual buildings /tenant spaces that have a fire alarm system and or
sprinkler system. The horn /strobe shall activate on the individual building/tenant
space indicating/identifying the building with which the fire alarm or sprinkler has
been activated.
Exception: One and Two family dwellings
5.4.4 Programming of Fire Alarm initiation devices
Programming identification of all fire alarm devices including but not limited to,
manual initiation, automatic initiation and zones, shall be preapproved by the Fire
Chief or designee
Sec. 5.5 Prohibited Systems
No system shall be permitted which automatically transmits to the Ellsworth
Dispatch Center
5.5.1 City Property Option
At the discretion of the City Council, property owned by the City of Ellsworth that
is protected by a fire alarm system may automatically transmit to the Ellsworth
Dispatch Center.
Sec. 5.6 Alarm Responses
The property owner or designated agent(s) shall respond to each alarm at the request
of the fire department for securing the premises.
PAGE 18........04-18-2017
Sec. 5.7 Nuisance Alarm Service and Repair
In the event the activation of an alarm system is deemed by the Fire Chief or designee
to be a nuisance alarm, the building owner shall be required to return a completed
report of service/repair or a plan of correction within fifteen (15) days of the fire alarm
activation to the Fire Chief or designee. The report shall verify that:
A. The fire alarm system has actually been examined by a qualified fire
alarm technician.
B. A bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any defect of
design, installation or operation of the fire alarm system which was
identifiable as the cause of the nuisance alarm activation.
C. Failure to return a report of service/repair or a plan of correction within
the fifteen (15) day period shall result in a written warning and reminder of
section 5.8 of this article for the nuisance alarm.
Sec. 5.8 Nuisance Alarms
The owner of the property of any alarm system that causes the transmittal of a
nuisance alarm three (3) times within a twelve (12) month rolling cycle shall pay a
penalty of $500 for each subsequent nuisance alarm in excess of that number.
5.8.1 The Fire Chief or designee shall give suitable written warning to any building
owner, or to his designated agent whose alarm system sends a third nuisance
alarm within a twelve (12) month rolling cycle.
5.8.2 In the event an alarm is activated as a result of a natural or unnatural event
beyond the property owner’s control the alarm activation will not be considered a
nuisance alarm.
Sec. 5.9 Fire Alarm system Documentation
Color coded as-built drawing floor plans shall be provided indicating the specific
building zones or areas being protected by the Fire Alarm system.
5.9.1 Color coded as-built drawing floor plans shall be submitted in BOTH print
form and digital PDF of a size and “drawing layers” to be approved by the Fire
Chief or designee.
5.9.2 All Fire Alarm documentation records shall be stored in the Fire Department
documentation cabinet.
5.9.3 For new construction, a Certificate of Occupancy may not be signed by the
Fire Chief or designee until the required documentation has been submitted and
reviewed by the Fire Chief or designee.
PAGE 19........04-18-2017
Sec. 5.10 Civil Violations
The following events shall each constitute a civil violation, punishable as set forth on
Article IX Penalties and Fines Sec. 9-4:
A. The installation, alteration or replacement of an Alarm System in the
absence of a permit therefore signed by the Fire Chief or designee.
B. The falsification of any data provided on an application form for an Alarm
System, done willfully or through gross negligence.
Sec. 5.11 No Enlargement of Liability
Neither the issuance of a permit under this Ordinance, nor the installation of an
alarm system pursuant to such a permit, create any obligation, duty or liability on the
part of the City of Ellsworth, its officers, agents, or employees, nor does any obligation,
duty or liability, exist, in the absence of such a permit or installation.
Article VI
Sprinkler Systems
Sec. 6.1 Design and Maintenance
All systems shall comply with NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, NFPA 13 Standard for the
Installation of Sprinkler Systems, NFPA 13D “Sprinkler Systems in One and Two
Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes” or NFPA 13R “Sprinkler Systems in
Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height” and the Maine
Life Safety System according to the State Fire Marshal’s Rules and Policies for
sprinkler systems, and the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) as
adopted by the State of Maine.
Sec. 6.2 Design Plans
All plans for construction of or alteration to fire sprinkler systems must be submitted
for review to the Fire Chief or designee along with a State Fire Marshal’s Office
installation permit prior to the installation of the sprinkler system. A copy of the
State Fire Marshal’s Office permit shall be forwarded to the Ellsworth Fire
Department Fire Chief or designee.
6.2.1 The State Fire Marshal’s preliminary review permit is not acceptable for
installation of sprinkler systems.
Sec. 6.3 Acceptance testing for new installation
The Fire Chief or designee shall be notified 48 hours prior to the final acceptance test
of the underground and aboveground piping system. The Fire Chief or designee will
schedule to be at the site of the installation to witness the underground flush test and
the acceptance test. Test procedures shall follow the requirements of the current
edition of NFPA 13 adopted by the State Fire Marshal’s Office, and the City of
Ellsworth Water Department policies and procedures. After the testing, contractor
test certificates shall be filed with the Fire Chief or designee.
PAGE 20........04-18-2017
6.3.1 Required acceptance test certificates
A. Contractor’s Material and Test Certificate for Underground Piping
(NFPA 13)
B. Contractor’s Material and Test Certificate for Aboveground Piping (NFPA
13)
Sec. 6.4 Inspection, Testing, and Maintenance
Any building containing a sprinkler system shall have the system inspected, tested,
and maintained by an inspector licensed by the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
Inspections, testing, and maintenance shall be in accordance with NFPA 25, to provide
at least the same level of performance and protection as designed. A written copy of
the test results shall be maintained on the premises and available to the Fire Chief or
designee.
Sec 6.5 Responsibility for Maintenance
The owner, occupant, or agent of any occupied or unoccupied buildings or portions
thereof having a sprinkler system in place, whether or not such a system is required
by this Ordinance, shall maintain all sprinklers, standpipe systems, and all
component parts in workable condition at all times. It shall be unlawful for any owner,
occupant, or agent of either to reduce the effectiveness of the protection, those systems
provide. This Section does not prevent the owner, occupant or agent of a building from
temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection when necessary, in order to
conduct testing, repairs, alterations or additions to the system, provided that the
testing, repairs, alterations or additions are done in such a way to avoid the creation
of a safety hazard, follow the requirements of NFPA 25, and the requirements of the
State Fire Marshal’s sprinkler technical policy.
6.5.1 Notification of System Shutdown or Impairments
Inspection, testing, maintenance, and impairment of water based fire protection
systems shall be implemented in accordance with procedures meeting those
established in National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 25 Standard for the
Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protection Systems, in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, and in accordance with the City
of Ellsworth Water Department policies and procedures.
A. The property owner or designated representative shall notify the
authority having jurisdiction, the Fire Chief or designee, the City of
Ellsworth Water Department, and the alarm receiving facility before testing
or shutting down a system or its supply.
B. The notification of system shutdown shall include the purpose for the
shutdown, the system or component involved, and the estimated time of
shutdown. All preplanned and emergency impairments shall follow the
procedures of NFPA 25 Chapter 15.
PAGE 21........04-18-2017
C. The authority having jurisdiction, the Fire Chief or designee, the City of
Ellsworth Water Department, and the alarm receiving facility shall be
notified when the system, supply, or component is returned to service.
D. All Impairments, whether emergency or preplanned, to water-based fire
protection systems shall comply with NFPA 25.
Sec 6.6 Sprinkler Risers
Any building having one or more sprinkler risers shall have each riser physically
identified. Each riser shall be monitored by an alarm system that will provide the
individual riser identification upon sprinkler system activation.
6.6.1 Multi-Story Building Control Valves
In multi-story buildings (2 or More) protected throughout by an approved,
supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 101.9.7, a
electronically supervised sprinkler control valve and electronically supervised
water-flow device shall be provided for each floor.
6.6.2 Special Structures or Construction Features or Areas
Special structures or construction features or areas protected by an approved,
supervised automatic sprinkler system in accordance with NFPA 101.9.7, shall be
provided with an electronically supervised control valve and electronically
supervised water-flow device.
6.6.3 Elevator Shaft Protected by a Sprinkler System
If an elevator shaft is protected by an approved, supervised automatic sprinkler
system then that portion of the system protecting the shaft shall be provided with
an electronically supervised control valve and electronically supervised water-flow
device.
6.6.4 Control Valves and Waterflow Devices
Electronically supervised control valves and electronically supervised water-flow
devices shall be connected to the fire alarm system in such a manner that
tampering with the control valve will activate a supervisory signal of the alarm
system indicating the location of the control valve. The operation of the sprinkler
waterflow device will activate a full fire alarm signal. Control valves and waterflow
devices shall be installed in an easily accessible location and shall be readily
identified. Identification markings shall be legible from the finished floor level.
6.6.5 Testing Bypass-Loop for Sprinkler System Backflow Valves
A Bypass loop shall be installed to accomplish the required annual full forward
flow test of the sprinkler system backflow valve. The Bypass loop shall be installed
around the sprinkler check valve in the fire department connection line with a
control valve in the normally closed position. The normally closed control valve
shall be chained and locked and may be monitored by the fire alarm system that
shall activate a fire alarm system supervisory signal when the valve is operated.
Exception: 13-D and 13-R systems
PAGE 22........04-18-2017
Sec. 6.7 New Building Construction
An approved automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all areas of all new
buildings as required by the currently State adopted NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, The
Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) and State Fire Marshal’s Rules
and Policies for sprinkler systems.
Exception: One & Two family dwellings (See Article 7, Section 7.5, Option 3)
Sec. 6.9 Additional Requirements of Sprinkler Systems
All Automatic Sprinkler Systems shall be monitored by an approved addressable fire
alarm system with a Point Source Identification Communicator; Digital Alarm
Communicator Transmitter (ID DACT) and by an approved, proprietary alarm
receiving facility, a remote station, or a central station as defined in N.F.P.A. 72 –
National Fire Alarm Code.
A. A multiple unit apartment building equipped with an Automatic
Sprinkler System or an apartment in a mixed and /or multiple use complex
of building equipped with an Automatic Sprinkler System shall include an
evacuation alarm, which will sound an audible and visual alarm within each
individual living space / area and throughout the entire building common
areas when the sprinkler system is activated.
B. A monitored tamper switch at the system shut off which transmits a
nonemergency trouble signal to the alarm monitoring station shall be
installed.
C. An outside water flow alarm shall be installed.
Exception: One & Two family dwellings
D. Exterior Weatherproof Horn /Strobe
A direct viewing type exterior weatherproof horn /strobe shall be installed
outside all individual buildings /tenant spaces that have a fire alarm system
and or sprinkler system. The horn /strobe shall activate on the individual
building/tenant space indicating/identifying the building with which the fire
alarm or sprinkler has been activated.
Exception: One and Two family dwellings
Sec. 6.10 Fire Department Connections
Any building requiring the installation of a Standard 13, 13D, 13R Sprinkler System
shall have a fire department connection as required by the standard the Fire Chief or
designee.
PAGE 23........04-18-2017
6.10.1 Fire Department Connection Location and size
A. The location of the fire department connection shall be approved by the
Fire Chief or designee and properly marked “Fire Department Connection”.
B. All Fire Department Connections shall be configured with “self-locking” 4-
inch Storz couplings, and a 30-degree elbow and cap.
Exception: The size of the Fire Department Connection, for systems meeting
the NFPA 13-R, or State of Maine approved life safety systems may be 2.5-inch
NH thread with a cap.
6.10.2 Fire Department Connection Signage
A. Any building served by more than 1 (one) Sprinkler and or standpipe, the
fire department connection shall have signs approved by the Fire Chief or
designee clearly noting what each connection serves.
B. Where a fire department connection services multiple buildings,
structures, locations, or partial buildings structures or locations a sign at
the fire department connection shall be provided indicating the buildings,
structures, or locations served.
C. Fire Department Sprinkler and/or Standpipe connection collars shall be of
a contrasting color of the building to which they are installed.
D. Sprinkler and Standpipe Fire Department connections shall have a
rectangular sign mounted above the connection or connections. The sign
shall have white reflective letters on a blue background. Letters shall be
1 inch in height. Signs shall indicate the following:
E. When a system is temporarily removed from service regardless of an
emergency or preplanned, a tag shall be posted at each fire department
connection and system control valve, indicating which system, or part
thereof, has been removed from service
6.10.3 Fire Department Connection Obstruction
Any person or persons, property owner or occupant shall immediately clear an
obstructed fire department sprinkler connection (FDC) of, but not limited to snow,
dumpsters, miscellaneous materials or any other obstructions.
FDC
SPRINKLER
FDC
STANDPIPE
FDC
SPRINKLER
STANDPIPE
PAGE 24........04-18-2017
Sec. 6.11 Sprinkler system Documentation
Color coded as-built drawing floor plans shall be provided indicating the specific
building zones or area(s) being protected by the sprinkler system. The drawings shall
indicate by color code which riser is protecting an individual zone or area.
6.11.1 Occupancies with multiple sprinkler risers shall have each individual
sprinkler riser identified with a sign indicating which zone the riser is protecting.
6.11.2 Occupancies with sprinkler risers that supply individual isolated
electronically supervised control valve(s) and electronically supervised water-flow
device(s) shall provide color-coded as-built drawing floor plans indicating the
location of the control valve(s) and water-flow device(s) at the sprinkler riser.
6.11.3 Occupancies with isolated individual electronically supervised control
valve(s) and electronically supervised water-flow device(s) shall indicate the
physical location(s) of the device(s) on the floor plan(s). The floor plan(s) shall also
show the area(s) that the electronically supervised control valve(s) and
electronically supervised water-flow device(s) are protecting.
6.11.4 Color-coded as-built drawing floor plans shall be protected and waterproof.
Drawings shall be framed and properly mounted on the wall of the main sprinkler
riser room.
6.11.5 Color coded as-built drawing floor plans shall be of a size to be determined
and approved by the Fire Chief or designee to provide fast and easy reference.
6.11.6 A set of sprinkler system documentation records and as-built drawing floor
plans shall be stored in the occupancy Fire Department Documentation cabinet.
Floor plans shall be submitted in BOTH print form and digital PDF of a size and
“drawing layers” to be approved by the Fire Chief or designee.
6.11.7 For new construction, a Certificate of Occupancy may not be signed by the
Fire Chief or designee until the required sprinkler system documentation has been
submitted, reviewed and approved by the Fire Chief or designee.
Article VII.
Water Supplies for Fire Fighting
Sec. 7.1 Fire Hydrants
No person shall install, relocate, modify or disconnect from the City of Ellsworth
supply main for service, any fire hydrant, whether such fire hydrant is located in a
public way or on private property, except in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
7.1.1 All hydrant systems shall comply with NFPA 24.
PAGE 25........04-18-2017
7.1.2 All fire hydrants shall be maintained in proper operating condition at all
times.
7.1.3 Owners of hydrants shall be responsible for all required inspections and
maintenance including but not limited to, removing accumulations of snow/ ice
from the fire hydrant(s) and draining the hydrant(s) prior to winter freeze.
7.1.4 Hydrant inspections shall be conducted at least once a year according to
NFPA 25 Standard for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water Based
Fire Protection Systems. Yearly inspection results shall be maintained by the
owner and available to the Fire Chief or designee upon request.
7.1.5 If at any time an inspection reveals that a fire hydrant is inoperative or not in
proper operating condition, the Fire Chief or designee and the City of Ellsworth
Water Department shall be immediately notified.
7.1.6 Water mains proposed to provide water supply to fire hydrants in private,
residential, non-residential, mixed-use or commercial subdivisions or
developments, shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter.
7.1.7 All private, residential, non-residential, mixed-use or commercial
subdivisions or developments shall install hydrants in compliance with the
National Fire Protection Association Fire Code; NFPA 1, Chapter 18.4 and 18.5;
2015 Edition.
7.1.8 No fire hydrant shall be so installed, relocated or modified unless it conforms
to the specifications as acceptable to the Ellsworth Water Department, the City of
Ellsworth, and its ordinances.
7.1.9 Upon the installation, relocation or modification of any fire hydrant, the
owner or contractor for the owner of any such fire hydrant shall notify the City of
Ellsworth Water Department and the Fire Chief or designee immediately after
installation, relocation or modification of such fire hydrant has been completed.
Sec. 7.2 Fire Protection at Construction Sites
As soon as a construction site begins to accumulate combustible materials, a water
supply for fire protection either temporary or permanent, may be required at the
discretion of the Fire Chief or designee. The Fire Chief or designee shall approve the
water supply.
PAGE 26........04-18-2017
Sec.7.3 Required Public Water Supply for Fire Protection
Any proposed, residential, non-residential, mixed-use or commercial subdivisions or
development whose vehicular entrance or closest point of said property is located
within 800 (eight-hundred) feet to a public water line must connect to the public water
system. The developer shall provide a written statement from the Water Department
that adequate water for both domestic and fire fighting purposes can be provided
without placing an undue burden on the source, treatment facilities or distribution
system involved. The developer shall be responsible for paying the costs of system
improvements necessary to serve the development. The minimum size and location of
mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service connections shall be reviewed and approved
in writing by the Water Department Superintendent and the Fire Chief or designee.
Sec. 7.4 Fire Hydrant Obstructions
7.4.1 No person or persons shall obstruct or permit to be obstructed by any means
any fire hydrant located within the City of Ellsworth. A 10 (Ten) foot area around
any hydrant shall be clear of all obstructions.
7.4.2 Nothing shall be attached or affixed to any hydrant.
Exception: Hydrants are permitted to be fitted with location indicators.
7.4.3 Hydrants shall not be decorated.
Exceptions:
A. Hydrants owned by the City of Ellsworth are permitted to be painted by
the Ellsworth Water Department or the Ellsworth Fire Department.
B. Private Hydrants shall be painted in conjunction with the City of
Ellsworth hydrant flow color coding requirements.
7.4.4 Any person or persons, property owner or occupant causing snow to obstruct
any fire hydrant shall immediately clear the obstructed fire hydrant. Failure to
clear the obstructed hydrant shall result in the City of Ellsworth clearing of the
fire hydrant. The person or persons, property owner or occupant responsible for
obstructing the fire hydrant may be liable for all costs associated therewith.
Exception: Highway crews performing snow removal from State and Local
roadways
PAGE 27........04-18-2017
Sec. 7.5 Fire Protection for Subdivisions
In areas of the City where landowners elect to develop subdivisions for residential or
commercial use in compliance with the Land Use Ordinances of the City of Ellsworth,
water supplies for fire suppression purposes shall be provided. A fire protection option
shall be decided upon and that option shall be included in the recorded deeds, and
identified as part of the property covenant requirements on the final Mylar drawings
signed by the Planning Board. Water supplies for fire suppression purposes shall be
provided by one of the following options:
Option 1: Water supply for fire protection shall be provided by water mains and
fire hydrants as specified in this Article.
Option 2: Water supply for fire protection shall be provided by installing
underground stationary water tanks of no less than ten thousand (10,000) U.S.
gallons capacity, at not more than 1000-foot intervals measured along vehicular
access and travel routes throughout the development. Minimum requirements
for a Static Water Supply System shall comply with the most current edition of
the Nation Fire Protection Association; NFPA 1142 Standard on Water Supplies
for Suburban and Rural Firefighting.
Option 3: The installation of automatic sprinkler systems per NFPA 13-D in one
and two family dwellings and Townhouses as defined by the MUBEC
International Residential Code and the State Fire Marshal Rule or NFPA 13-R
in all other residential structures and NFPA 13 in any commercial structure.
A. Fee Schedule for NFPA 13-D Inspections:
When the building permit is applied for, the applicant shall pay a fee to the
City of Ellsworth to cover the rough-in and final inspections of the NFPA 13-
D sprinkler system. Fees shall be paid accordingly:
1. One and Two family dwellings $100.00
2. Multiple-family Townhouse style dwellings: $50.00 per living unit
7.5.1 Open Static water sources
Fire protection water supply from penstocks, flumes, rivers, lakes, ponds, fire
ponds, reservoirs or private pools for New Subdivisions shall be prohibited options
for fire protection within the City of Ellsworth.
7.5.1.1 Existing Open Static Water Sources
All previously approved and existing open static dry hydrant water supply
sources shall be accessible year-round. An existing open water supply source
shall be maintained as approved, or shall be replaced according to Option #2
of section 7.5.
The chosen option narrative of 7.5 shall be included in the recorded deeds, and identified as
part of the property covenant requirements on the final Mylar drawings signed by the
Planning Board.
PAGE 28........04-18-2017
7.5.2 Fire Protection Maintenance
Upkeep and maintenance of the chosen fire protection option shall remain the
responsibility of the developer, property owner or road/property owners association.
Exception: Water mains and hydrants that are accepted by the Ellsworth Water
Department as public infrastructure.
7.5.3 Responsible Party Documentation
Documentation shall be filed identifying the responsible party whether the
developer, property owner or road/property owners association, describing in detail,
the responsibilities of upkeep and maintenance of the chosen fire protection option.
Documentation shall be noted on site plans and in the Homeowners Association
Bylaws, Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions and the property deed that is
approved by the Ellsworth Planning Board and the Ellsworth Fire Department
Fire Chief or designee prior to the Planning Board’s final signature of approval.
Article VIII
Definitions
Activity Site: The physical location, property or structure, where any activity requiring a
permit under this ordinance will be conducted.
Alteration: Any structural change to an existing structure other than repair or addition.
Assembly Occupancy: An occupancy (1) used for a gathering of 50 or more persons for
deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating, drinking, amusement, awaiting
transportation, or similar uses; or (2) used as a special amusement building, regardless of
occupant load. [NFPA 101:3.3]
Apartment Building: A building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling
units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities. (NFPA 101-3.3.32.3)
Approved Automatic Sprinkler System: A system installed in accordance with National
Fire Protection Association Standards and approved by the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
Approved Supervisory Alarm System: A system, which complies with the requirements of
N.F.P.A. 72 National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for
the shelter, housing, use or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
Ellsworth Dispatch Center: The Dispatch Center for the City of Ellsworth public safety
departments.
PAGE 29........04-18-2017
Fire Chiefs’ designee: The position of Fire Inspector shall be established within the Fire
Department as the Fire Chiefs’ designee. The Fire Chief may detail full-time employees
as inspectors as shall be necessary for the enforcement of said codes. The inspector(s)
shall work under the supervision of the Fire Chief and serve as the Fire Chiefs’ designee
for issues related to this code.
Fire Alarm System: Any mechanism, equipment or device designed to automatically
transmit a signal, message or warning indicating fire, water flow, emergency or like need
for public safety assistance, from any mode, telephone, dialer, private third party
monitors, etc., directly or indirectly to the Ellsworth Dispatch Center.
Indoor Open Flame Devices: Any device including but not limited to, decorative torches,
flaming batons, flaming swords, fuel fire lanterns, flares, candles, or any other machines
or process liable to start or cause a fire.
Nuisance Alarm: A nuisance alarm means the activation of any alarm system including
the alarm being transmitted to the Ellsworth Dispatch Center, which results in requiring
a response from the fire department. A nuisance alarm shall include, but shall not be
limited to; alarms caused by malfunctioning equipment, mechanical failure, improper
installation, lack of proper maintenance, negligent activation of the alarm, or improperly
monitored equipment.
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Unit: A building that contains not more than two
dwelling units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities. (NFPA 101-3.3.61.2)
Private Fire Hydrant: A valved connection on a water supply system having one or more
outlets and that is used to supply hose and fire department pumpers with water on
private property. Where connected to a public water system, the private hydrants are
supplied by a private service main that begins at the point of service designated by the
AHJ, usually at a manually operated valve near the property line.
Pyrotechnics: Controlled exothermic chemical reactions that are timed to create the
effects of heat, gas, sound, and dispersion of aerosols, emission of visible electromagnetic
radiation, or a combination of these effects to provide the maximum effect from the least
volume.
Sprinkler Riser: An aboveground horizontal or vertical pipe between the water supply
and the overhead piping to which the sprinklers are installed. A sprinkler riser is fitted
with a control valve and a waterflow alarm device located between the water supply and
the overhead piping. Sprinkler riser waterflow alarm device activates the fire alarm
system when the sprinkler system is in operation.
Throughout: In or through all parts of a structure including normally unoccupied areas
and spaces. “Throughout; as being throughout all the building and areas within the
building.” NFPA, Fire Protection Handbook
PAGE 30........04-18-2017
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more
attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or
public way on at least two sides.
Unit of Occupancy.: Any interior space with defined boundaries described in a deed, lease,
license or agreement in which a discrete business, commercial, office, service,
professional, institutional or industrial activity is conducted and which is separated from
any other business, commercial, office, service, professional, institutional or industrial
activity by interior or exterior walls.
Trusses: Trusses are pre-engineered wood or steel, fabricated with diagonal members
and used to construct roofs and floors.
Article IX
Penalties and Fines
Sec. 9.1 Authority
The Fire Chief may bring civil legal action on behalf of the city when voluntary
compliance cannot be obtained.
Sec. 9.2 Code Violations
Any person, being the owner or tenant or having control of any property or structure
or part thereof which violates any of the provisions of this Code or who fails to conform
to any of the provisions thereof, after having received a ten-day notice of such
violation, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Section 9-4.
Sec. 9.3 Notice of Violation
The Fire Chief may cause a notice of violation or order to be served on the person
responsible for a violation or non-compliance condition, in violation of the provisions
hereof, or in violation of a plan of correction or of a detail statement made with a
permit application.
A. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or
condition and the abatement of the violation.
B. If the notice is not complied with promptly, the Fire Chief may issue a
Civil Summons, or may request that the City institute the appropriate
proceedings, in law or in equity; to restrain, correct or abate such violation.
Sec. 9.4 Penalty
Whenever in this code no specific penalty is provided the violation of any such
provision of this Code shall be punished by a penalty of not less than $100.00 and not
greater than $250.00, plus costs. All penalties shall be recovered on complaint to the
use of the city. Each day any violation of any provisions of this Code shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the applicable civil penalty, a
violator may be ordered to correct or abate violations. If the City is the prevailing
party, the City must be awarded reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and
costs.
PAGE 31........04-18-2017
Sec. 9.5 Licenses
No Liquor, Lodging, Victualer, Business or other City license will be granted without
compliance with this ordinance.
Sec. 9.6 Appeals
The Ellsworth Board of Appeals is hereby established as the Board of Appeals to sit in
judgment on matters concerning interpretation of NFPA Codes adopted by the City,
and their enforcement. The Board of Appeals shall meet whenever directed by the
appointing authority to interpret the provisions of this Code or to consider and rule on
any properly filed appeal from a decision of the Fire Chief, giving at least five days
notice of hearing, but in no case shall it fail to meet on an appeal within 30 calendar
days of the filing of notice of appeal. All of the meetings of the Board shall be open to
the public.
Sec. 9.7 Means of Appeals
Any person shall be permitted to appeal a decision of the Fire Department to the
Board of Appeals when it is claimed that any one or more of the following conditions
exist:
A. The codes or ordinances described in this Code have been incorrectly
interpreted.
B. The provisions of the codes or ordinances do not apply.
C. A decision is unreasonable or arbitrary.
Sec. 9.8 Board of Appeals
An appeal shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals in writing within 30 calendar
days of notification of violation outlining the Code provision from which relief is
sought and the remedy proposed.
Appendix A
Code, Statutes, Rules
State of Maine
Adopted National Fire Prevention Association (NFPA) Standards
And
Maine Unified Building and Energy Code (MUBEC)
? Fire Prevention Code
? NFPA #1, Uniform Fire Code, 2006 edition
? Water-Based Fire Protection Systems
? NFPA #13 Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, 2016 edition.
? NFPA #13D Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One and Two Family
Dwellings and Manufactured Homes, 2016 edition
? NFPA #13R Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies Up
To and Including Four Stories in Height, 2016 edition
PAGE 32........04-18-2017
? NFPA #14 Standard for the Installation of Standpipe, Private Hydrants and Hose Systems,
2013 edition
? NFPA #15 Standard for Water Spray Fixed Systems for Fire Protection, 2012 edition
? NFPA #16 Standard for the Installation of Foam-Water Sprinkler and Foam-Water Spray
Systems, 2011 edition
? NFPA #20 Standard for the Installation of Stationary Fire Pumps for Fire Protection, 2013
edition
? NFPA #22 Standard for Water Tanks for Private Fire Protection, 2013 edition
? NFPA #24 Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their
Appurtenances, 2013 edition
? NFPA #25 Standard for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-Based Fire
Protection Systems, 2014 edition
? NFPA #214 Standard on Water Cooling Towers, 2011 edition
? NFPA #318 Standard for the Protection of Semiconductor Fabrication Facilities, 2015 edition
? NFPA #409 Standard on Aircraft Hangers, 2011 edition
? NFPA #418 Standard for Heliports, 2011 edition
? NFPA #750 Standard on Water Mist Fire Protection Systems, 2015 edition
? Fire Extinguishers
? NFPA #10, Standard for Portable Fire Extinguishers, 2007 edition
? Fire Extinguishing Systems
? NFPA #11, Standard for Low,Medium,and High- Expansion Foam Systems, 2005 Edition
? NFPA #12, Standard on Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems, 2008 edition
? NFPA #17, Standard for Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems, 2009 edition
? NFPA #17A, Standard for Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems, 2009 edition
? NFPA #18, Standard on Wetting Agents, 2006 Edition
? NFPA #2001, Standard on Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems, 2008 edition
? Dry Cleaning Plants
? NFPA #32, Standard for Dry cleaning Plants, 2007 edition
? Spray Applications
? NFPA #33, Standard for Spray Application Using Flammable or Combustible Materials, 2007
edition
? Dip Tanks
? NFPA #34, Standard for Dipping and Coating Processes Using Flammable or Combustible
Liquids, 2007 edition
? Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas Turbines
? NFPA #37, Standard for the Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas
Turbines, 2006 edition
? Bulk Oxygen and Hydrogen Systems
? NFPA #55, Standard for the Storage, Use, and Handling of Compressed Gases and Cryogenic
Fluids in Portable and Stationary Containers, Cylinders, and Tanks, 2005 edition
PAGE 33........04-18-2017
? Welding, Cutting and Allied Processes and Acetylene Cylinder Charging Plants
? NFPA #51, Standard for the Design and Installation of Oxygen-Fuel Gas Systems for Welding,
Cutting and Allied Processes, 2007 edition
? NFPA #51A, Standard for Acetylene Cylinder Charging Plants, 2006 edition
? NFPA #51B, Standard for Fire Prevention During Welding, Cutting, and other Hot Work, 2009
edition
? National Fuel Gas Code
? NFPA #54, National Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition
? Fire Protection Rules for Medical Facilities and Equipment
? NFPA #99, Standard for Health Care Facilities, 2005 edition
? NFPA #99B, Standard for Hyporbaric Facilities, 2005 edition
? NFPA #110, Standard for Emergency and Standby Power Systems, 2005 edition
? Storage and Handling of Liquified Petroleum Gases
? NFPA #58, Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code, 2008 edition
? NFPA #59, Utility LP-Gas Plant Code, 2008 edition
? National Fire Alarm Code
? NFPA #72, National Fire Alarm Code, 2007 edition
? Carbon Monoxide Alarms
? NFPA # 720, Standard for the Installation of Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detection and Warning
Equipment (portions of), 2009 edition
? Vapor Removal From Cooking Equipment
? NFPA #96, Standard for the Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking
Operations, 2008 edition
? Fire Safety in Buildings and Structures
? NFPA #80, Standard for Fire Doors and other Opening Protectives, 2010 edition
? NFPA #101, Life Safety Code, 2009 edition
? NFPA #220, Standard on Types of Building Construction, 2006 edition
? Tents and Grandstands Air Supported Structures for Places of Assembly
? NFPA #102, Standard for Grandstands, Folding and Telescopic Seating, Tents, and Membrane
Structures, 2006 edition
? Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances
? NFPA #211, Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances,
2006 edition
? Purged and Pressurized Enclosures for Electrical Equipment
? NFPA #496, Standard for Purged and Pressurized Enclosures for Electrical Equipment, 2008
edition
? Display of Fireworks
? NFPA #1122, Code for Model Rocketry, 2008 edition
? NFPA #1123, Code for Fireworks Display, 2006 edition
PAGE 34........04-18-2017
? NFPA #1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, and Storage of Fireworks and
Pyrotechnic Articles, 2006 edition
? Pyrotechnics Before a Proximate Audience
? NFPA #160, Standard for Flame Effects Before an Audience, 2006 Edition
? NFPA #1126, Standard for the Use of Pyrotechnics before a Proximate Audience, 2006
edition
? Manufacture, Transportation, Storage and Use of Explosive Materials
? NFPA #495, Explosive Materials Code, 2006 edition
? Flammable and Combustible Liquids
? NFPA #30, Standards for Flammable and Combustible Liquids, 2008 edition
? NFPA #30A, Code for Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages, 2008 edition
? NFPA #30B, Code for Manufacture and Storage of Aerosol Products, 2007 edition
? NFPA #385, Standard for Tank Vehicles for Flammable and Combustible Liquids, 2007 edition
? Consumer Fireworks
? NFPA #1124, Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage, and Retail Sales of
Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles: Chapter 7, Retail Sales of Consumer Fireworks, 2006
edition
? Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC) (International Building
Code / International Residential Code / International Energy Code / International Existing
Building Code)
? Office of State Fire Marshal, Fire Sprinkler Policy and Rule
1
CHAPTER 5 SEWER ORDINANCE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
Adopted April 18, 2005
Revised June 19, 2006
Revised July 17, 2006
Revised June 18, 2007
Revised May 17, 2010
Revised April 18, 2011
Revised March 18, 2013
Revised April 15, 2013
Revised November 18, 2013
Revised April 17, 2017
Revised December 18, 2017
Revised January 8, 2018
A true copy –
Attest: _____________________________
Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
2
An ordinance to promote the public’s general health, safety, and welfare, to prevent disease by regulating
the use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, the installation and connection of
building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer systems, and providing
penalties for violations thereof in the City of Ellsworth, County of Hancock, State of Maine.
ARTICLE I - DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in this ordinance will be as follows:
"A.S.T.M." shall mean American Society for Testing and Materials.
"B.O.D." (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20)
degrees Centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter (Mg/L).
"Builder" shall mean any person, persons, or corporation who undertake to construct, either under contract or
for resale, any habitable building.
"Building Drain" shall mean the part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the
discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer beginning eight (8) feet outside the inner face of the building.
"Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of
disposal.
"City" shall mean the City of Ellsworth, Maine.
"City Council" shall mean the duly elected officers of the City of Ellsworth or their authorized deputy
or representative.
"Contractor" shall mean any person, firm, or corporation approved by the City Council to do work in the City of
Ellsworth.
"D.E.P." shall mean Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
"Developer" shall mean any person, persons, or corporation who undertake to construct simultaneously more
than one housing unit on a given tract or land subdivision.
“Drawings” shall mean the drawings that show the character and scope of the sewer extension work to be
performed and which have been prepared by the Owner’s Engineer and approved by the City and/or its
Consulting Engineer.
“Dwelling, Multiple” shall mean a building designed or intended to be used exclusively for residential
occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of one another and containing three (3) or more
dwelling units, including apartment buildings and condominiums, but excluding single-family dwellings and
two-family dwellings.
“Dwelling, Single-Family” shall mean a building designed or intended to be used exclusively for residential
occupancy by one (1) family only and containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
“Dwelling, Two-Family” shall mean a building designed or intended to be used exclusively for residential
occupancy by two (2) families and containing two (2) dwelling units, but excluding single-family dwellings.
3
“Engineer” (also “Consulting Engineer” and “Engineering Consultant”) shall mean the professional engineer or
engineering firm or corporation hired by the Owner to design and/or oversee the construction and start-up of the
sewer extension project or hired by the City to assist with review of the Sewer Extension design and oversight
of construction of said project.
“Family” shall mean one (1) or more persons occupying dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit whether or
not related to each other by birth, marriage, or adoption, but not to consist of more than five (5) unrelated
persons.
“Floatable Oil” is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater
by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it
is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
"Garbage" shall mean solid wastes from the retail preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from
the retail handling, storage, and sale of produce.
“Grease” shall mean the material removed from a grease interceptor (trap) serving a restaurant or other
facility requiring such grease interceptors. Also means volatile and nonvolatile residual fats, fatty acids,
soaps, waxes, and other similar materials.
"Industrial Wastewater or Non-Domestic Wastewater” shall mean the wastewater or waterborne wastes
resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing trade or business or from development of any natural
resources as distinct from domestic wastewater, sewage or unpolluted water. Industrial wastewaters may or may
not be discharged separately from sanitary wastewaters. For a combined discharge, the City shall determine if
the discharge meets the definition of “industrial wastewater”.
"Manager" shall mean the City Manager of Ellsworth or the individual designated by the City Council to
perform this function, or the authorized deputy, agent or representative of this individual.
"Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet, not man made, into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake, or other body of
surface or ground water.
“Non-residential” shall include, but not be limited to, multiple dwellings.
"Owner" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, or group having title to real property.
"Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society or group.
"pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of the hydrogen ions in grams-ionic
weight per liter of solution, and is a term used to express the relative acidity or alkalinity of a substance or
solution.
"Property Line" shall mean curb line if the building sewer is to connect with the public sewer in a public street.
"Property Line" shall mean the edge of a sewer right-of-way in those instances where the buildings sewer
connects to the public sewer in a right-of-way.
"Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food or
produce that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in dimension.
"Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights and which is
4
controlled by public authority.
“Residential Service” shall mean sewer service to single-family and two-family dwellings. Sewer service to
multiple dwellings shall be considered “other non-residential service".
"Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are
not intentionally admitted.
"Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water carried wastes from residence, businesses, institutions, and
industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
"Sewage Treatment Plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage
and industrial wastes.
"Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
"Sewage Works" shall mean all municipal facilities for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage and industrial wastes.
"Shall" is mandatory; "May" is permissive.
“Slug” shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste in which concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceed for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than
five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
"Standard Methods" shall mean the latest edition of the publication, “Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater”, published by A.P.H.A., A.W.W.A., and W.P.C.F.
"State Plumbing Code" shall mean the State of Maine Plumbing Code, as amended, from time to time.
"Storm Sewer" or "Storm Ditch" shall mean a pipe or conduit which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes.
"Superintendent" shall mean the individual retained or designated by the Manager or City Council to
supervise and oversee the operation and maintenance of the municipal sewer system and treatment facilities.
"Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage
or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with "Standard methods".
"Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
ARTICLE II - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
Section 201 - It shall be unlawful to discharge to any watercourse, either directly or through any storm sewer
within the City or to any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with federal, state, and local laws.
Section 202 - Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, leaching pit, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
Section 203 - The owner of any residential building or property situated within the City and abutting on any
5
street, alley, or right-of-way, in which there is now located, or may be in the future located, a public sanitary
sewer of the City is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect
such facilities to the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this local law, within ninety (90)
days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that said public sewer is located within two hundred
(200) feet of the building or property to be served by said sewer and the facility can be served by gravity flow.
However, where excavation of the public highway is otherwise prohibited by state law or regulation, or where
the building or property to be served has public road frontage and is more than two hundred (200) feet from the
sewer, the City Council may grant exceptions upon specific application of the owner or lessee of such
properties, with such conditions as the said City Council may impose.
Section 204 – The owner of any non-residential or sub-division property situated within the City and abutting on
any street, alley, or right-of-way, in which there is now located, or may be in the future located, a public sanitary
sewer of the City is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect
such facilities to the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this local law, within ninety (90)
days after the date of official notice to do so; provided that said public sewer is located within five hundred
(500) feet of any subdivision or remaining land of owner or facility to be served by said sewer. However, where
excavation of the public highway is otherwise prohibited by state law or regulation, or where the structure to be
served has public road frontage and is more than five hundred (500) feet from the sewer, the City Council may
grant exceptions upon specific application of the owner or lessee of such properties, with such conditions as the
said City Council may impose.
ARTICLE III - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section 301 - Where a public sewer is not available under those provisions of Section 203, the building
sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article
and the State Plumbing Code.
Section 302 - Construction of private sewage disposal systems shall comply in all respects with requirements of
the State Plumbing Code. In addition, a written notice shall be filed with the Code Enforcement Officer on a
form furnished by the City, giving notice and details of said installation.
Section 303 - The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with
all recommendations of the Department of Human Services, Bureau of Health, State of Maine.
Section 304 - The building owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a
sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
Section 305 - At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage
disposal system, as provided in Section 203, connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this ordinance, and any septic tanks, cesspools, or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable material.
Section 306 - No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional
requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
ARTICLE IV - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Section 401 - No person shall uncover, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, without
first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
6
Section 402 –
A. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits - (1) for residential service, and (2) for commercial,
industrial, and other non-residential service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent.
*Sewer Connection fees shall be as follows and paid to the City Treasurer at the time an application is filed:
Residential $500; Non-residential connection fees shall be based on the design flow of the building use cited
in the design flow table of the most recent edition of the sub-surface sewer rules of the State of Maine. The fee
shall be $500 for the first 270 gallons of design flow and $5 per gallon of design flow thereafter. The
connection fee will be reviewed annually at the January City Council meeting.
B. If a residential service is changed to commercial, industrial, or other non-residential service, the owner or
agent shall make a new application for the new class of use in accordance with subsection (A). If the property
owner paid a residential connection fee, the fee paid will be credited toward the new fee calculated based on
design flow.
C. If a commercial, industrial, or other non-residential use is expanded or in any way enlarged, causing the
design flow to increase, the owner or agent shall be charged a fee based on increased design flow only. If a
commercial, industrial, or non-residential user relocates to another location within the public sewer area, the
connection fee must be based on the design flow as stipulated in Section 402 A. The Wastewater
Superintendent may allow for a reduction in design flow by deducting the average flow of the most current
business within the building being redeveloped from the design flow. If the design flow of the relocating
business is less than the average flow of the business it is relocating to, no fee will be assessed.
Section 403 - A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one
building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, in which case the building sewer from the
front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Section 404 - Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are
found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all the requirements of this ordinance.
Section 405 - The building sewer shall be schedule 35 or higher plastic pipe, or other suitable material approved
by the Superintendent. The quality and weight of materials shall conform to the specifications of the State
Plumbing Code. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. Where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree
roots or is installed in filled or unstable ground, the Superintendent shall have the authority to stipulate such
special pipe materials or installation provisions as he deems necessary for the circumstances.
Section 406 - The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the Superintendent, but
in no event shall the diameter be less than four (4) inches. The slope of the building sewer pipe shall not be less
than one–eighth (1/8) inch per foot.
The sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction
shall be made only with man-holes or pipe fittings as approved by the Superintendent. A cleanout shall be
located a minimum of four inches above the basement floor also, cleanout shall be provided at bends greater
than 45 degrees or at 100 foot maximum intervals.
Section 407 - Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the
basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall which
7
might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer
shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made
only with approved pipe and fittings.
Section 408 - In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building
sewer.
Section 409 - The type of pipe and installation of joints and connections of building sewers shall be in
conformance with the State Plumbing Code in all respects. Other jointing materials and methods may be used
only upon written approval of the Superintendent.
Section 410 - The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made with the wye branch or
its equivalent. When connecting a four (4) inch diameter building sewer to any public sewer eight (8) inches in
diameter or less, or when connecting a six (6) inch diameter building sewer to any public sewer twelve (12)
inches in diameter or less, a wye branch must be installed in a location specified by the Superintendent. Where
the public sewer has a greater than the maximum diameter for installation of a wye branch as specified above or
no properly located wye branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the upper quadrant of the public sewer
to receive the building sewer with entry to be made in the downstream direction at an angle of approximately
forty-five (45) degrees, again in a location specified by the Superintendent. A properly sized wye saddle shall be
inserted into the hole so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be
made and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete or as otherwise approved.
Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the Superintendent.
Section 411 - The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. No public sewer shall be disturbed except
under the supervision of the Superintendent.
Section 412 - All excavation work for building sewer installations shall meet the following conditions:
A. The traveling public shall be adequately protected.
1. At least one-way traffic shall be maintained at all times.
2. Work shall be signed, barricaded, lighted, and traffic officers will be supplied when necessary.
B. Construction methods shall be such that excessive size of excavation and excessive destruction of pavement
will be avoided. Bituminous concrete pavements shall be cut in advance along the proposed edges of the
excavation. Trenches showing a tendency to collapse shall be supported by substantially placed sheeting.
C. Special backfill of suitable material may be used in the trench, immediately around the pipe. Otherwise, all
material used for backfill shall be the same as or equivalent to that removed from each layer of excavation.
Where the nature of the highway base material is not readily determined, backfill shall be clean gravel. The top
eighteen (18) inches of any trench through paving shall be clean gravel. (At its option, in the interest of good
public relations, the contractor or owner may place a temporary cold mix bituminous pavement.)
D. Backfill material shall be uniformly distributed in layers of not more than eight (8) inches and thoroughly
compacted by use of approved mechanical compactors before successive layers are placed. Water shall be added
when necessary to increase the moisture content of the backfill material in order to obtain adequate compaction.
Puddling or jetting of backfill will not be allowed. Backfill materials shall be free from large clods of earth, free
from stones and rock fragments over 50 lbs., and free from frozen materials.
E. Surplus material shall be removed from the site and the area shall be left in a clean, presentable condition.
F. Permanent pavement shall be replaced at the owner or developer’s expense.
G. The City reserves the right, after due notice in writing to the Contractor or Owner:
1. To provide such supervision and inspection as it may deem necessary, at Owners or Contractor’s expense
8
2. To properly excavate and backfill areas as necessary at Owners or Contractor’s expense
3. To clean up areas of private property not properly cleaned by Owner or Contractor, at Owner’s or
Contractors expense.
H. Sidewalks, parks, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Street Commissioner.
Section 413 - Any building sewer serving a school, hospital, or similar institution or public building, or serving
a complex of commercial or industrial buildings, or which, in the opinion of the Superintendent, will receive
sewage or industrial wastes of such volume or character that frequent maintenance of said building sewer is
anticipated, then such building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer through a manhole. If required, a
new manhole shall be installed in the public sewer and the location of this manhole and the building sewer
connection to it or to an existing manhole shall be as specified by the Superintendent.
Section 414 - All costs and expense incident to the installation, connection, and maintenance of the building
sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may
directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
Section 415 - Where permitted by the plumbing codes or other appropriate laws or regulations of the State of
Maine, other types of material and construction methods may be used notwithstanding any provisions of this
ordinance to the contrary.
Section 416 - No person shall dismantle or move any building having a building service entrance into a public
sewer without first having sealed the area of the entrance of the service into such building with a masonry plug.
If upon examination by the Superintendent, the sewer service is found to be unserviceable, the owner shall
remove such service and seal it at the public sewer.
Section 417 – No person shall connect to an existing sewer line unless the existing sewer line discharges into the
public sewer. Furthermore, all lines tying into the existing line shall also be identified as approved connections
to the public sewer system.
Section 418 – Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants that are being discharged into the system shall notify the City at least 45 days prior to the
change or connection.
ARTICLE V - SEWER EXTENSIONS
Section 501 – For gravity sewer extensions requested by individual homeowners, the City will not participate in
the financing of the sewer extensions.
Section 502 - For those sewer extensions which are to serve subdivisions on new streets, the City will not
participate in the financing of the sewer extensions.
Section 503 – Any developer incurring the cost of an approved sewer extension may recoup up to seventy five
percent (75%) of the cost of the construction of such extension through future customer rebates. Future
customers, with the exception of individual homeowners, that connect to the new main within ten (10) years of
initial construction shall be required to pay a per foot cost based on the location of the connection on the new
extension. The per foot cost shall be determined by dividing the 75% cost by the length in linear feet of the
extension. The total infrastructure expansion fee shall be the per foot cost multiplied by the number of feet from
the beginning of the extension to the point of the new connection. If there are multiple connections within the
ten year period, a customer that connects in a location further along the extension may subtract the infrastructure
expansion fee the customer before them has previously paid. As such, any customer that connects in a location
below an existing customer must reimburse that customer directly above, their portion of the infrastructure
expansion fee previously paid. (See Appendix A for examples)
The infrastructure extension fee is in addition to the sewer connection fee and is payable to the City of Ellsworth
for connection to the public sewer system.
9
Section 504 - All extensions to the sanitary sewer system shall be designed in accordance with the
Recommended Standards for Sewage Works, as adopted by the Great Lakes-Upper Mississippi River Board of
State Sanitary Engineers. Plans and specifications for sewer extensions shall be submitted to and approval
obtained from the Superintendent before construction may proceed. The design of sewers must anticipate and
allow for flows from all anticipated future extensions or developments within the surrounding area for the
foreseeable future.
Section 505 - Sewer design shall be in accordance with the following provisions: Pipe material shall be schedule
35 or higher plastic pipe meeting the A.S.T.M. standards. No standard strength clay pipe or non-reinforced
concrete pipe shall be used. Minimum internal pipe diameter shall be eight (8) inches. Joints for each kind of
pipe shall be designed and manufactured such that "O" ring gaskets of the "snap-on" type are employed. Gaskets
shall be continuous, solid and natural or synthetic rubber and shall provide a positive compression seal in the
assembled joint such that the requirements of Section 505 are met. Joint preparation and assembly shall be in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Wye branch fittings shall be installed for connection to
building sewers in accordance with section 411. Trench widths as measured just above the crown of the pipe
shall not exceed the internal diameter of the pipe plus three (3) feet. Pipe shall be firmly and evenly bedded on a
minimum of six (6) inches of screened gravel or bank run sandy gravel with stone size not exceeding one (1)
inch. Pipe thickness and field strength shall be calculated on the following criteria:
Safety Factor 1.9
Load Factor 1.7
Weight of Soil 120 lbs. /cu. ft.
Wheel Loading 16,000 lbs.
Utilizing the above information, design shall then be made as outlined in Chapter IX of the Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, "Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers".
Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or alignment or at intervals of three hundred (300) linear
feet. The manholes shall be constructed with a poured three thousand (3,000) psi concrete base eight (8) inches
thick, steel troweled concrete or mortar bench walls and inverts and precast four (4) foot diameter concrete
manhole barrel sections with tapered top sections, as specified by ASTMC-478. The manhole frame and cover
shall be the standard design of the City and shall be set with no less than two (2) courses of brick underneath to
allow for later adjustment in elevation. All joints shall be sealed against infiltration.
Section 506 - All Public sewers shall satisfy requirements of a final vacuum test before they will be approved
and sewage flow accepted from them by the City. Testing methods shall be as follows:
A. General: Test all sanitary sewer pipes after backfill.
B. Gravity Sewer – Leakage Tests: Use low pressure air tests as follows:
1. Plug ends of section to be tested
2. Supply air slowly to the pipe to be tested until the air pressure inside the pipe is 6 psi.
3. Disconnect air supply and allow a minimum of 2 minutes for stabilization of pressure.
4. Following stabilization period measure drop in pressure over a 6-minute test period.
5. Acceptable drop; No more than 1.0 psi.
C. Repair all pipes not passing tests using materials and methods approved by the owner and retest.
MANHOLE VACUUM TESTING
A. The manhole being tested must not be backfilled. The test is passing if the manhole holds ten (10) inches of
mercury vacuum for 3 minutes, with one (1) inch of mercury loss allowable.
10
REPAIRS
A. Determine causes of all leaks and repair them. Perform earthwork required if manhole has been backfilled.
B. Perform repairs using methods and materials approved by the owner. Remove and replace or reconstruct
manhole if necessary. Remove and replace defective sections if required by the owner.
Section 507 - All extensions of public sewers constructed at the expense of the property owner, builder, or
developer, after approval by the Superintendent, and acceptance by the City Council, shall become the property
of the City and shall thereafter be maintained by the City. Sewers shall be guaranteed against defects in the
materials or workmanship for eighteen (18) months, from the date of acceptance by the City. The guarantee
shall be in a form approved by the City and may include a completion bond or certified check.
Section 508 - No builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a new dwelling or structure requiring
sanitary facilities within the City of Ellsworth, unless a suitable and approved method of waste disposal is
proposed.
ARTICLE VI - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Section 601 - No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water, to any sanitary sewer.
Section 602 - Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are
specifically designated as storm drains for such discharge or to a natural outlet approved in writing by the
Manager or his designee. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon written
approval of the Manager or his designee, to a storm sewer or natural outlet, provided, however, that said
discharge shall be in accordance with all State regulations.
Section 603 - Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit.
B. Any water or waste which may contain more than twenty five (25) milligrams per liter of fat, oil, or grease,
or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees
Fahrenheit.
C. Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, lubricating oils, or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or
gases.
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
E. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch
manure, or any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
F. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.5 or having any other corrosive property
capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
G. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids or biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of such character
and quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals,
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
H. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or
expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
I. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance.
Section 604 – Grease interceptors shall be required in the following establishments where food is prepared or
dispensed including but not limited to: restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, bars and clubs, hotels, bed
and breakfasts, hospitals, sanitariums, factories, school kitchens, commercial kitchens, and nursing homes. The
11
Superintendent may authorize an annual waiver if it is determined that an establishment generates wastewater or
other waste entering the public sewer which contains less than 25 parts per million, by weight of fat, oil, or
grease. In reaching this determination, the Wastewater Superintendent may require a test. Testing fees, if
necessary, shall be paid by the applicant.
A grease interceptor is not required for individual dwelling units or for any private living quarters.
Establishments which are not on the public sewer system are exempt from the requirements of this ordinance.
All grease interceptors shall be of a design conforming to Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standards PDIG101,
December, 1985 Edition. Sand and oil interceptors, when in the opinion of the Superintendent are
necessary, shall conform to the same standards as grease interceptors. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They
shall be of substantial construction, water-tight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted
in place shall be gas tight and water tight.
Installation and maintenance of any interceptor shall comply with the Plumbing and Drainage Institute
Standards PDI-G101, except that accumulated grease shall be removed at a minimum of once every four (4)
weeks or more often if needed. Owners of properties in which grease interceptors are installed shall, on forms
available at the Ellsworth Wastewater Treatment Plant, maintain record of the dates and times that such
interceptors are cleaned.
Section 605 – Oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the Superintendent, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units.
Sand and Oil interceptor design shall conform to the most current edition of the Plumbing and Drainage Institute
Standards PDI-G101.
Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense,
in continuously efficient operation at all times. The owner or tenant of the premises shall grant to the City
permission to conduct unannounced inspections of any such interceptor during normal business hours. Such
inspections shall not unreasonably interfere with normal operations of the business.
Section 606 - The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a) a 5-day B.O.D. greater
than three hundred (300) milligrams per liter; or (b) containing more than three hundred fifty (350) parts per
million by weight of suspended solids; or (c) containing any quantity of substance having the characteristics
described in Section 603; or (d) having an average daily flow greater than two (2%) percent of the average daily
flow of the City shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent. Where necessary, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, the owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be
necessary to (a) reduce the Biochemical Oxygen Demand to three hundred (300) milligrams per liter; or (b)
reduce suspended solids to three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter; or (c) reduce objectionable
characteristics to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 603; or (d) control the quantities and rates
of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications, and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Superintendent and the
Department of Environmental Protection of the State of Maine. No construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
Section 607 - Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
Section 608 - When required by the Superintendent, the owner of industrial or commercial property, served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control structure in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurements of wastes. Such structure, shall be accessible, safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Superintendent. The structure and all
necessary measuring and sampling equipment shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and controlled and
12
maintained by the owner, but shall be open to inspection by the Superintendent.
Section 609 - All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in Sections 603 and 606 shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage", and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in Section
608, or upon suitable samples taken at said controls structure. Records of the measuring and sampling shall be
those prescribed by the Superintendent and shall be available to the Superintendent for his inspection.
Section 610 - For industrial wastes of unusual volume, strength of character, special agreements, as determined
by the City in accordance with Federal and State regulations, shall be required between the City and the industry
concerned providing for the acceptance of such wastes in the municipal system.
Section 611 – Pretreatment Standards - All users of the Public Sewer System will comply with all standards and
requirements of the Clean Water Act, including The National Pretreatment Standards and the National
Categorical Standards. The National Categorical Standards located 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-
471 are hereby incorporated into this ordinance.
Section 612 – Dilution – Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable Pretreatment Standard, no
user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any other way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a Pretreatment Standard.
ARTICLE VII - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
Section 701 - No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the municipal sewage works. Violators
shall be subject to criminal charges.
Section 702 - A contractor must present a certificate showing proof of liability insurance before a permit will be
issued for construction of building sewers, sewer extensions, or private sewage disposal.
Section 703 – General Prohibitions – no user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, in any manner or
fashion, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which is determined by the Ellsworth Wastewater
Department to be detrimental to the operation or performance of the Ellsworth Wastewater Facility.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a user may only contribute the following substances with
written authorization from the Ellsworth Wastewater Department, however, at no time shall the prohibitions of
40 CFR 403.5 (a) & (b) or Categorical standards or Section 603 limits be violated:
1. Any solids, liquids, or gases which, by reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient at
point of discharge, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause a fire or an explosion or be
injurious, in any way, to the District, or to the operation of the District. The closed cup flash point of the waste
being discharged to the District not, per 40 CFR 403.5 (b) (1), be less than 60 degrees C using the approved
laboratory procedure, at the end of pipe.
2. Any solid or viscous substances in amounts which may cause obstruction to the flow in the sewer
collection system resulting in interference or cause a nuisance with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities. Unless explicitly allowable by a written permit, such substances include, but are not limited to,
grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues
from refining or processing fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
3. Any wastewater having a ph less than 5.5 or greater than 9.5, except at the discretion of the Ellsworth
Wastewater Department, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and/or City personnel. In no case shall the ph be less than 5.0 or greater than or
equal to 12.5 at end of pipe as per 40CFR 403.5 (b) (2).
4. Oils and grease – Any commercial, institutional, or industrial wastes containing floatable fats, waxes,
13
grease, or oils, or which become floatable when the wastes cool to the temperature prevailing in the wastewater
at the Wastewater Treatment Plant, during the winter season; also any commercial, institutional, or industrial
wastes containing more than 100 mg/1 of oil or grease; also any substances which will cause the sewage to
become substantially more viscous, at any seasonal sewage temperature in the District. At no time shall there
be a discharge of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause interference or pass through as per 40 CFR 403.5 (b) (6).
5. At no time shall there be a discharge of any substance which will cause interference or pass through
as per 40 CFR 403.5 (a) (1).
6. Any wastewater with objectionable color which is not removed in the treatment process. At no time
shall a discharge impart color to the receiving waters which causes those waters to be unsuitable for the
designated uses and characteristics ascribed to their class.
7. Any solid, liquid, vapor, or gas having a temperature higher than 65 degrees C (150) degrees f); however,
such materials shall not cause the wastewater treatment plant influent temperature to be greater than 40 degrees
C (104 degrees F). The City reserves the right to prohibit wastes at temperatures lower than 65 degrees C.
8. Unusual flow rate or concentration of wastes, constituting slugs, except by Industrial Wastewater Permit,
but in no case any discharge of a flow rate or concentration which will cause pass through or interference as per
40 CFR 403.5 (a) (1).
9. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes except as approved by the District, and in compliance
with applicable State and Federal regulations.
10. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or which creates a public nuisance, either by itself
or in combination, in any way, with other wastes.
Section 704 – Concentration Based Limitations – No person shall discharge, directly or indirectly, into the
sewer, wastewater containing any of the following substances in concentrations exceeding those specified below
on a daily basis, except by permit. Concentration limits are applicable to wastewater effluents at the point just
prior to discharge into the Ellsworth Collection System (“end of pipe” concentration).
EFFLUENT LIMITS
SUBSTANCE ALLOW. AVG DAILY ALLOW. MASS LIMITS
Cadmium 0.45 mg/l 0.008 lbs/day
Chromium (tot) 4.99 mg/l 0.106 lbs/day
Copper 7.47 mg/l 0.108 lbs/day
Lead 3.33 mg/l 0.062 lbs/day
Mercury 0.03 mg/l 0.0004 lbs/day
Nickel 15.53 mg/l 0.278 lbs/day
Zinc 2.70 mg/l 0.600 lbs/day
(1) All concentrations listed for metallic substances shall be as “total metal”, which shall be defined as the
value measured in a sample acidified to a ph value of 2 or less, without prior filtration.
(2) As determined on a composite sample, unless otherwise stated in writing, taken from the User’s daily
discharge over a typical operational and/or production day.
ARTICLE VIII - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
In emergency situations or with reasonable cause, the Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the City bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, and measurement sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this ordinance.
14
ARTICLE IX - PENALTIES
Section 901 - Any person violating any provision of this ordinance except Section 701 shall be served by the
City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in said notice, permanently
cease all violations.
Section 902 - Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance other than those provisions
pertaining to the payment of charges for services established herein, shall, be liable for a civil penalty not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. The continued violation of any provision of any
section of this ordinance, other than those pertaining to the payment of charges for services established herein,
shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day such violation of any provision hereof shall continue.
Section 903 - As an alternative, upon violation of this ordinance, the proper authorities of the City, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings including an injunction to prevent such
unlawful use, construction, or maintenance of cesspools, septic tanks, sewage disposal systems, pipes or drains,
to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of any building structure or land where
said violations of this ordinance are found.
Section 904 - Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become liable to the City for
any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the City by reason of such violation. The City Manager is authorized
to order that legal action be taken to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A.
Section 4452.
ARTICLE X - SEWER SERVICE CHARGE
Section 1001 – The City shall impose a Sewer Service Charge upon owners of property whose residence or
place of business is connected to the City of Ellsworth public sewer system.
Section 1002 - Sewer Service Charge rates shall be determined by the City Council annually and in general,
such charges will be determined on a rate structure based on water consumption. All users not served by the
water utility shall be charged on volume as determined by a meter installed and maintained by the owner, but
open to inspection by the Superintendent. Said meter shall be of the type and design approved by the City. The
sewer service charge shall be computed and billed at quarterly intervals throughout the calendar year and shall
be due and payable as of the date of the bill.
Section 1003 - A Special Sewer Service Charge shall be assigned any user whose waste varies significantly in
strength or otherwise from that of normal domestic sewage. In general, a Special Sewer Charge will be based on
equitable prorating of costs for conveying and treating such waste, taking into account, but not necessarily
limited to, the effect of volume, B.O.D., suspended solids, settleable solids, chlorine demand, toxicity, and pH.
Pretreatment by the industry may also be a requirement if necessary to make the waste compatible with flow in
the sewer system. The City Council, shall assign a Special Sewer Service Charge to the user. The applicable
portions of the preceding sections as well as the equitable rights of the public shall be the basis for such an
arrangement.
Section 1004 - INDUSTRIAL & N0N-DOMESTIC COST RECOVERY - In addition to the Special Sewer
Service Charge, there shall be an additional charge to non-governmental users of the Public Sewage Work
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, prepared by the Federal Government Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following divisions:
Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing
Division B - Mining
Division D - Manufacturing
Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services
15
Division I - Services
A user in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined that it will introduce primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. Any facility whose nature is within one or more of the
above Divisions, which is connected to the Public Sewage Works, and which is discharging or is connected with
the intent of discharging to the Public Works significant quantities of process, industrial or other wastes not of a
domestic or sanitary nature, shall be subject to the special charge to be established by separate agreement
between said user and the City for the purpose of recovering that portions of Federal Grants expended in aid of
the construction of Public Sewage Works, under programs administered by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, allocable to the treatment of wastes from such users in accordance with the following
provisions:
A. Each year during the cost recovery period, each user of the treatment works shall pay its share of the total
grant amount divided by the recovery period.
B. The cost recovery period shall be equal to thirty (30) years or the useful life of the treatment works,
whichever is less.
C. Payments shall be made no less often than annually. The First payment by an industrial user shall be made no
later than one year after use of the treatment works begins.
D. A user’s share shall be based on all factors which significantly influence the cost of the treatment works.
Factors such as strength, volume, and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included to
insure a proportional distribution of the grant amount allocable to industrial use to all industrial users of the
treatment works. At a minimum, an industry’s share shall be based on its flow versus treatment works capacity
except in unusual cases.
E. If there is a substantial change in the strength, volume or delivery flow rate characteristics introduced into the
treatment works by an industrial user, such user’s share shall be adjusted accordingly.
F. If there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works, each existing industrial user’s share will be
adjusted accordingly.
G. An industrial user’s share shall not include any portion of the grant amount allocable to unused or unreserved
capacity.
H. An industrial user’s share shall include any firm commitment to the grantee of increased used by such user.
I. An industrial user’s share shall not include an interest component.
Section 1005 - The City Council reserves the right from time to time to change Sewer Service Charges
originally or previously assigned to any property owner.
Section 1006 - All property owners outside the city limits, who, by their own request are served by sanitary
sewers, must pay a Sewer Service Charge established by the City Council.
Section 1007 - Each sewer charge, together with accrued interest, levied pursuant to this ordinance, is hereby
made a lien on the real estate served or benefited by the sewer; and if not paid within ninety (90) days of the due
date, may be collected by the City Treasurer pursuant to the provisions of Title 38, Section 1208, M.R.S.A., and
Title 30, Section 4355 M.R.S.A. as amended.
Section 1008 – ABATEMENTS – Abatements for use of water for lawn sprinklers, garden hoses, or other uses
of significant volumes of water, which do not enter the public sewer, or water loss from a catastrophic event
may be made on application to the City. Commercial/non-residential accounts are not eligible for an abatement.
Consumer is only eligible every four (4) billing cycles and must have previous four (4) billing cycles to apply
for an abatement. Consumer may not have an abated bill within those previous four (4) billing cycles of the
abatement period and must apply for an abatement within ninety (90) days of the billing date. To qualify as a
catastrophic event the consumption must be 150% greater than the average of the previous four (4) billing
16
cycles. The adjusted billing determined shall not be less than the highest billing or adjusted billing during the
previous three billing cycles. The City may abate for residential swimming pools that have registered the
volume of the pool with the City. There must be corresponding water usage on the bill for the volume of the
pool. The pool abatement will only be granted once per year. The City Manager or his/her designee shall
approve or deny abatements.
Section 1009 - INTEREST ON UNPAID BILLS - There shall be charged, in addition to the rates herein
established, interest at the annual rate of eighteen (18%) percent on all sewer use fees which are not paid on the
due date shown on the bill except that such interest so charged shall be excused unless notice of lien claim for
non-payment of sewer use fees is mailed in accordance with these regulations.
Section 1010 – CAPITAL CHARGE – The City shall impose a capital sewer charge to offset capital costs
involved in maintaining and improving the collection system and treatment facility. The capital sewer charge
rates shall be determined by the City Council on a year to year basis, and in general, such charges will be
determined on a rate structure based on metered consumption.
ARTICLE XI. SPECIAL EXCEPTION.
Upon recommendation of the Wastewater Superintendent, the City Council may grant a Special Exception
modifying the requirements of this ordinance. The Wastewater Superintendent’s recommendation must
include: 1) a description of the special circumstances justifying the Special Exception; 2) the proposed
modification to ordinance standards; 3) a statement that the granting of the Special Exception would not
have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the ordinance or other City ordinances; and 4) a list
of any conditions deemed appropriate to protect public health, safety, and welfare given the proposed
Special Exception. The Council may grant the Special Exception if the Council finds that special
circumstances so warrant and provided that the exception would not result in a material adverse impact to
public health, safety, or welfare. The Council may condition the grant of a Special Exception upon the
execution of a contract with the party requesting the exception that includes indemnification to the City.
ARTICLE XII INFLOW REMOVAL PROGRAM
In order to reduce unapproved inflow to the sewer collection system, the City of Ellsworth will charge a $50
quarterly inflow surcharge against those contributing said inflows. This surcharge will be assessed for each
incidence of unapproved connections to the sewer. This charge will be eliminated upon removal of the
unapproved or illegal connection to the sewer service and a proven and viable method for ground water and
surface water removal has been installed to the Wastewater Departments specifications. Illegal inflows include
but are not limited to sump pumps, foundation drains, and basement drains.
This fee will commence 180 days after approval by the City Council. This surcharge will be applied to all
users; exemptions will be given if no illegal connection is found or if an illegal connection is satisfactorily
removed per the above specifications. Sewer users should contact City Hall to schedule an appointment for
inspection to determine exemption eligibility.
ARTICLE XIII - VALIDITY OF ORDINANCE
Section 1301 - All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
Section 1302 - The validity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this ordinance shall not affect the
validity of any part of this ordinance which can be given without such invalid part or parts.
ARTICLE XIV - ORDINANCE IN FORCE
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval, and recording, except
Section 204 is not applicable to any project, development or subdivision that has received final Planning Board
approval or other local review approval or other local review approval prior to date of adoption of this
Ordinance by the Ellsworth City Council.
City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 6
Sanitation of Public
Eating and Drinking
Places
This ordinance was repealed.

1
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC CODE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Amended 11/17/1980
Amended 11/19/1990
Amended 05/20/1991
Amended 05/20/1996
Amended 07/15/1996
Amended 04/21/1997
Amended 02/28/2000
Amended 03/20/2000
Amended 07/19/2004
Amended 09/21/2009
Amended 07/18/2011
Amended 02/09/2015 Effective 04/01/2015
2
ARTICLE 1. DEFINITIONS
Section 101. Words and Phrases Defined. The following words and phrases,
when used in this ordinance, shall, for the purpose of this ordinance, have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this article.
101.1. Alley. A narrow way between buildings or giving access to the rear of
buildings.
101.2. Authorized Emergency Vehicle. Vehicles of the Fire Department, Police
Department, ambulances, and any other emergency vehicles.
101.3 Crosswalk. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured
from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; or,
any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for
pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface,
101.4. Curb. The outer edge of a defined sidewalk, or either edge of the wrought
and usually traveled part of a street.
101.5. Driver. Every person who drives or is in any manner in control of a
vehicle.
101.6. Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of
the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadway of two
highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within
which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angles may come
in conflict.
101.7 Individual Parking Space. A portion of the paved surface of the street of
sufficient length and depth from the sidewalk curb to accommodate a vehicle to be
parked as shall be specified and marked off by the City Manager or an agent designated
by him.
101.8 Official Traffic Signs. All signs, signals, markings and devices placed or
erected by officials having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
101.9 Parking Meters. A device or devices which shall indicate thereon the
length of time during which a vehicle may be parked in a particular place, which shall
have as a part thereof a receptacle or chamber for receiving and storing coins of United
States money, a slot or place in which said coin or coins may be deposited, a timing
mechanism to indicate the passage of the interval of time during which parking is
3
permissible and which shall also display an appropriate signal when the aforesaid interval
of time shall have elapsed; also brief instructions as to its operation.
101.10. Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
101.11. Police Officer. Every sworn officer of the municipal police department
or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
the law or ordinances.
101.12. Right-of-Way. The privilege of immediate use of the roadway.
101.13. Sidewalk. That portion of a street, between the curb or ditch line and the
adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians.
101.14. Stop. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
101.15. Stop, Stopping, or Standing. When prohibited, means any stopping or
standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control
sign or signal.
101.16. Through Street. Every street or portion thereof at the entrance to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required to stop before entering
or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in this ordinance.
101.17. Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances whether singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel.
101.18. Traffic-Control Devices. All signs, signals, markings and devices,
whether immovable or whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, placed or
erected by authority of the City Council or City Manager by which traffic is alternately
directed to stop and to proceed or for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding
traffic.
101.19. Vehicle. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except those operated by human power, or
upon rails or tracks.
4
ARTICLE 2. POLICE AUTHORITY
Section 201. Authority of Police Officers. Officers of the Police Department, or
such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the
event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the
provisions of this ordinance.
201.1 Emergency Rule by Police Officer. Whenever a police officer shall deem
it advisable, during the time of a fire or at the time of any accident, special emergency or
for the public safety and convenience, he may temporarily close any way or part thereof
to vehicular traffic, or to vehicles of a certain description, or to divert traffic thereof, or to
divert or break a course of pedestrian traffic.
Section 202. Compliance. No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction of a police officer.
Section 203. Exemptions to Authorized Emergency Vehicles. The provisions
of this ordinance regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not
apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in Section 101, while the driver of
any such vehicle is operating the same in the necessary performance of public duties
providing said driver sounds a siren, bell or exhaust whistle as a warning to others. This
exemption does not protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of
reckless disregard of the safety of others.
5
ARTICLE 3. TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section 301. Authority to Install. The City Manager shall place and maintain or
cause to be placed and maintained, traffic control signs, signals, and devices when and as
required or authorized under this ordinance, and may place and maintain such additional
traffic control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this ordinance
or under State law, or to guide or warn traffic, including angle parking signs and
markings, turning markers and signs prohibiting left, right or U turns, the location of
which he is authorized to determine.
Section 302. Obedience to Official Traffic Control Devices. The driver of any
vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with this ordinance, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this
ordinance.
Section 303. Designation of Crosswalks and Traffic Lanes. The City Manager is
hereby authorized:
303.1 Crosswalks. To designate and maintain by appropriate devices, marks or
lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion,
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as
he may deem necessary.
303.2 Lanes. To make lanes for parking and for traffic on street pavements at
such places as he may deem advisable consistent with this ordinance.
Section 304. Stop Signs.
304.1 Authority to Erect. Whenever this ordinance designates and describes a
through street, it shall be the duty of the City Manager to place and maintain, or cause to
be placed and maintained, a stop sign on each and every street intersection such through
street. Every such sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters not less than six inches in
height, and shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.
304.2 Stop Required. When stop signs are erected as herein provided at or near
the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such
sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection except when directed
to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signals.
304.3 Entering Through Street. After the driver of a vehicle has stopped in
obedience to a stop sign at the entrance to a through street, such driver shall then proceed
cautiously, yielding the right-of-way to vehicles which have entered the intersection from
said through street or which are approaching so closely on such through street as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but may then proceed.
6
305. Interference. No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in
fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device, or any
inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
7
ARTICLE 4. PARKING REGULATED
Section 401. CITY MANAGER'S POWER TO REGULATE PARKING.
The City Manager and Chief of Police are hereby authorized and directed to designate
and mark off or cause to be marked off, such individual parking spaces as either deems
proper along any street in the business or industrial areas of the City for the parking of
vehicles. Where individual parking is so marked off, each vehicle shall be parked
entirely within an individual parking space.
The City Manager and Chief of Police are hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs, places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping,
standing, or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic. When official signs are erected, no person shall stop, stand
or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
The City Manager and Chief of Police are hereby authorized to cause temporary
or permanent signs to be erected indicating no parking adjacent to any school property
when such parking would, in either's opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous
situation. When official signs are erected indicating no parking adjacent to any school
property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
The City Manager and Chief of Police are hereby authorized to designate specific
areas or streets as prohibited parking areas and shall mark or cause to be marked such
areas.
The Municipal Officers have the exclusive authority to enact all traffic and
parking ordinances in the municipality in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section
3009.
Section 402. ENFORCEMENT. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the
City of Ellsworth, acting in accordance with instructions by the City Manager and Chief
of Police, to report:
402.1 The state license number of any vehicle that is or has been parking in
violation of any provisions of this ordinance.
402.2 The time at which such vehicle is parking in violation of any provision of
this ordinance.
402.3 Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
402.4 Each officer shall attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator
thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 403. EVIDENCE. The fact that any vehicle is illegally parked is
8
prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked illegally by the person in whose
name the vehicle is registered. (30-A M. R. S. A. Sec. 3009 (C)
SECTION 404. HOLIDAYS DEFINED. The term "holidays" as used in this
ordinance shall mean all State of Maine legal holidays and holidays accepted by the City
Council.
SECTION 4051. PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS LIMITED.
405.01 No person shall park, stand, or leave a motor vehicle for more than the
prescribed time period, between eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday
through Saturday, except recognized State of Maine holidays, at the
locations specified.
405.02 Any vehicle that remains in a parking space longer than the time
prescribed for parking in Section 405 of this chapter is hereby determined
to be illegally parked.
405.03 Each time period during which a vehicle is parked in violation of the
timed parking shall be construed to be a separate violation.
405.10 Two Hour Parking2
405.11 Main Street – South side from State Street east to a point that measures
495 feet west of High Street. North side from Main Street to School
Street.
405.12 Franklin Street – either side from Pine Street to Store Street
405.13 3State Street – West side from Main Street to the northeast corner of the
Hancock County Courthouse; East side from Main Street to Church
Street.
405.14 City Hall Parking Lot – Southerly row of parking spaces (fronting Store
Street)
405.15 School Street Parking Lot – 10 parking spaces along the embankment
(facing City Hall parking lot). 4
405.20 20 Minute Parking
405.21 Church Street City Hall Parking Lot – four designated parking spaces for
city business only.
405.22 City Hall Parking Lot – four designated parking spaces on the north side
between the front city hall steps and the Fire Station handicap entrance.
SECTION 406. Repealed
SECTION 407. PROHIBITED PARKING AREAS. No person shall park,
1 Section 405 repealed & replaced 2/28/00
2 Amended 07/19/2004
3 Section 405.13 repealed & replaced 3/20/00
4 Section 405.15 added 7/18/2011.
9
stand, or leave a motor vehicle in the following specified areas:
407.1 Either side of High Street from Main Street to Short Street.
407.2 South side of Main Street from High Street west over a distance of 495
feet. North side of Main Street from Oak Street to School Street.
407.3 Either side of Main Street and West Main Street from the intersection of
Water, Main and State Streets to the south driveway of the Colonel Black Estate.
407.4 Either side of South Street from the intersection of Laurel Street to a point
490 feet from West Main Street.
407.5 East side of Oak Street from Main Street to State Street.
407.6 Either side of Fourth Street from Wood Street to Forest Avenue.
407.7 Either side of Court Street from Route #172 to the Christian Ridge Road.
407.8 South side of Church Street from State Street to Oak Street. North side of
Church Street from School Street to Oak Street.
407.9 South side of Pine Street from High Street to Water Street; and north side
of Pine Street from Water Street easterly 213 feet and High Street westerly to United
Baptist Church parsonage, a distance of 690 feet.
407.10 East side of State Street from the south entrance of the Bryant E. Moore
School to Oak Street.
407.11 Either side of Water Street from Card's Brook to Franklin Street.
407.12 Either side of Grant Street from West Main Street to Liberty Street.
407.13 West side of State Street from Church Street to Central Street. East side
of State Street from a point 180 feet north of the Church Street intersection proceeding
northerly over a distance of 288 feet (north edge of the lot at 77 State Street).
407.14 West side of Hancock Street from the intersection of Main and Hancock
Streets to a point 149 feet south on Hancock Street.
407.15 No parking on Store Street, so called, a public way situated behind and on
the northerly side of the stores on Main Street extending from the westerly side of
Franklin Street west 206 feet. No parking on Store Street from the easterly side of
Franklin Street and extending 100 feet east. Vehicles may be parked on Store Street in
these locations for the purpose of loading and unloading material to or from the business
having direct access to this street.
10
Vehicles which are parked on Store Street for the purpose of loading or unloading
shall display a loading permit on the dashboard or visor. The loading permits are issued
at the Police Department and are valid for 15 minutes.
407.16 South side of East Main Street from the intersection of High and Main
Streets to the entrance of the St. Joseph's Church parking lot, a distance of 153 feet.
407.17 North side of Birch Avenue from Oak Street to School Street.
407.18 East side of Cross Street from Court Street to West Main Street.
407.19 Both sides of Outer State Street from Oak Street to Infant Street.
5407.20 Both sides of Garden Street from Birch Avenue to Park Street.
6407.21 Franklin Street both sides from Pine Street southerly to Water Street
407.22 Both sides of Red Bridge Road from Christian Ridge Road to Bangor
Road. This article shall automatically repeal on January 1, 2012 unless earlier
repealed.7
SECTION 408. STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN
SPECIFIED PLACES. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or with the
direction of a police officer or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
408.1 On a sidewalk;
408.2 In front of any driveway or lane;
408.3 Within an intersection;
408.4 Within eight feet of a fire hydrant;
408.5 On a crosswalk;
408.6 Within ten feet of an intersection;
408.7 Within 15 feet upon the approach to any stop sign located at the side of the
roadway;
408.8 On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of a street (double parking, so called)
408.9 Upon any bridge;
408.10 At any place where official signs or curb painting so prohibit. Any curb
which is painted yellow shall be deemed to be a non parking area;
408.11 In fire lanes so designated by signs.
SECTION 409. OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC. No person shall stop, stand, park
or leave his vehicle on any street in such a manner or under such conditions so as to
5Added 5/20/96
6Added 04/21/97
7 Added 09/21/2009
11
obstruct the free passage of other vehicles in either direction unless specifically permitted
by a police officer or so as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway
for free movement of vehicular traffic.
SECTION 410. PARKING IN ALLEYS. No person shall park a vehicle within an
alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of
the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall
stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property.
SECTION 411. HANDICAPPED PARKING
411.1 The City manager or Chief of Police is hereby authorized to determine and
designate by proper signs, certain parking spaces for handicapped parking.
411.2 Any vehicle or motorcycle parked in a parking space clearly marked as a
handicapped parking space and which does not bear a special registration plate or placard
issued under Title 29, Section 252, 252-A or 252-C, or a similar plate issued by another
state, shall be cited for a forfeiture of not less than $50.00. "Clearly marked" includes
painted signs on pavement and vertical standing signs which are visible in existing
weather conditions. Any police officer may cause any vehicle so parked to be removed
from the parking space and placed in a suitable parking space at the expense of the owner
of such vehicle, and without the City being liable for any damage that may be caused by
such removal.
SECTION 412. BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS. The City Manager
shall designate spaces as bus stops and taxicab stands on such public streets in such
places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public. The City Manager shall cause such spaces to be designated by
appropriate signs or curb markings or both.
412.1 The driver of a bus or taxicab is hereby authorized to park the same in any
such place without restriction as to time.
412.3 No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus or taxicab in
any such space when the same has been officially designated and appropriately marked,
except that the driver of any passenger car or light delivery vehicle may stop the same
therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers
or parcels and when such stopping does not interfere with any operator who desires to
drive a bus or taxicab into such space.
SECTION 413. METHOD OF PARKING. All parking shall be parallel to the
curb or the edge of the roadway where a curb does not exist, right wheels resting within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except where individual parking spaces
provided with parking meters or lines indicate otherwise.
12
SECTION 414. PLACES OF ASSEMBLAGE. The City Manager or Police
Chief hereby is authorized to place temporary or permanent traffic control signs in front
of the entrance to places of assemblage or any building in which entertainments, plays,
shows, exhibitions and the like are given, either regularly or otherwise, and for such
period as the City manager or Police chief in his discretion may deem wise under the
circumstances.
The City Manager or Chief of Police is hereby authorized to place temporary
traffic control signs on any street or public way under control of the City where parking
for any event or gathering will create a traffic hazard.
SECTION 415. SNOW REMOVAL. No vehicle shall be parked at any time on
any public street or way or city-owned parking area so as to interfere with or hinder the
removal of snow from the street or way or city-owned parking area by the City plowing
or loading and hauling. Any police officer may cause any vehicle so parked to be
removed from the street and placed in a suitable parking space off of the street, at the
expense of the owner of such vehicle and without the City being liable for any damage
that may be caused by such removal. For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow
the City manager may cause to be placed properly marked signs along any street or
streets as he shall from time to time deem necessary.
SECTION 416. STREET SWEEPING. The foreman of the City Highway
Department shall mark or cause to be marked with temporary signs, public ways or cityowned
parking areas for which the highway department wishes to sweep. The signs shall
specify the date and times during which parking shall be unlawful. The signs shall be
placed at the locations a minimum of 24 hours prior to the period during which parking
becomes illegal. The signs shall be removed as soon as possible after the sweeping is
completed. Any police officer may cause any vehicle parked in violation to be removed
from the parking space and placed in a suitable parking space at the expense of the owner
of such vehicle and without the City being liable for any damage that may be caused by
such removal.
SECTION 417. ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED. No person shall
park a vehicle on any street or way for a period of longer than thirty (30) minutes
between the hours of twelve midnight and 6:00 a.m. of any day from November 1 of each
year to April 1 of the following year, except physicians on emergency calls.
SECTION 418. UNLAWFUL PARKING. No person shall park a vehicle upon
any roadway for the principal purpose of: (1) advertising; (2) displaying such vehicle for
sale; or (3) greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an
emergency.
13
SECTION 419. PENALTIES. The operator or owner of any vehicle charged with a
violation of Section 405 (Overtime Parking) of this Article may waive all court action by
the payment of a waiver fee of ten dollars ($10.00) at the Police Department prior to the
expiration of the 30 day period proceeding the issuance of the parking ticket as stated on
the Notice of Illegal Parking.
The operator or owner of any vehicle charged with a violation of Section 411
(Handicapped Parking) of this Article may waive all court action by the payment of a
waiver fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) at the Police Department prior to the expiration of the
30 day period proceeding the issuance of the parking ticket as stated on the Notice of
Illegal Parking.
The operator or owner of any vehicle charged with a violation of any other section
of this Article may waive all court action by the payment of a waiver fee of twenty-five
($25.00) at the Police Department prior to the expiration of the 30 day period proceeding
the issuance of the parking ticket as stated on the Notice of Illegal Parking.
In addition to sections of this ordinance which specifically allow for towing
violations, a police officer may tow any vehicle parked in violation of this article at the
expense of the owner of such vehicle and without the City being liable for any damage
caused by such removal when that vehicle is parked in a fire lane, blocking a fire hydrant,
parked and left unattended in a bus stop, parked on a sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian
traffic or parked in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard.
Any owner or operator of any vehicle charged with five (5) or more violations of
any of the parking regulations set forth in this Article in any consecutive 30 day period
may be required to forfeit the court waiver fees, and be ordered to appear in court. Any
person summonsed to District Court for a parking violation and found guilty of the
alleged violation may be required to pay for court costs in addition to the fine for the
violation.
** SECTION 420. FINES. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any
provision of this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100 nor less
than $25.00 for each offense, to be recovered by complaint of any police officer of the
City of Ellsworth.
Article 4 & 5 Repealed and Replaced With New Article 4 11/19/90
** Added 05/20/91
14
ARTICLE 6. OPERATION OF VEHICLES
SECTION 601. BACKING LIMITATION. The driver of a vehicle shall not
back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
SECTION 602. CLINGING T0 MOTOR VEHICLES. No person riding upon
any motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or
himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
SECTION 603. ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM CURB. The driver of vehicle
starting from a curb or roadway edge shall yield the right-of-way to all moving traffic on
the roadway. He shall not enter or attempt to enter such moving traffic until he can do so
safely.
SECTION 604. ENTERING TRAFFIC FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE
DRIVEWAY. The driver of a vehicle emerging from any alley, driveway or building
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across any alleyway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may
be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-ofway
to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
SECTION 605. FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS. The driver of any vehicle
shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500
feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block, and not closer than 500 feet to
where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
SECTION 606. FIRE HOSE. No person shall drive a vehicle over any
unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway,
to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department or police
department.
SECTION 607. LITTER. No person shall drive a vehicle over any street in such
a manner that material, rubbish, refuse, junk or litter of any kind drips, sifts, leaks, drops
or otherwise escapes therefrom or drops upon the surface of such highway, street or alley.
SECTION 608. NOISE. No person shall sound an automobile horn, bell or other
sound device on any vehicle anywhere in the City at any time, except when necessary for
safe driving. No person shall drive a motor vehicle, except a fire department vehicle, on
a street unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and
in constant operation to prevent excessive noise and annoying smoke, nor use a muffler
cut-out on any vehicle, except a fire department vehicle, upon any street.
15
SECTION 609. OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Upon the immediate approach of an
authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver thereof is giving audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position as close as possible to the right hand curb or edge of
the roadway, clear of intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police
officer. This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway.
SECTION 610. REPORT OF ACCIDENT. The driver of any vehicle involved
in an accident resulting in injuries to or death of any person or property damage to the
estimated amount of $200 or more shall give immediate notice to the Ellsworth Police
Department as is provided by Section 891 of Chapter 11, Title 29 of the Public Laws of
Maine.
SECTION 611. RIGHT-OF-WAY, INTERSECTING WAYS AND
ENTRANCES OF PRIVATE ROADS. All vehicles shall have the right-of-way over
other vehicles approaching at intersecting public ways, except traffic circles or rotary
intersections, from the left and shall give the right-of-way to those approaching from the
right, except that traffic officers stationed at such intersections may otherwise regulate
traffic threat. The drive of a vehicle entering a public way from a private road, alley,
driveway or building shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on said
public way or sidewalk and before crossing any sidewalk or before entering such public
way where no sidewalks shall exist, shall proceed cautiously across said sidewalk or into
said public way. "Private Road" as used in this section shall be construed to include a
private road, a private way of any description, an alleyway or a driveway.
SECTION 612. SIDEWALKS. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive or ride
within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
613.1 CAREFUL SPEED. Any person driving a vehicle on a way or in any
other place shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than is
reasonable and proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the way or
place, and of any other conditions then existing.
613.2 RATES OF SPEED. Except where the conditions contained in subsection
613.1, the following maximum rates of speed are established.
A. Speed in excess of 15 miles an hour when passing a school during
recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours
shall be unlawful.
16
B. Speed in excess of 15 miles an hour when approaching within 50 feet
and in traversing an intersection of ways when the driver's view is obstructed shall be
unlawful, except where preference is given to through movement of traffic in one
direction at the expense of cross traffic by utilization of "Stop" signs or other control
devices or by direction of a traffic officer. A driver's view shall be deemed to be
obstructed when at any time during the last 50 feet of his approach to such intersection he
does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of the traffic upon
all of the ways entering such intersection for a distance of 200 feet from such
intersection.
C. Speed in excess of 25 miles an hour in a business or residential district,
or built-up portion, as defined in subsection 3 shall be unlawful unless a different speed is
fixed by the municipal officers with the approval of the Department of Transportation,
with the consent and approval of the Chief of the Maine State Police, and such speed is
duly posted.
D. Speed in excess of 45 miles an hour shall be unlawful unless otherwise
posted.
E. Speed of mobile homes, however drawn, in excess of 45 miles per hour
in the daytime or nighttime shall be unlawful.
F. School buses shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 45 miles per
hour except that when used for purposes of an educational trip or for transporting pupils
to an from any extra-curricular activity a school bus may be operated at a speed not
exceed 50 miles per hour.
G. Speed of any motor driven cycle in excess of 35 miles per hour at any
time mentioned in section 1071, unless such motor driven cycle is equipped with a
headlamp or lamps which are adequate to reveal a person or vehicle at a distance of 300
feet ahead, shall be unlawful.
In every charge of violation of a speed limit, the complaint and the summons or
notice to appear shall specify the speed at which the respondent is alleged to have driven.
613.3 DEFINITIONS.
A. COMPACT OR BUILT-UP PORTIONS. The compact or built-up
portions of any municipality shall be the territory of any municipality contiguous to any
way which is built up with structures which are situated less than 150 feet apart for a
distance of at least 1/4 mile. Municipal officers may designate such compact or built-up
portions by appropriate signs.
17
B. DAYTIME AND NIGHTTIME. Daytime for purposes of this
section shall mean from 1/2 hour before sunrise to 1/2 hour after sunset. Nighttime shall
mean any other hour. "Sunrise" and "Sunset" shall be the time given in the Maine
Farmer's Almanac.
SECTION 614. SNOW PLOWS. The driver of any vehicle other than one on
official business shall not follow closer than 200 feet to any snow plow engaged in
plowing. the driver of any vehicle meeting a snow plow on a roadway plowing shall turn
off on anther street if practicable, otherwise, shall come to a complete stop at least 50 feet
away from said plow and not start again until the plow has passed.
SECTION 615. TRAFFIC LAW VIOLATION TICKETS. No person shall
remove from any vehicle a traffic law violation ticket, notice or citation placed on or in
such vehicle by a police officer of the City, except for the purpose of answering such
notice or citation as required therein.
SECTION 616. TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTION. No driver shall enter an
intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the
intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing
the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
SECTION 617. TURN AROUND. The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such
vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district,
and shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made
in safety and without interfering with other traffic.
SECTION 618. UNATTENDED VEHICLE. No person driving or in charge of
a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand on any roadway unattended without first
effectively setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of said vehicle. No person
shall allow an animal-drawn vehicle to be unattended unless it is reasonably fastened.
SECTION 619. UNLAWFUL ACTS. No person shall throw or place or cause
to be thrown or placed upon any highway, any glass, glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, scrap
metal, crockery, cans or any other substance injurious to the feet of persons or animals or
to tires or wheels of vehicles. Whoever accidentally, or by reason of accident, drops from
his hand or a vehicle any such substance upon any highway shall forthwith make all
reasonable efforts to clear such highway of the same.
18
SECTION 620. CURB LOADING ZONE. The City Manager may designate
spaces as curb loading zones on such public streets in such places and in such number as
he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. He shall
cause such space to be designated by appropriate signs or curb markings or both. No
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such place between the hours of 8:00 a.
m. and 6:00 p. m. on any day except Sundays and public holidays when same has been
officially designed and appropriately marked, except for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers for a period not to exceed three
minutes, or in loading or unloading materials for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
SECTION 621. THROUGH STREETS. The following streets and parts of
streets, having been so designated by the Maine State Highway Commission as provided
by M. R. S. A., title 29, Section 948, are hereby declared to be through streets:
621.1. THR0UGHWAY - U. S. #1A from the Dedham town line -Ellsworth city
line via S. H. 43-1 to the junction of U. S. Routes #1 and #1A, State Route #3, and State
Aid Highway #3 (Main Street).
621.2 THROUGHWAY - State Aid Highway #7, from the junction of U. S.
Route 1A and State Aid Highway 37, via State Route 179 to the Ellsworth city line -
township 8 S. D. town line.
621.3 THROUGHWAY - State Aid Highway #8, from the junction of State Aid
Highway 37 and State Aid 38, via State Route 180 to the Ellsworth city line-Otis town
line.
621.4 THROUGHWAY - State Aid Highway #3 from the junction of U. S.
Routes 1 and 1A, State Route 3, and State Highway #3, via Main Street to the Ellsworth
city line-Hancock town line.
621.5 THROUGHWAY - State Aid Highway #12, from the junction of U. S.
Route 1A and State Aid Highway #12 via Infant Street and Christian Ridge Road to the
junction of State Aid Highway #12 and U. S. Route 1 and State Route 3.
621.6 THROUGHWAY - U. S. Route 1 and State Route 3, from the Orland town
line/Ellsworth city line via State Highway 42-1 to the junction of U. S. Routes 1 and 1A,
State Route 3 and State Aid Highway 3, all traffic on intersecting ways to STOP for
traffic on U. S. Route 1 and State Route 3 with the following exception:
A) Junction of U. S. Route 1 and State Route 3 and State Route 172,
eastbound traffic on U. S. Route 1 and State Route 3 to YIELD to traffic within or
approaching the intersection.
19
621.7 THROUGHWAY - State Route 172, from the junction of U. S. Route 1
and State Route 3 and State Route 173 via S.H. 250-1 to the Ellsworth city line/Surry
town line.
621.8 THROUGHWAY - State Route #230, from the junction of U. S. Route 1
and State Route 3 and State Route 230, via State Aid Highway #9 to the Ellsworth city
line/Trenton town line.
621.9 THROUGHWAY - U. S. Route 1, from the junction of U. S. Route 1, 1A,
State Route 3 and State Aid Highway #3, via S. H. 43-1 and S. H. 44-1 to the Ellsworth
city line/Hancock town line. All traffic on intersecting ways to STOP for traffic on U. S.
Route #1, with the following exception:
A) Junction of U. S. Route #1 (F.A.P. 43-1 and F.A.P. 44-1) and State
Route 3 (F.A.P.. 43-1), northbound traffic on State Route 3 to YIELD to traffic within or
approaching the intersection.
621.10 THROUGHWAY - State Aid Highway #6, from the junction of U. S.
Route 1A and State Aid Highway #6, via State Street to the junction of Route 1 and State
Route 3, and State Aid Highway #6.
621.11 THROUGHWAY - State Route 3, from the junction of Route 1 and State
Route 3, via S. H. 43-1 to the Ellsworth city line/Trenton town line.
621.12 THROUGHWAY - Fourth Street (S. A. #14), from the junction of Fourth
Street and State Street (S. A. #6) to the northerly terminus of Fourth Street.
621.13 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of States Routes #179 and #180 (S. A.
#7) and U. S. Route 1A; all traffic on State Routes 179 and 180 to STOP before entering
the intersection.
621.14 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of State Aid Highway #12 (Infant
Street) and U. S. Route 1A; all traffic on State Aid Highway #12 to STOP before
entering the intersection.
621.15 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of State Street (S. A. #6) and U. S.
route 1A (F. A. P. 43-1); all traffic on State Street to STOP before entering the
intersection.
621.16 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of State Aid Highway #12(Christian
Ridge Road) and U. S. Route 1 and State Route 3; all traffic on State Aid Highway #12 to
STOP before entering the intersection.
20
621.18 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of State Route 180 (S. A. #8) and
State Route 179 (S. A. #7); all traffic on State Route 180 to STOP before entering the
intersection.
621.19 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Hancock Street and Pine Street (S.
A. #13); all traffic on Franklin Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
621.20 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Oak Lane and Pine Street (S. A.
#1); all traffic to STOP before entering the intersection.
621.21 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of City Hall Avenue and Church
Street (S. A. #16); all traffic on City Hall Avenue to STOP before entering the
intersection.
621.22 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Church Street (S. A. #16) and
School Street (S. A. #15); all traffic on Church Street to STOP before entering the
intersection.
621.23 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Park Street and School Street (S.
A. #15); all traffic on Park Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
621.24 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Fourth Street (S. A. #14) and State
Street (S. A. #6); all traffic on Fourth Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
621.25 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of State Aid Highway #11 and S. H.
C. Inventory Road #358; all traffic on State Aid Highway #11 to STOP before entering
the intersection.
621.26 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Birch Street and School Street (S.
A. #15); all traffic on birch Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
621.27 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Winkumpaugh Road and U. S.
Route 1A; all traffic on Winkumpaugh Road to STOP before entering the intersection.
621.28 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Union Street and Main Street (S. A.
#3); all traffic on Union Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
621.29 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of SHC Inventory Road #358 and S.
A. #12; all traffic on S. H. C. Inventory Road #358 to STOP before entering the
intersection.
621.30 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Forest Avenue, Shore Road and
Fourth Street; all traffic on Forest Avenue to STOP before entering the intersection.
21
621.31 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Grant Street and West Main Street
( R 1 & 3)
621.32 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Grant Street and Christian Ridge
Road (S. A. 312).
621.33 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of South Street and West Main Street
(R 1 & 3).
SECTION 622. The following streets and parts of streets are designated by the
municipal officers of the City of Ellsworth as throughways and stop or yield
intersections:
622.1 THROUGHWAY - Union Street from the junction of Union Street and
State Aid Highway #3 (Main Street) to the Ellsworth city line/Hancock town line.
622.2 THROUGHWAY - Winkumpaugh Road, from the junction of U. S. route
1A and Winkumpaugh Road to the Ellsworth city line/Orland town line.
622.3 THROUGHWAY - S.H.C. Inventory Road #358 (Branch Lake Road),
from the junction of State Aid Highway #12 (Christian Ridge Road) and S.H.C.
Inventory Road #358 to the westerly terminus of S.H.C. Inventory road #358.
622.4 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of West Maple Street and Laurel
Street; all traffic on West Main Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.5 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Laurel Street and South Street;
all traffic on Laurel Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.6 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Young's Avenue and Chapel Street;
all traffic on Young's Avenue to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.7 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Willow Street and Chapel Street; all
traffic on Willow Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.8 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Willow Street and Grant Street; all
traffic on Willow Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.9 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Liberty Street and Grant Street; all
traffic on Liberty Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.10 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Mae Street, Sterling Street and
Royal Street; all traffic on Royal Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
22
622.11 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Mae Street and Third Street; all
traffic on Mae Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.12 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Wood Street and Third Street; all
traffic on Wood Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.13 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of H & S Drive and Forest Avenue;
all traffic on H & S Drive to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.14 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Argonne Street, Memorial Road and
Forest Avenue; all traffic on Argonne Street and Memorial Road to STOP before
entering the intersection.
622.15 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Memorial Road, Fifth Street and
Pond Avenue; all traffic on Pond Avenue to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.16 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Jude Lane and Fifth Street; all
traffic on Jude Lane to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.17 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Fox Street and Birch Avenue; all
traffic on Fox Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.18 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Spring street and Birch Avenue; all
traffic on Spring Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.19 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Spring Street and Park Street; all
traffic on Spring Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.20 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Bayview Avenue and Park Street;
all traffic on Bayview Avenue to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.21 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Spring Street and Lincoln Street;
all traffic on Spring Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.22 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Lincoln Street and Bayview
Avenue; all traffic on Lincoln Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.23 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Spring Street and Church Street; all
traffic on Spring Street and westbound traffic on Church Street to STOP before entering
the intersection.
622.24 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Church Street and Bayview
Avenue; all traffic on Church Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.25 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Oak Lane and Elm Street; all traffic
on Oak Lane to STOP before entering the intersection.
23
622.26 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Hancock Street and Dean Street; all
traffic on Hancock Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.27 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Elm Street and Hancock Street; all
traffic on Elm Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.28 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Spruce Street and Hancock Street;
all traffic on Spruce Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.29 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of S.H.C. Inventory Road #353
(Happytown Road) and S.H.C. Inventory Road #3205 (Branchview Drive); northbound
traffic on S.H.C. Inventory Road #353 to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.30 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Western Avenue and Argonne
Street; all traffic on Argonne Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.31 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Birch Avenue and Garden Street;
all traffic on Garden Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.32 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Park Street and Garden Street; all
traffic on Garden Street to STOP before entering the intersection.
622.33 On any other intersection where the City manager deems it necessary for
public safety and causes a stop sign to be erected. The erection of a stop sign shall be
prima facie evidence that the stop intersection is authorized.
* 622.34 STOP INTERSECTION - Junction of Boggy Brook Road and Vittum
Road; all traffic on Vittum Road to stop before entering the intersection.
** SECTION 623 - ONE WAY STREETS - The following streets or parts of streets
are hereby declared to be one way streets:
623.1 ONE WAY STREET - Boggy Brook Road - beginning at U. S. Route 1A
and proceeding to the intersection of the Vittum Road, one way in a northerly direction.
*** SECTION 630 - LEFT TURNS PROHIBITED - No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in such a manner as to permit said vehicle to turn left from the first named street
onto the second named intersecting street.
630.11 East Maple Street onto High Street
630.12 South Street onto Main Street
* Added 11/17/80
** Added 11/17/80
*** Added 7/15/96
24
ARTICLE 7. PEDESTRIANS
SECTION 701. PEDESTRIAN'S RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK.
When traffic control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle
shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a
pedestrian crossing the roadway within any crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the
half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the
path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
SECTION 702. CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS. Every
pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or
within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles upon the roadway.
SECTION 703. CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES. No pedestrian shall cross a
roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest
route to the opposite curb except in a crosswalk.
SECTION 704. DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE. Notwithstanding the
foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by
sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing
any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
25
ARTICLE 8 MISCELLANEOUS
SECTION 801. PENALTIES. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by
State law, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $100 nor less than $10.
SECTION 802. SEPARABILITY. If any part or parts of this Ordinance are
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, it is the legislative intent of the
City Council that such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
this ordinance.
26
ARTICLE 9. BEALS AVENUE RESTRICTED
SECTION 901. No vehicle exceeding 6,000 pounds gross weight or dual-wheel vehicle
shall be operated at any time upon or over Beals Avenue or any part thereof.
SECTION 902. EXCEPTIONS. This ordinance shall not apply as follows:
902.01. OPERATION ON STREET OF DESTINATION. The operation of
vehicles when necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point on Beals
Avenue, provided the vehicle shall enter said Beals Avenue at the intersection nearest the
destination point of the vehicle. 902.2 Emergency Vehicles and School Buses.
902.3 PUBLIC UTILITIES. The operation of vehicles owned or operated by the
City of Ellsworth, public utilities, any contractor or material man, while engaged in the
repair, maintenance or construction of the street, street improvement or street utilities,
within the limits of the street.
902.4 DETOURED TRUCKS. The operation of vehicles upon any officially
established detour.
SECTION 903. PENALTY. Whoever violates any provision of this ordinance
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $100 nor less than $10.
SECTION 904. GARDEN STREET RESTRICTED. No through trucks to be
allowed on Garden Street.
27
ARTICLE 10. RED BRIDGE ROAD WEIGHT RESTRICTION8
SECTION 1001. WEIGHT LIMIT IMPOSED.
No motor vehicle or trailer in excess of 36,000 pounds gross registered
weight shall travel on Red Bridge Road except as provided herein.
SECTION 1002. EXEMPTIONS. The following motor vehicles
and trailers are exempted from the restriction imposed by Section 1001:
1002.1 Any vehicle or trailer whose destination is a property
located on Red Bridge Road or a road that may only be accessed
via Red Bridge Road, whether for the purpose of providing
services or delivering goods thereto or because the vehicle or
trailer is principally housed thereon;
1002.2 Any emergency vehicle or trailer;
1002.3 Any vehicle or trailer operated by a municipal, state, or
federal government; or
1002.4 Any vehicle or trailer as otherwise directed by the
Ellsworth Police Department.
SECTION 1003. NOTICES.
Notices specifying the restrictions created by this Article shall be
conspicuously posted at each end of Red Bridge Road.
SECTION 1004. ENFORCEMENT.
In accordance with 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395(6) and (7), a violation of this
Article is a traffic infraction punishable by a fine, which may not be
suspended, of not less than $250.
SECTION 1005. SUNSET.
This Article shall automatically repeal on January 1, 2012, unless earlier
repealed. The repeal of this Article, whenever accomplished, shall not
affect any pending enforcement actions.
8 Added Entire Article 10 09/21/2009
28
ARTICLE 11. SHORE ROAD WEIGHT RESTRICTION9
SECTION 1101. WEIGHT LIMIT IMPOSED.
No motor vehicle or trailer in excess of 36,000 pounds gross registered
weight shall travel on Shore Road except as provided herein.
SECTION 1102. EXEMPTIONS. The following motor vehicles
and trailers are exempted from the restriction imposed by Section 1001:
1102.1 Any vehicle or trailer whose destination is a property
located on Shore Road or a road that may only be accessed via
Shore Road, whether for the purpose of providing services or
delivering goods thereto or because the vehicle or trailer is
principally housed thereon;
1102.2 Any emergency vehicle or trailer;
1102.3 Any vehicle or trailer operated by a municipal, state, or
federal government; or
1102.4 Any vehicle or trailer as otherwise directed by the
Ellsworth Police Department.
SECTION 1103. NOTICES.
Notices specifying the restrictions created by this Article shall be
conspicuously posted at each end of Shore Road.
SECTION 1104. ENFORCEMENT.
In accordance with 29-A M.R.S.A. § 2395(6) and (7), a violation of this
Article is a traffic infraction punishable by a fine, which may not be
suspended, of not less than $250.
9 Added entire Article 11 on 02/09/2015, with an effective 04/01/2015.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 8
TAXICAB ORDINANCE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Amended 05/16/2016
Amended 05/15/2017
Objective of the Ordinance is to protect the safety and welfare of persons hiring taxicabs within the City of
Ellsworth in conjunction with compliance from taxicab owners to enhance the passenger experience.
Section 101. Definition. Every motor vehicle used or to be used for the conveyance of persons for hire from
place to place within the City shall be deemed a taxicab within the meaning of this ordinance except a motor
vehicle subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Maine, and motor vehicles
collecting fares by tickets or coupons for interstate transportation.
Section 102. Owner's License. The owner of every such motor vehicle shall apply for an owner's license;
application therefore shall set forth the name and address of applicant, trade name under which applicant does
or proposes to do business, where proposed stands and garages are or are to be located, the number of vehicles
the applicant desires to operate, a clear description of such vehicle and such other facts as the City Clerk may
require.
Section 103. Taxicab Markings. Every vehicle thus licensed shall have the name of the company and the word
"TAXI" plainly lettered not less than two inches in height on the main panel of each rear door, or other
conspicuous place.
Section 104. Driver's License. No person shall drive or operate a taxicab unless duly licensed as a taxicab
driver. No such license shall be issued to any person without a valid Maine State operator's license certified by
the Police Chief or his designee. A valid license from another State can be certified by the Police Chief or his
designee in cases where an employee is working in Maine on a temporary basis for example during the summer
months only.
Section 105. Temporary Driver’s License. A temporary driver’s license will be issued when a taxicab owner
desires to designate a new hire with a probation status. This driver’s license will have a term to expire ten (10)
calendar days from the date of issue. All the provisions described in Section 104, Driver’s License must be
complied with prior to a Temporary Driver’s License being issued. The only advantage to the taxicab owner is
the fee for the Driver’s License will be waived until the ten (10) calendar days period has expired and/or the
taxicab owner makes the decision to retain the employee.
Section 106. Driver's Identification. The City Clerk shall deliver to each licensed driver an identification card
setting forth the date of issue, expiration date of each license, name, address, photo of driver, and physical
description of the licensee including date of birth, sex, height, and weight. This card shall at all times be
displayed prominently in the cab driven by the licensee or carried upon his/her person; if carried upon his/her
person, the licensee shall exhibit the same to any passenger or officer of the law, who may so request.
Section 107. Vehicle Inspection. Every Taxi owner shall present each taxicab listed on the Owner’s License
issued by the City of Ellsworth to the Police Chief or his designee for inspection whenever the Police Chief or
his designee so requires, during the 1st full week of January and the 3rd week of July of each calendar year,
Monday thru Friday between 8 AM and 4 PM, and at the time of initial licensing or addition to an existing
license. The inspection process will be conducted in compliance with the City of Ellsworth Vehicle Compliance
Report (see Attachment A). This inspection process will be a general overview of the vehicle, not intended to
be a State certified inspection, nor does this preclude the vehicle from having a State Certified Inspection. If a
taxi is not inspected during the designated weeks for renewals, or on the day a new taxi is licensed or added to
an existing license that specific taxi will be suspended from use. If the taxi fails the inspection outlined in
Attachment A; it will be suspended immediately from use until such time it can be re-inspected and successfully
pass the inspection outlined in Attachment A.
Section 108. Penalty. Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the penalty for failure to obtain an
Owner’s License, Driver’s License, or Temporary Driver’s License as required by this ordinance is hereby
determined to be twice the amount of the required license. The fee will be collected by the City Clerk at the
time of issuing the license.
Any person who violates the provisions found in Section 107. “Vehicle Inspection” of the City of Ellsworth
Chapter 8 Taxicab Ordinance commits a civil ordinance violation for which a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) may be imposed for each day such offense
continues and the City’s reasonable fees and expenses, including attorney’s fees to prosecute such ordinance
violation. Each infraction against Section 107 will constitute a separate offense for each day the violation
occurs.
CITY OF ELLSWORTH
TAXICAB
VEHICLE COMPLIANCE REPORT
Please designate Pass with a “P” and Fail with an “X” in the space provided.
____ All lights in proper working order (head, tail, directional, flashers, dash, and top light)
____ Business Name and word “TAXI” plainly lettered not less than two inches in height on the main panel
of each rear door, or other conspicuous place. Name must match registration.
____ Passenger Bill of Rights and “NO Smoking” signs are prominently displayed
____ No visible tears in carpeting or upholstery
____ No dents larger than six (6) inches in diameter
____ No exhaust leaks
____ No fluid leaks
____ No loose trash or large amounts of dirt or sand in the interior passenger area
____ No missing trim or body work
____ No cracks in windshield or windows
____ Seat belts for all passenger seats visible and in working order
____ Operational jack and inflated spare tire in vehicle
____ No bald spots on tires
____ No missing hubcaps
____ No visible primer paint
____ No rust greater than one (1) inch in diameter
____ Current State of Maine Inspection sticker #__________________
__________________________________ ________________________
Signature of Examiner Date
__________________________________ ________________________
Taxi Business Name Last eight #’s of VIN
__________________________________ _________________________
Hire Plate # Fleet # (if applicable)
Attachment A
City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 9
Sign Ordinance
This ordinance was repealed.

{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
CHAPTER 10
MAINTENANCE, ADMINISTRATION AND DISPOSITION OF
TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted 6/17/1985
Amended 12/16/1996
Repealed/Replaced 04/19/2010
Amended 08/16/2010
Amended 04/15/2019
Amended 11/18/2019
{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
ARTICLE I. GENERAL
Section 1. Short Title
This ordinance is hereby adopted in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A MRSA,
Section 3001, as amended and shall be known as and may be cited as the "Ordinance for the
Maintenance, Administration and Disposition of Tax Acquired Property for the City of
Ellsworth" and shall be referred to herein as the "Ordinance".
Section 2. Purpose
The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish and dictate a procedure whereby real property,
1recently acquired in accordance with 36 MRSA, Sections 942 and 943, as amended, shall be
managed, administered and disposed of by the City of Ellsworth. 2This ordinance does not
dictate procedure of City Property which may be disposed of by the City Council as they deem
advisable.
Section 3. Definitions
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
3a. “City Property” shall mean all property owned by the City except for tax acquired
property as defined below.
b. "Foreclosed Tax Lien" shall mean a tax lien mortgage that has automatically
foreclosed pursuant to the provisions of 36 MRSA, Section 942 and Section 943, as amended.
c. "Mail" shall mean regular, first class mail, postage prepaid.
d. "Municipality" shall mean the City of Ellsworth.
e. "Prior Owner" shall mean the person or persons, entity or entities, heirs or assigns to
whom the property was most recently assessed for municipal tax purposes.
f. "Quit Claim Deed" shall mean a signed, legal instrument releasing the municipality's
right, title or interest in the real estate property, acquired by virtue of foreclosed tax liens, to an
individual or individuals, entity or entities without providing a. guarantee or warranty of title
to same.
g. "Real Property" shall mean all land or lands and all structures, buildings, dwellings,
tenements and hereditaments, including manufactured homes, located or relocated upon any
land or lands connected therewith and all rights thereto and interests therein.
h. "Tax Acquired Property" shall mean that real property acquired by the municipality
by virtue of a foreclosed tax lien as defined above 4within five (5) years of the date of
1 Amended August 16, 2010
2 Amended August 16, 2010
3 Amended August 16, 2010
4 Amended August 16, 2010
{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
foreclosure. Following expiration of five years of City ownership, tax acquired property shall
be deemed to be City Property.
i. "Tax Lien" shall mean the statutory lien created by 36 MRSA, Section 552, as
amended.
j. “Timeshare” shall mean real property that is subject to shared ownership whereby a
purchaser receives a right to use accommodations, facilities, or recreational sites, whether
improved or unimproved, for a specific period of time less than a full year during any given year
and which extends for a period of more than three years. The definition of timeshare does not
include property owned jointly where each party has the right to occupy the property for the
entire year even if the owners agree among themselves to limit their occupancy to certain time
periods. The definition of timeshare further does not include property owned by one party or
owned jointly where each party has the right to occupy the property for the entire year which is
then leased or licensed to third parties for a specific period of time less than a full year.
ARTICLE II. MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 1. Following statutory foreclosure of a tax lien mortgage, title to the real property
automatically passes to the municipality. The management of this property rests exclusively
with the City Council, subject to the applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations.
Section 2. The City Council may obtain fire loss insurance for tax acquired property with
structures in a dollar value not less than all outstanding taxes, liens, costs and other attendant
expenses.
Section 3. The City Council shall determine when and if any occupant of tax acquired
property shall vacate the same.
Section 4. The City Council shall determine whether a tax acquired property is to be retained
for municipal use or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 5. Should the City Council decide to retain tax acquired property for use by the City,
it may take all actions necessary to establish clear title to the property.
Section 6. The City Council may charge a monthly rental fee to any and all occupants of tax
acquired property. If a rental fee is charged the City Council shall obtain sufficient insurance
coverage for the tax acquired property.
Section 7. The City Council shall obtain insurance coverage for tax acquired property at such
time as the prior owner, his lessee or licensee, has ceased to occupy the same for a period of 60
days, except that the City Council may, at its discretion, obtain insurance coverage for tax
acquired property that is subject to Article III-B.
{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
ARTICLE III. DISPOSITION OF TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY
Should the City Council decide to dispose of tax acquired property, the following provisions
shall be followed unless Article III-A or III-B apply:
5Section 1. As soon as possible following the automatic foreclosure, the Treasurer will mail a
30-day redemption notice by certified mail, return receipt request, to the person or entity
against whom taxes were most recently assessed. The prior owner may redeem the property
within 30 days from the date of the letter by paying all taxes in fill including interest, costs,
and current tax year. Payment must be made by cashier’s check, postal money order, or cash.
6Section 2. The City Council shall solicit sealed bids for the sale of tax acquired property and
shall receive bids on a date to be determined by the City Council.
Section 3. The City Council shall cause a public notice of the impending public sale of tax
acquired property to be posted within the city building and to be advertised for two
consecutive weeks in the 7newspaper of general circulation, the last notice to be published at
least seven days prior to the advertised sale date.
Section 4. The City Council shall require the following for proper submission of bids:
a. A bid sheet containing the Tax Map and Lot number(s) of the property being bid upon and
the bid price.
b. A certified cashier's check or postal money order in an amount not less than 10% of the bid
price must be included as a deposit on the bid. Failure to submit a deposit shall cause the
bid to be automatically rejected.
Section 5. The City Council shall require that those bid items cited above in Section 4,
subsections a) and b), be sealed in a single plain envelope marked only "Tax Acquired
Property Bid" on the exterior and either be hand delivered to the City Manager or, if mailed, to
be enclosed within a second envelope addressed to the City Manager, City of Ellsworth. All
bids must be received by the municipality on the date and time determined by the City Council
in Section 2 above.
Section 6. The City Council shall not accept any bid that is less than the total outstanding
taxes, interests and costs, current year taxes not assessed, and public notice costs and insurance
costs.
Section 7. The City Council shall retain the right to accept or reject any and all bids
submitted. Should the City Council reject all bids, the property may be offered again for public
sale without notice to any prior owner or owners.
Section 8. The City Council shall notify by mail any successful bidder.
5 Amended August 16, 2010
6 Amended August 16, 2010
7 Amended August 16, 2010
{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
Section 9. The City Council shall, as a credit to payment, retain the submitted bid price
deposit of any successful bidder and shall return all other submitted deposits.
Section 10. The City Council shall require payment in full from a successful bidder within 30
calendar days following the date when bids are opened and read. Should the bidder fail to pay
the balance within 30 days 8or should the successful bidder choose not to complete the
purchase for any reason, the City shall retain the bid price deposit and title to the proffered
property.
Section 11. The City Council may, subject to a show of good cause on the part of the bidder,
extend the time limit in which full payment must be received by 20 additional days.
Section 12. The City Council shall convey title to tax acquired property by Quit Claim Deed.
Section 13. The successful bidder shall be responsible for the removal of any and all
occupants of tax acquired property purchased by him and shall, in writing, forever indemnify
and save harmless the municipality from any and all claims arising out of the sale of the tax
acquired property by the occupants of the purchased property, their heirs or assigns. A signed,
written document giving effect to the provisions of this section shall be delivered to the
municipality with the balance of the purchase price.
**ARTICLE III-A SALE TO PRIOR OWNERS RESIDING ON THE PREMISES
Section 1. This Article applies only to prior owners who personally reside on the premises of
the tax-acquired property at the time the tax lien matured and continuously thereafter up to and
including the time of the petition for repurchase noted below.
Section 2. Within thirty (30) days of the maturation of the oldest property tax lien
encumbering the immediate prior owner of the tax acquired property may petition the City
Council to repurchase the property.
Section 3. The City Council may, at its discretion, allow such repurchase if it deems the
repurchase to be in the best interest of the City. The City Council shall establish the terms of
the repurchase at the time it decides whether to allow such repurchase.
Section 4. In the event the City Council votes to allow the immediate prior owner to
repurchase the property, the City Treasurer shall prepare a repurchase agreement. This
agreement shall allow the immediate prior owner to repurchase the property upon payment of
all back taxes, interest, charges and fees and all attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the
repurchase process, plus any taxes and interest accrued during the term of the repurchase
agreement. The repurchase agreement shall generally conform to the model found at
Appendix A of this Ordinance.
Section 5. A repurchase agreement is not binding upon the City until it is reviewed by the City
Attorney and signed by the City Council after a vote thereon.
8 Amended April 15, 2019
{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
Section 6. The City Council shall only give a Quitclaim Deed to convey title to the property.
There shall be no transfer of title of the property until the repurchase agreement is
satisfactorily performed by the repurchaser.
ARTICLE III-B. DISPOSITION OF TIMESHARE PROPERTY
Section 1. This Article applies only to tax-acquired timeshares.
Section 2. Tax arrears on Timeshare property shall be written-off upon foreclosure.
Section 3. The City Council may, at its discretion, dispose of Timeshare property as it deems to
be in the best interest of the City without offering the prior owner an additional 30-day
redemption period. This may be accomplished by leasing timeshare property to a third party for
subleasing and marketing.
Section 4. The City Manager is authorized to execute municipal quitclaim deeds for the sale of
Timeshare properties.
ARTICLE III-C. OTHER SALE AND DISPOSITION PROCEDURES
Section 1. Should the City Council determine that tax-acquired property shall be relinquished
rather than retained by the City, and the provisions of Article III have been completed in full a
minimum of one (1) time and the provisions of Article III-A do not apply thereto and if bids
are not received for tax acquired property under the terms and conditions of Article III, then
the City Council may dispose of tax acquired property as they deem advisable.
Section 2. Any sale of tax-acquired property shall be through public sale. The Finance
Director, under the directive of the City Manager, shall oversee the exact terms and conditions
of such sale and use his/her best judgment to seek the best and most expedient method of sale
and return on the sale for the City. The City Council will have the right to accept or reject any
sale.
Section 3. The price of tax acquired property, sold pursuant to this Article must be no less
than the total outstanding taxes, interest, costs including, but not limited to, public notice costs
and insurance costs, and current year taxes. The City Council may waive this provision if it
concludes that doing so would be in the City’s best interest.
Section 4. A public notice of tax acquired property available for sale under Article III-B to be
posted within the city building, on the City website, and to be advertised for two consecutive
weeks in the9newspaper of general circulation.
9 Amended August 16, 2010
{R0743996.3 46914-047482 }
ARTICLE IV. CONSTRUCTION AND ADOPTION
Section 1. The various Articles and Sections of this Ordinance are severable. Should any
article or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any
other Article or Section of this ordinance.
Section 2. The provisions of this ordinance shall not be deemed applicable to a release given
by the City Council to any person or persons, entity or entities, the sole purpose of which is to
remove any cloud upon title to property arising from defective or unrecorded discharges of tax
liens.
Section 3. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption by the City
Council.
Adopted 6/17/85 Amendments through 11/18/19
CHAPTER 11
USE OF STREETS
Section 101. Definitions. The words "street" or "street" as used in this ordinance
shall be understood as including highways, avenues, courts, lanes, alleys, parks,
squares, places, sidewalks, and bridges. The definitions of words and phrases
contained in the Traffic Code Ordinance of the City are hereby made applicable to
this and to every other ordinance of this City.
Section 102. Assemblage. No person or persons shall hold or address any public
meeting or assemblage of people in any street without a permit to do so granted
by the City Clerk and approved by the City Manager.
Section 103. Awnings. No owner or leasee of a building to which an awning is
hereafter attached shall allow any part of said awning to be nearer than seven feet
of the surface of the sidewalk or street, and the fixtures thereof shall be securely
fastened and supported in such a manner as not to interfere with pedestrians.
*Section 104. Begging. No person shall beg in any street or public place in the
City of Ellsworth.
Section 105. Business. No person shall in any part of a street expose any goods
for sale, unless the same is especially allowed by law or ordinance, without first
obtaining a written permit from the City Clerk to do so.
Section 106. Cleaning Sidewalks. No person in removing dust, dirt, debris, snow,
ice or muck from any sidewalk or crosswalk of the City, shall project or cause to
be deposited any such material upon the person or apparel of any person nearby or
passing, but in all cases material shall be removed in a careful manner, and the
person so engaged in removing the same shall if necessary discontinue such
operation until the person passing or nearby shall have reached a safe distance.
Section 107. Conduct. No person shall engage in any indecent, insulting,
immoral or obscene conduct; nor create a disturbance; nor make any indecent
figure or write any indecent or obscene words upon any fence, sidewalk, building,
or other public place in the City.
Section 108. Encroachment. Whenever the City Council shall ascertain that any
structure encroaches upon the limits of any street, it shall forthwith issue a notice
to the offending part that such structure be removed within a reasonable time as
said Council shall therein specify, and in case the offending party shall not
comply with said order, the City Council shall cause such structure to be
removed, at the charge and expense of the persons maintaining the same, in
addition to the penalty prescribed for violation of this section.
*Amended 4/26/76
Section 109. Encumbrance. No person shall occupy any street for the purpose of
placing wood, lumber, bricks or any other material intended to be used in erecting
or repairing any building on any land abutting on any of the streets or public
places within the City, except in accordance with the terms of a building permit
previously obtained, and any authorization thereunder by the Building Inspector.
Such permit or authorization thereunder shall allot such part of the street or other
public place as the Building Inspector may deem necessary and sufficient for the
purpose, and so as to leave convenient room for pedestrian and vehicles to pass
therein; and the part so allotted may be used for placing all materials for any such
building or other purposes, and for receiving the rubbish arising therefrom; and all
the rubbish arising therefrom or thereby shall be fully and entirely removed and
carried away at the expense of the person so building or repairing and so
occupying said street or other public place, in such time as shall be limited and
expressed in such building permit or authorization thereunder. Such building
permit or authorization thereunder may contain such reasonable conditions and
limitations with regard to the erection and maintenance of barricades, warning
signs and lights, and such other precautions as the Building Inspector may deem
necessary.
*Section 110. Encumbrance by Sales Display. No person engaged in the sale of
goods, wares, or merchandise shall deposit, pile, place or display for purposes of
sale, or cause or permit to be deposited, piled, placed or displayed for the purpose
of sale, any such goods, wares or merchandise upon or overhanging any sidewalk
or street in front of or adjacent to his business or premises without consent of the
City Council, and a written permit from the City Clerk as per Section 105 of this
ordinance. **Except that the City Council may grant temporary permits to
persons engaged in the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, for sale on any
sidewalk or street, in front of or adjacent to his business or premises, upon the
following conditions:
a) Said permit not to be issued for longer than 40 days, and may only be granted
for those sales held during the months of July and August;
b) City Council having found that said sale would not unduly interrupt pedestrians
or motor vehicular traffic; and
c) Provided that said sale would not cause a risk of harm to persons using said
streets or sidewalks.
Section 111. Excavations. No person shall break or dig up the ground in or near
any street or public place in this City, without a permit from the City Clerk.
Section 112. Games. No person shall, within the limits of any street in the City,
play at any game of ball, amusement or exercise, interfering with the convenient
and free use of such street by persons or vehicles traveling thereon, except such
street as may be designated as e a "play street" by the City Manager, and then
only for the period definitely so designated.
*Amended 4/26/76
**Added 5/17/76
Section 113. Loitering. No person shall loiter in any street or public place, or in
the doorway of any store, after being ordered to move on by a police officer.
Section 114. Missiles. No person shall throw any missiles in or across any street
or public place.
Section 115. Noise. No person shall without a permit from the City Clerk,
approved by the City Manager, use any device to amplify sound for commercial
profit advertising purposes, either stationary or by means of conveyance, upon
any street or public place in the City.
Section 116. Notices. No person shall deface or tear down any public notice,
ordinance or advertisement posted in a street or public place by any public official
in the performance of his duties.
Section 117. Paint on Sidewalks. No person shall paint or cause to be painted
any sign, advertising, or any other matter upon the public sidewalks, or apply
paint thereto for any purpose in any manner, except such paint as may be applied
under the direction of a public official or employee for public purposes.
Section 118. Projections. No person shall make or maintain any door-step,
platform, portico or porch, or any entrance to any passage way to any cellar or
basement, or any other structure projecting into or upon any street or sidewalk.
*Section 119. Signs. No person shall injure, damage, deface, break, take down, or
remove or in any manner interfere with any street sign placed in a street under
authority of the City Council or City Manager except a public official or
employee for repair or replacement purposes.
Section 120. Signs of Warning. No person shall damage, interfere or meddle
with, throw down, destroy or carry away from any street or public place, any
lamp, lantern flare or other light, barricade or danger signal, erected and placed
therein for the purpose of guarding or enclosing unsafe or dangerous places, or
giving warning or notice thereof.
*Section 121. Obstructions on Traveled Roadway. No person shall place,
deposit or cause to be deposited any rocks, stones, snow, ice or other obstructions
upon any street or roadway in any manner so as to obstruct traffic or use of said
street or roadway.
Section 122. Sidewalks. No owner of any building, lot or premises shall allow
rain water or drain water to drain from such buildings, lot or premises onto a
sidewalk, or to allow ditches, leaders, ducts, or drainpipes to empty on a sidewalk.
*Amended 4/26/76
**Section 123. Emergency Rule by Police Officer. Whenever a police officer
shall deem it advisable, during a fire or at the time of any accident, special
emergency or for public safety and convenience may e temporarily close any way
or part thereof to vehicular traffic, or to vehicles of a certain description, or to
divert the traffic thereof, or to divert or break a course of pedestrian traffic.
**Section 124. Emergency Rule by City Manager or Highway Foreman.
Whenever the City Manager or Highway Foreman shall deem it advisable, during
a fire, at the time of any roadway construction, special emergency or for public
safety and convenience may temporarily close any way or part thereof to
vehicular traffic, or to vehicles of a certain description, or to divert the traffic
thereof, or to divert or break a course of pedestrian traffic.
Section 125. Penalty. Any person who shall be guilty of a violation of any
provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $10 nor
more than $100 for each and every offense. The imposition of a penalty for
violation of this ordinance shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue;
such violation shall be remedied within a reasonable time, or within such time
limit as may be specified in any notice given to the owner or occupant of the
premises by the City Manager, and each day such violation continues to exist
following the expiration of the time limit specified in any such notice shall
constitute a separate offense.
**Added 4/26/76
CHAPTER 12
CLOSING OF WAYS
Section 101. Purpose. The following sections are enacted under the authority
vested in the City Council by Chapter 84, Section 126 of the Revised Statutes of
Maine (1944), to prevent the abuse of highways by motor and horse drawn
vehicles during certain seasons of the year.
Section 102. Posting. When in the judgment of the City Manager or Road
Commissioner, it becomes necessary to limit the use of public ways, said roads
shall be posted as closed to all vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of
23,000 pounds.
Section 103. Notice. The notice of such closing shall be by means of advertising
such action in the "Ellsworth American", and at the beginning of each section of
road or way affected. Such notice shall state the weight limit allowed, the date of
closing, and the penalties for violation of the ordinance.
Section 104. Exemptions. The following vehicles are exempt from the
requirements of
Chapter 12:
a. Any vehicle registered for more than 23,000 pounds traveling without a load,
other than tools or equipment necessary for the proper operation of the vehicle.
This exemption does not apply to special mobile equipment.
b. City of Ellsworth highway maintenance or vehicles under the direction of the
City of Ellsworth engaged in emergency maintenance of public roads or
appurtenances thereto.
c. School buses, emergency vehicles solid waste collection vehicles and vehicles
with three axles or less under the direction of a public utility and engaged in plant
maintenance or repair.
d. Service vehicles such as home heating fuel delivery trucks, medical gases
trucks, and postal delivery trucks.
e. Any vehicle operating with a valid special permit to travel over posted roads.
Special permit exemptions may be obtained and are on file at the City Hall,
Ellsworth Me 04605. The fee for a special permit shall be $10/day.
Section 105. Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating any of the
regulations concerning the posted road or way is liable to a fine of not more than
$100 for each offense, and in addition thereto shall be liable for all damages to the
highway occasioned thereby.
Amended April 17, 1995
Back to Ordinances
CHAPTER 13
OFFICE OF CODE ENFORCEMENT
WHEREAS, the General Code of Ordinances of the City of Ellsworth as
heretofore adopted and amended by the City Council from time to time, either
contain provisions for enforcement by designated city officials or do not expressly
state by whom said ordinances are to be enforced; and
WHEREAS, the City Council believes that the enforcement of all city ordinances
should be entrusted to a single city department; and
WHEREAS, the Charter of the City of Ellsworth provides that the Council may
establish city departments, offices or agencies which are not expressly created by
the Charter;
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the City Council acting pursuant to
Article V, Part 1., Section 5.01(a) of the Charter of the City of Ellsworth, does
hereby establish the office of Code Enforcement Officer consisting of a Code
Enforcement Officer and Deputy Code Enforcement Officers for the purpose of
enforcing all ordinances enacted by the City of Ellsworth heretofore or hereafter,
except those ordinances which are expressly to be enforced by the Police
Department or the enforcement of which is expressly given to some other officer
or agency by the Statutes of Maine.
The Deputy Code Enforcement Officers shall have all the powers and duties of
the Code Enforcement Officer but is subject to the direction and control of the
Code Enforcement Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer and Deputy Code Enforcement Officers shall be
appointed annually by the City Manager and shall serve in said offices at the will
and pleasure of the City Manager.
Compensation for said officers shall be determined by the City Council from time
to time.
Any provision of any ordinance heretofore adopted with respect to the
enforcement of same and which is contrary to the provisions set forth above, is
hereby repealed.
Voted 3/22/85
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 14
Licenses and Permits
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted 10/21/1996
Amended 01/27/1997
Amended 02/24/1997
Amended 03/17/1997
Amended 07/21/1997
Amended 08/18/1997
Amended 11/16/1998
Repealed 08/20/2007
New Ordinance Adopted 08/20/2007
Effective 09/01/2007
Amended 06/16/2008
Amended 08/17/2009
Amended 12/13/2010
Amended 10/17/2011
Amended 04/16/2012 effective 06/16/2012
Amended 09/15/2014
Amended 05/16/2016
2
INDEX
ARTICLE I DEFINITIONS P.4
ARTICLE II LICENSE/PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE 9
ARTICLE III GENERAL PROVISIONS 10
Section 301 Enactment Authority 10
Section 302 Licensing/Permitting Authority 10
Section 303 Delegation of Authority 10
Section 304 Application Requirements 10
Section 305 Action Criteria 10
Section 306 Public Notice and Hearing 11
Section 307 Term of License 11
Section 308 Transferability of a Business 12
Section 309 City Council Action 12
Section 310 Violations 12
Section 311 Denial, Suspension and Revocation 12
Section 312 Appeal 14
Section 313 Validity 14
Section 314 Exemption of Fees 14
Section 315 Penalties 14
ARTICLE IV REQUIRED LICENSE/PERMIT 14
Section 401 Amusement (Special) License 14
Section 402 Amusement License 15
Section 403 Arcade License 15
Section 404 Business License 15
Section 405 Carnival/Circus License 15
Section 406 Closing Out Sales (M.R.S.A. 30-A § 3781 et seq) 15
Section 407 Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales License 16
Section 408 Driveway Permit 17
Section 409 Junkyard/Auto Graveyard License 17
Section 410 Liquor License (Malt, Vinous, Spirits) 17
Section 411 Lodging House License 18
3
INDEX (Continued)
Section 412 Mass Gathering 18
Section 413 Medical Marijuana Dispensary License 19
Section 414 Mobile Vending Units 21
Section 415 Parade Permit 22
Section 416 Pole and Wire Permit 22
Section 417 Sewer Hook-up Permit 22
Section 418 Street Opening Permit 22
Section 419 Streets, Use of 22
Section 420 Taxicabs, Taxi Drivers, and Taxi Stands 23
22
Section 421 Towing License Permit 23
22
Section 422 Transient Seller License 22
23
Section 423 Victualers’ 23
ARTICLE V BUSINESS LICENSE/PERMITS 23
Section 501 Purpose 23
Section 502 Permit(s) Required 24
Section 503 General Requirements 24
Section 504 Issuance of Business Permits 24
Section 505 Fees for the Business Permit 25
Section 506 Exemption of Fees 25
Section 507 Exhibition of Permit 25
Section 508 Locations of Restrictions 25
Section 509 Permit not Transferable 25
Section 510 Change of Place of Business 25
Section 511 Adoption 25
Attachment A Flow Chart as it pertains to Business Licenses 26
4
CHAPTER 14 LICENSES AND PERMITS
ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS
Except as specifically defined herein, all words in this ordinance shall carry their customary
dictionary meanings. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein are to be
construed or defined as follows:
Act Upon: To go through the process of deciding whether the application has met the criteria to be
approved.
Alcoholic Beverage: All liquors, including but not limited to wine, beer, and spirits.
Amusement: Live music, dancing, entertainment, exhibition, performances, shows, diversions. (No
adult activity, see Ordinance 46 “Paid Sexual Contact”.)
Amusement (Special): Live music, dancing, entertainment, exhibition, performances, and shows,
diversions that include the offering of alcoholic beverages. (No adult activity, see Ordinance 46
“Paid Sexual Contact”.)
Arcade: Building or area containing pinball, video, and bagatelle games, including pool and
billiards.
Automobile Graveyard: Refer to "Junkyard".
Bagatelle: Coin operated device involving the rolling of balls into scoring areas - refer to "Arcade".
Bed and Breakfast: Refer to "Lodging House".
Boarding Home: Refer to "Lodging House".
Bottle Club: Building or portion thereof where amusement is allowed and a fee is charged.
Beverages and/or food may be consumed on premises with associated licenses.
Branch Establishment: A division of a business or other organization.
Business: Any trade, calling, profession, or occupation, which regularly provides goods and/or
services within the corporate limits of the City of Ellsworth.
Cardholder, Qualified Patient (medical marijuana): Cardholder means a registered patient or a
registered primary caregiver who has been issued and possesses a valid registry identification card.
Cardholder, Qualified Employee (medical marijuana): Cardholder means a principal officer,
board member or employee of a dispensary who has been issued and possesses a valid registry
identification card.
Class A Establishment: Designated as an establishment requiring Amusement, Lodging House,
Liquor and Victualer’s License.
5
Class B Establishment: Designated as an establishment requiring a combination of three of the
following licenses: Amusement, Lodging House, Liquor and Victualer's. Combinations may include:
1. Lodging House, Liquor, Victualer's
2. Lodging House, Liquor, Amusement
3. Lodging House, Victualer’s, Amusement
4. Victualer’s, Liquor, Amusement
Class C. Establishment: Designated as an establishment requiring a combination of two of the
following licenses: Amusement, Lodging House, Liquor, and Victualer's. Combinations may
include:
1. Amusement and Victualer’s
2. Amusement and Liquor
3. Lodging House and Victualer’s
4. Lodging House and Liquor
5. Amusement and Lodging
6. Liquor and Victualer
Closing-Out Sales: This licensing procedure governs any sale which states either directly or by
implication that the intent of the seller is to dispose of the entire stock of goods with a view to
permanently terminate further business after that disposal is complete.
Conditions of Record: For the purpose of this Chapter, this term shall mean any formal written
complaint or written violation.
1Consumer Fireworks:
"Consumer Fireworks" as defined in, Sec. 1. 8 MRSA §221-A, sub-§1-A has the same meaning as in 27 Code
of Federal Regulations, Section 555.11 or subsequent provision, but includes only products that are tested and
certified by a 3rd-party testing laboratory as conforming with United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission standards, in accordance with 15 United States Code, Chapter 47.
"Consumer Fireworks" does not include the following products as defined by the State Fire Marshal by rule:
A. Missile-type rockets:
A device similar to a skyrocket in size, composition, and effect that uses fins rather than a stick for guidance
and stability. Missiles shall not contain more than 20 grams of total chemical composition.
B. Helicopters and aerial spinners:
A tube containing more than 20 grams of chemical composition, with a propeller blade attached. Upon
ignition, the rapidly spinning device rises into the air. A visible or audible effect may be produced at or near
the height of flight.
C. Sky rockets and bottle rockets:
Cylindrical tube containing not more than 20 grams of chemical composition, as prescribed under
section 3.7 and Table 4.3-1 of the American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1 with a wooden
stick attached for guidance and stability. Rockets rise into the air upon ignition. A burst of color
and/or sound may be produced at or near the height of flight.
1 Added 4/16/2012 effective 6/16/2012
6
Dance Hall: Building or portion thereof where dancing is allowed. The term shall also include
public or private parking lots, streets, or area(s) set aside for dancing - refer to "Amusement and
Amusement (Special)".
Dispensary: A Registered Dispensary or Dispensary means a not-for-profit entity registered
pursuant to 10-144 CMR Chapter 122 Section 6 consisting of a Medical Marijuana Cultivation
Facility, a Medical Marijuana Retail Facility, or a Medical Marijuana Combined Facility (Medical
Marijuana Cultivation Facility and a Medical Marijuana Retail Facility as defined:
1. Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility (Cultivation Facility): A not-for-profit facility
limited to the acquisition and possession of medical marijuana; cultivation or growing of
medical marijuana; manufacturing of medical marijuana; delivering, transporting and
transferring of medical marijuana to a Medical Marijuana Retail facility.
2. Medical Marijuana Retail Facility (Retail Facility): A not-for-profit facility limited to
acquisition and possession of medical marijuana; the selling, supplying or dispensing of
medical marijuana and of paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials to
registered patients who have designed the Medical Marijuana Retail Facility to dispense
medical marijuana for their medical use and to registered primary caregivers of those
patients.
Eating Establishment: Refer to "Victualer’s"
Exhibition: A public showing for which a fee may or may not be charged.
Food Establishment (medical marijuana): A dispensary that prepares goods containing marijuana
for medical use by a registered patient.
Highway Opening: Refer to "Street Opening".
Hotels: Refer to "Lodging Houses".
Innkeepers: Refer to "Lodging Houses".
Itinerant Vendors: Refer to "Transient Sellers".
2Junkyard/Automobile graveyard –
1. Junk Yard - a yard, field or other area used as a place of storage for discarded, worn-out or
junked plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances, furniture, discarded scrap and
junked lumber, old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris,
waste and scrap iron, steel and other ferrous and non-ferrous material, including garbage
dumps, waste dumps and sanitary landfills.
2. Automobile Graveyard - A place occupied by three (3) or more unregistered, unserviceable,
discarded, or junked automotive vehicles, or bodies, engines, or other parts thereof sufficient
in bulk to equal two (2) vehicles or bodies, also referred to as a motor junk yard. (But
excluding vehicle repair garages where autos are being overhauled or held temporarily
pending insurance claims, etc.)
License: As used in this Chapter, this term shall also mean permit and approval from the authority
having jurisdiction.
2 Added 6/16/08
7
License Exemptions: Any organization/charity holding a Cert. (IRS 501 (c) (3)) verifying nonprofit
status is exempt from the monetary requirements of this Chapter, however still subject to inspections
pursuant to Article III Section 304 through 315.
Live Music: People performing live in a musical capacity.
Lodging House: Place providing sleeping accommodations with or without meals and charges a fee,
including but not limited to bed and breakfast, boarding houses, hotels, inns and motels.
Lunch Wagons: Establishment selling foods of any sort for consumption on or off premises, mobile
in design. Refer to "Victualer."
Mass Gathering: Outdoor events, including but not limited to, exhibitions, festivals, music concerts
and fairs where more than 250 persons are reasonably expected to attend.
Marijuana: Marijuana means the leave, stems, flowers and seeds of all species of the plant genus
cannabis, whether growing or not. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced
from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, and other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake or sterilized seed of the
plant which is incapable of germination.
Medical Use (medical marijuana): Medical use means the acquisition, possession, cultivation,
manufacture, use, delivery, transfer or transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the
administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered patient’s debilitating medical condition
or symptoms associated with the registered patients debilitating medical condition.
Non-Business: Any schools, churches, athletic groups, non-profit organizations, persons fulfilling
work under a warranty or professionals performing work within their profession, on an itinerant
basis, within the City limits of Ellsworth who are licensed by the State of Maine.
Patient (medical marijuana): Means a person whose physician has provided a written certification
to the department for the patient’s medical use of marijuana.
Permit: A document or certificate giving permission to operate a business.
Person: Individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or any other group,
organization, entity acting as a unit in the plural as well as the singular number, legal entity,
including but not limited to lessee and manager.
Premises: For the purpose of this Chapter, this term shall mean any building, room, structure,
mobile unit, or area wherein or whereat the activity takes place.
Public Exhibition: Refer to "Exhibitions."
Registered Patient (medical marijuana): Registered patient means a patient who has a registry
identification card issued by the State of Maine.
Regularly: At least once a month.
Special Amusements: Refer to "Amusement (Special)"
8
Special Event: An event which:
1. Is operated in a temporary structure or in the out-of-doors.
2. Includes, but is not limited to, circuses, fairs, carnivals, festivals, religious revivals,
political rallies, vehicle shows and displays, swap meets, rodeos, and similarly
recognized temporary activities.
3. Does not include wedding and funeral ceremonies, elections, private yard sales, car
washes (fundraising), and activities such as retail sales promotions conducted under
an existing business permit that could otherwise be lawfully conducted in accordance
with the provisions of the zoning restrictions in the district where such promotion
takes place.
Street Opening: Method of excavation and destruction of pavement and its associated gravel
surface (shoulders) within a public way. (See Unified Development Ordinance, Article 9
“Street Design and Construction Standards)
Taxicab: A vehicle used for the conveyance of persons for a fee.
Taxicab Driver:A person with an active Maine Driver’s License and legally permitted to operate a
taxicab through the City of Ellsworth.
Taxicab Stands: A parking place within but along the shoulder of a public road right- of-way,
designated specifically and reserved for the temporary parking of taxicabs for the purpose of loading
and unloading passengers and their property.
Traffic Trip Generation: Number of vehicles that visit a location in a peak hour.
Transient Seller: Person(s) with no business office or location within the City of Ellsworth or State
of Maine passing through or by the City with only a brief stay.
Vendor: Someone who promotes or exchanges goods or services for money.
Victualer’s: Provider of prepared food, of any sort, for public consumption either on or off premises
for a fee.
9
ARTICLE II
LICENSE/ PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
TYPE OF LICENSE TERM OF LICENSE FEE AUTHORITY
AMUSEMENT
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT
ONE YEAR
ONE YEAR
$35.00
$35.00
CLK
CC/CLK
ARCADES ONE YEAR (12
devices or less)
$20.00 CLK
ARCADES ONE YEAR (over 12
devices)
$35.00 CLK
BUSINESS PERMIT INDEFINITELY-OR
UNTIL CHANGES
OCCUR
$10.00 CEO
CARNIVAL/CIRCUS PER DAY $110.00 CM
CLASS A ESTABLISHMENT ONE YEAR $100.00 CC/CLK
CLASS B ESTABLISHMENT ONE YEAR $85.00 CC/CLK
CLASS C ESTABLISHMENT ONE YEAR $65.00 CC/CLK
DRIVEWAYS THIRTY DAYS NO CITY FEE CEO/DOT
CLOSING-OUT SALES
(Required by State Law)
VALID FOR SIXTY
DAYS
$10.00 CC
CLOSING-OUT SALES
(Required by State Law)
SIXTY DAY
EXTENSION
$10.00 CC
CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL
SALES LICENSE
ONE YEAR $500.00 CC
JUNKYARD/AUTOMOBILE
GRAVEYARD/RECYCLING
ONE YEAR (within
100’ from highway)
$200.00 CC/CLK
JUNKYARD/AUTOMOBILE
GRAVEYARD/RECYCLING
ONE YEAR (100 +
from the highway)
$55.00 CC/CLK
LIQUOR ONE YEAR $35.00 CC/CLK
LODGING HOUSE ONE YEAR $30.00 +
$2.00/RM
CC/CLK
MASS GATHERING PER DAY $110.00 PC
MEDICAL MARIJUANA
DISPENSARY
ONE YEAR $1000.00 CC/CLK
MOBIL VENDING UNIT ONE YEAR $45.00 CC/CLK
POLE/WIRE PERMIT
ONE TIME $8.00/FILING FEE CM/PW (already
existing)
STREET OPENING THIRTY DAYS Minimum fee $25.00 CM/CEO/PW
TAXICABS ONE YEAR $35.00/TAXI CLK/PC
TAXI DRIVER ONE YEAR $20/DRIVER CLK
TAXI STANDS ONE YEAR $110.00/SPACE CLK
TRANSIENT SELLER THIRTY DAYS $110.00 CLK/CEO
VICTUALER’S ONE YEAR $35.00 CLK
OFF-PREMISE CONSUMPTION PER EVENT $35.00 CLK
BED&BREAKFAST
(Less than 5 rooms)
$35.00 CC/CLK
WRECKER/TOWING SERV. ONE YEAR $110.00 PC/CLK
KEY:
CC = CITY COUNCIL CM = CITY MANAGER
CEO = CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER CLK = CITY CLERK
PC = POLICE CHIEF PW = PUBLIC WORKS
10
ARTICLE III
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 301. ENACTMENT AUTHORITY
This chapter is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001 et seq. This chapter expressly
applies to licenses and permits requiring "municipal officers" approval.
SECTION 302. LICENSING/PERMITTING AUTHORITY
The City Council and/or their designees shall be the licensing/permitting authority for the City of
Ellsworth in accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001.
SECTION 303. DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY
A. As agent of the City Council, the City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to:
1. Receive applications required by Article IV:
2. Distribute applications to appropriate department heads for their inspection(s) and written
report;
3. When required, set a public hearing and place request on the next available agenda for
Council action; and
4. Issue licenses.
B. As agent of the City Council, the City Highway Foreman is hereby authorized and directed to
receive and act upon all applications for driveway and City-street opening permits.
C. As agent of the City Council, the Superintendent of the City Wastewater Treatment Facility is
hereby authorized and directed to receive and act upon all applications for hookups to the City sewer
system.
D. As agent of the City Council, the Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
receive and act upon all applications for Business Licenses/Permits.
SECTION 304. APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Any person required by this ordinance to obtain a license or permit from the City shall make
application upon a form provided by the appropriate issuing authority (see attachment A) and shall
state facts as may be required. Application(s) must be accompanied by the required fee (refer to
Article II) and returned to the issuing authority. The issuing authority will be responsible for
obtaining written approvals from applicable department heads, including but not limited to: (1) Fire
Chief, (2) Police Chief, (3) Code Enforcement Officer and (4) City Treasurer before license will be
issued by licensing authority. Said approvals shall be based upon criteria set forth in this Chapter.
All licenses, new and renewals, requiring public hearings shall be acted upon by the City Council.
The City Clerk shall act upon all licenses, new and renewals, not requiring public hearings.
SECTION 305. ACTION CRITERIA
When required, the officials named in Section 304 shall cause inspections to be made and a written
report forwarded to the licensing authority verifying that the premises to be used by the proposed
activity is in compliance with the following:
A. Current Land Use Ordinance
11
B. Current 101 Life Safety Code (As adopted by the State of Maine)
C. Chapter 14 Fire Prevention Codes and Ordinances
D. Chapter 59 Consumer Fireworks and Commercial Outdoor Public Fireworks/Pyrotechnics
Display Ordinance
E. Current Electrical Code
F. Current Building Code
G. Current Plumbing and Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules
H. Current Sewer/Storm Water Ordinance
I. Current Maine State Food Code
J. As a condition of approval, the Police and/or Fire Department may require that Police and/or Fire
personnel be present before, during, or after the event, at the applicant’s expense.
SECTION 306. PUBLIC NOTICE AND HEARING
A. Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall, when required, cause notice of said
application to appear for at least two (2) consecutive weeks before the date of the hearing in a
weekly newspaper having general circulation in the City of Ellsworth, the cost of which shall be
borne by the applicant and paid directly to the City of Ellsworth.
With NEW APPLICATIONS requiring a public hearing, the applicant must adhere to the following:
1. Applicant and/or authorized agent must be present at the public hearing:
2. Non-attendance shall cause the licensing authority to deem the application "incomplete" and
no action will be taken;
3. Should Section 306.2 occur, the applicant shall have to reapply for notice and hearing as set
forth in Section 304.
With RENEWAL APPLICATIONS requiring a public hearing, the applicant and/or authorized agent
is not required to be present. The City Clerk will notify applicants if their appearance is required at
the Public Hearing based on non-compliance with one or more of the following sections:
B. Article III Section 304 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
C. Article III Section 305 APPROVAL CRITERIA
D. Article III Section 309 CITY COUNCIL ACTION
E. Article IV Section 407 CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL SALES LICENSE
F. Article IV Section 410 LIQUOR LICENSE (MALT, VINOUS, SPIRITS)
G. Article IV Section 413 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
SECTION 307. TERM OF LICENSE
A. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter or by State Law, the term of all licenses shall be
for one (1) year from the date of issuance and shall run concurrently unless the license(s) is issued
for a lesser period.
12
SECTION 308. TRANSFERABILITY OF A BUSINESS
No license or permit issued under this ordinance shall be transferable. When a business or enterprise
is transferred the previous owner’s license shall immediately terminate unless otherwise provided by
statutes or ordinance. The new owner shall obtain a new license under the terms of this ordinance.
For the purposes of this ordinance, a new owner shall include business or enterprise formerly
operated by a tenant or mortgagor, or in the case of a corporation, a new owner or a controlling
interest in the corporation. In applying for a permit, a potential new owner shall be permitted to
apply for a permit as an owner upon a showing of legal right, title or interest to the business or
enterprise.
SECTION 309. CITY COUNCIL ACTION
Upon referral by the City Clerk of a completed application in accordance with Section 304 of this
chapter, the City Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the license/permit application. In its
consideration to approve or deny said request, the City Council shall determine that the applicant
has:
A. Obtained approvals in accordance with Section 305.
B. Paid all arrearages of the City personal property taxes and solid waste fees or any other
obligations owed to the City, excluding real estate taxes and water and sewer charges. Real estate
taxes and water and sewer charges will be collected under Title 36 and Title 38 of the Maine Revised
Statutes and the Maine Public Utilities Commission Water Laws and Rules. Other obligations may
include monies as aforementioned still owed by previous owners after a transfer of business occurs.
Sole Proprietors will also be responsible for outstanding balances remaining in their personal names.
C. Is in compliance with any requirements for obtaining the license or permit pursuant to this or any
other ordinance and any state or federal law.
D. If the City Council determines the applicant and/or owner has met these requirements, it shall
approve the license/permit. If the City Council determines the applicant and/or owner has not met
these requirements, it shall deny the license/permit.
SECTION 310. VIOLATIONS:
Any person who operates any activity regulated under this ordinance without a license or permit or
who operates a such activity after suspension or revocation of a license or permit, pursuant to this
ordinance, may be assessed a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day the violation
continues. In the event the City brings an action for violation of this ordinance and prevails in that
action, it shall be awarded its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs from the establishment at issue.
This section does not preclude the City from exercising any other remedy it may have for violations
of this ordinance or for operation of any such activity in a manner contrary to law.
SECTION 311. DENIAL, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
A. The City may deny a Permit or License if the applicant fails to comply with the
requirements of this ordinance. A Permit or License issued under the provisions of this
ordinance may be revoked by the Code Enforcement Officer for any of the following
reasons:
13
1. If the licensee violates any condition or requirement of licensing under state or federal law or
local ordinance.
2. If there is fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of applying for a
permit, or judicial finding of fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made to the City in
the course of operating the business;
3. If there is judicial finding that the permittee conducted business in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety, or welfare of the public;
4. For failure to comply with terms or conditions of approval as specified in the
permit application, such as but not limited to, building permit, sign permits,
and development permit; or
5. For failure to abide by conditions imposed by Code Enforcement Officer,
Police, and Fire Departments, in connection with a business permit involving
a special event.
B. Failure of an establishment to obtain a license when deemed necessary by this ordinance
shall be construed as violation and dealt with in the same manner as a denial, suspension or
revocation. If an applicant or a permitee has not complied with any of the requirements
listed above, or if, through a routine criminal background investigation it is discovered that
an applicant or a permitee has a criminal background and that background may jeopardize the
welfare and safety of the community, the City may immediately refuse to grant a permit or
revoke an existing permit. The applicant or permittee shall receive notice by personal service
or if personal service cannot be affected, by certified mail of the refusal or revocation.
The notice shall contain a statement of the reason(s) for the refusal or revocation. Violation,
suspension or revocation shall be subject to the following procedures:
1. Upon receipt by the Code Enforcement Officer of a report from any department head or City,
state or federal employee or agent charged with issuing, supervising, monitoring, inspecting
or otherwise regulating any licensee, that the licensee is violating any law or ordinance
respecting such license, the Code Enforcement Officer shall give notice to the licensee of the
alleged violation.
The notice of violation from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be delivered to the licensee
by a police officer of the City of Ellsworth or some other person authorized to serve process
under the laws of the State of Maine. The notice shall state the nature of the alleged violation
and the date it was allegedly observed. The violator may appeal any decision pursuant to
Section 312. Appeals.
C. In the event the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a violation noted in paragraph (B.1.)
has occurred, the Code Enforcement Officer shall promptly take one of the following actions:
1. Deny or revoke the license:
2. Suspend the license until the violation is corrected;
3. Order the license revoked, but suspend the revocation for a reasonable time to allow
correction of the violation. If the violation is corrected during that period, the revocation shall
be rescinded.
D. Any order by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be issued in writing and state the reasons
therefore. In the event the Code Enforcement Officer orders the suspension or revocation of a license
pursuant to Section C.1. through C.3. the licensee shall have the right to appeal the suspension or
revocation pursuant to Section 312. Appeals.
14
E. In the event a violation reported pursuant to Section A. or B. above, the Code Enforcement
Officer may immediately suspend the license by giving notice thereof to the licensee.
SECTION 312. APPEAL
A. The Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal pertaining to the Code Enforcement Officer
suspending or revoking a permit/license de novo at a duly noticed meeting held within thirty (30)
days of the date the appeal is filed.
B. Within thirty (30) days from the denial or revocation of a License or Permit the aggrieved
party may appeal, pursuant to Article VII of the City of Ellsworth Land Use Ordinance.
SECTION 313. VALIDITY
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of the Chapter shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such validity shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Chapter and to
that end the provisions of this Chapter are hereby declared to be sever able.
SECTION 314. EXEMPTION OF FEES
Any organization operated exclusively for educational, religious, charitable public service,
fraternal or other non-profit purposes, with the exception of Medical Marijuana Dispensaries,
and having a permanent address within the City of Ellsworth may be exempted from the
monetary provisions of this ordinance, but still subject to inspection and permit requirements
pursuant to Article III Section 304 through 315.
SECTION 315. PENALTIES
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner agent or contractor,
violating any provision of this ordinance may, upon being found liable, be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day such offense continues, and the City’s reasonable
fees and expenses including attorneys fees. Each offense may constitute a separate offense
for each day the violation occurs. Any violation of this ordinance may be deemed to be a
nuisance.
ARTICLE IV
REQUIRED LICENSE/PERMIT
SECTION 401. AMUSEMENT (SPECIAL) LICENSE
No person shall operate any establishment within the City which offers and/or allows alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on the premises and offers live music, dancing, live entertainment,
performance or show without obtaining a license or permit in accordance with Article III Section
304 through 315 of this ordinance and Chapter 37 Special Amusement Permit Ordinance of the
Ellsworth Code of Ordinances. A public hearing is required prior to action on the license or permit
application or renewal.
15
SECTION 402. AMUSEMENT LICENSE
No person shall operate any establishment within the City, which offers live music, dancing, live
entertainment, performance or show without obtaining a license or permit in accordance with Article
III Section 304 through 315.
SECTION 403. ARCADE LICENSE
No person shall keep pinball machines, video games or arcade games of any sort, for public
patronage in the City, without first obtaining a license in accordance with Article III Section 304
through 315.
SECTION 404. BUSINESS LICENSE
No person shall directly or indirectly conduct any business or activity or use in connection therewith
any vehicle, premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, for which a license or permit is
required under this ordinance without a license or a permit therefore being procured and kept in
effect at all times as required by this ordinance or by state statute.
SECTION 405. CARNIVAL/CIRCUS LICENSE
No person shall operate a carnival, or circus, within the City without first obtaining a license in
accordance with Article III Section 304 through 315. This license must be obtained no less than
twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of the event.
SECTION 406. CLOSING OUT SALES (M.R.S.A 30-A § 3781 et seq.)
No person may offer for sale a stock of goods, wares or merchandise under the designation of
"closing-out sale," "going out of business sale," "discontinuance of business sale," "entire stock must
go," "must sell to the bare walls" or other designation which states, directly or by implication, an
intent of that person to dispose of the entire stock of goods with a view to permanently terminating
further business after that disposal is complete, unless the person complies with the following
requirements:
A. Inventory license. Before the disposal sale begins, the person must obtain a license to conduct the
sale from the City Council or their designee of the municipality in which the sale will be conducted.
1. The person must apply to the City Council or their designee for the license under oath. The
application must contain a complete inventory of all items to be included in the sale and must
be accompanied by the payment of a license fee set by the City Council or their designee.
The applicant must affirm, in writing and under oath, to the City Council or their designee
that no merchandise will be included in the stock offered for sale unless the merchandise is in
or at the place of business where the sale will take place when the sale opens. Any unusual
purchases and additions to the stock of goods, wares or merchandise made within 60 days
before the filing of an application for a license is prima facie evidence that the purchases and
additions were made in contemplation of the sale.
a. If the applicant has been in the same business for which the sale is being conducted
for less than 2 years of continuous operation in the municipality, the applicant must
also affirm, in writing and under oath, that none of the merchandise was purchased
16
before the sale opened for the purpose of selling and disposing of that merchandise at
the sale.
2. The license is valid for 60 days from the date of issuance, unless revoked under Article III,
Subsection 310-312. The validity of the license may be extended for 60 additional days if the
licensee provides an affidavit to the City Council or their designee stating that all goods,
wares or merchandise listed in the inventory have not been disposed of within the original
60-day period.
B. License issued; records preserved. The City Council or their designee shall immediately
issue the license upon compliance with this section. The City Council or their designee shall
preserve all applications for licenses and other papers filed in connection with an application
as a public record in their office for 5 years. They shall endorse the dates of filing and the
granting or denial of the license on those papers and shall make an abstract of any other
proceedings taken in connection with the application.
C. Revocation; prior violations; suspension. The City Council or their designee shall revoke
any license issued under this subchapter if the licensee is convicted of violating this section.
The City Council or their designee may refuse to issue another license to any applicant who
has been convicted of violating this section before the date of application. If any person
convicted of any violation of this section appeals the decision or sentence of the trial court,
that person's license shall be suspended while the appeal is pending in the appellate court.
SECTION 407. CONSUMER FIREWORKS RETAIL SALES LICENSE
No person shall operate any establishment or sell from any establishment Consumer Fireworks within the
City of Ellsworth without obtaining a license in accordance with Article III Section 304 through 315.
A public hearing is required prior to action on the initial license application or renewal.
A. The application fee for the initial license and renewal license shall be $500.00.
B. Applicant must be 21 years of age or older and provide proof of age with birth date and one
government issued picture identification are required.
C. A separate license is required for each location at which an applicant seeks to sell consumer
fireworks.
D. Application for a license to sell consumer fireworks within the City of Ellsworth shall be submitted
with a current valid Federal license to sell consumer fireworks.
Prior to submission of an application to the State Fire Marshal’s Office, the applicant must have a valid City
of Ellsworth Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales License and a valid Federal license to sell consumer fireworks.
Upon receipt of the State license, the applicant shall submit a copy of the current valid license to the Fire
Chief.
17
SECTION 408. DRIVEWAY PERMIT
A. This procedure is for City roads/sidewalks only State roads are subject to different rules through
the Department of Transportation.
B. No person shall cause construction of a driveway within the City without obtaining approval,
including but not limited to: (1) Code Enforcement Officer, (2) Highway Foreman and (3) City
Manager.
C. Any person required to obtain a City road/sidewalk opening permit shall make application with
the Code Enforcement Office. The Code Enforcement Officer, Highway Foreman and City Manager
will act upon the application and notify the applicant of their decision.
SECTION 409. JUNKYARD/AUTO GRAVEYARD LICENSE
No person shall operate or allow operation of an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling, or
junkyard as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3751 et. Seq. without first obtaining a license in
accordance with said statute. A public hearing is required prior to action on the license application or
renewal.
SECTION 410. LIQUOR LICENSE (Malt, Vinous, Spirits)
A. No person shall operate any establishment within the City which offers/allows alcoholic
beverages for sale or consumption, either on or off the premises, without obtaining a license in
accordance with Article III Section 304 through 315. A public hearing is required prior to action on
a new license application or renewal application for establishments where alcohol is consumed on
premises.
B. Applications for licenses to sell or serve alcohol may be denied on any one or more of the
following grounds:
1. Noncompliance with Article III Section 305.
2. Applicant/owner has been convicted of any Class A, B or C crime.
3. There have been conditions of record regarding waste disposal, health or safety, or traffic
or parking violations on or in the vicinity of the licensed premise and caused by employees or
patrons.
4. There have been conditions of record caused by patrons or employees which unreasonably
disturb, interfere with or affect the ability of persons or businesses residing in the vicinity of
the licensed premise to use their property in a reasonable manner.
5. There have been repeated incidents of breaches of the peace, disorderly conduct,
vandalism or other violations of law in the vicinity of the licensed premise and caused by
patrons or employees.
6. The applicant has committed a violation of any provision under Title 28-A M.R.S.A., or
State of Maine Liquor Enforcement Rules and Regulations.
C. Applications for licenses to sell or serve alcohol may be denied if the proposed use is within three
hundred (300) feet of a public or private school, school dormitory, chapel or parish house; provided
the exceptions within Title 28-A M.R.S.A §701, “Proximity to Schools” do not apply. The distance
must be measured from the main entrance of the premises to the main entrance of the school, school
dormitory, church, chapel, or parish house by the ordinary course of travel.
D. The Chief of Police or his designee may cause an investigation to be made of the criminal record
of the principal officer(s), shareholders, members, or person(s) to be licensed.
18
SECTION 411. LODGING HOUSE LICENSE
No person shall operate a lodging house in the City without obtaining a license in accordance with
Article III Section 304 through 315. A public hearing is required prior to an action on the license
application or renewal.
SECTION 412. MASS GATHERING
A. No person or group of persons may sponsor, promote, operate or hold any festival, exhibition,
amusement show, fair, theatrical performance, music concert, parade or other activity which 250 or
more people are reasonably expected to attend and in which a substantial portion of the
entertainment or the people attending will be out-of-doors unless a license is first obtained from the
City of Ellsworth.
B. The person or group of persons seeking a mass gathering license must file an application, in
accordance with Article III Section 304 through 315, with the Police Chief no less than 45 days
before the proposed commencement of the outdoor event and secure the following:
1. A corporate bond from a company authorized to do business in Maine, ensuring prompt
cleaning of the grounds after the close of the outdoor event, and ensure prompt payment for
all damages caused by an attendee or employee to public or private property in the vicinity
resulting from or in connection with the licensed event. The surety shall be to the benefit
of the City of Ellsworth and shall allow the City to draw on the funds if actions are not
taken within three (3) working days after the event.
2. As a condition of approval, the Police and/or Fire Department may require that Police
and/or Fire personnel be present before, during, or after the event, at the applicant’s
expense.
3. Demonstrate, by means of a written descriptive plan, that adequate facilities will be
provided at the site of the outdoor event, in order to protect the health of the people who
attend, including:
a. Adequate waste disposal facilities;
b. Adequate fire fighting equipment and personnel;
c. Adequate water supplies;
d. Adequate first aid facilities; and
e. Adequate communication facilities.
4. Provide notice to the appropriate City, county and state officials as named by the Police
Chief.
5. File proof of authority from landowners whose property will be used in holding the outdoor
event.
6. Demonstrate in a written descriptive plan that adequate parking space will be available.
Permission from any property owner whose property will be used for parking must also be
included.
C. Exemptions: All outdoor events, festivals, music concerts, fairs and other large gatherings
sponsored and under the direct supervision of the City of Ellsworth including the School Department
shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. All such activities conducted as an auxiliary
use to normal operation of an approved campground shall also be exempt.
19
SECTION 413. MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY LICENSE
No person shall operate any medical marijuana dispensary establishment within the City of
Ellsworth without obtaining a license in accordance with Article III Section 304 through 315. A
public hearing is required prior to action on the license application or renewal.
A. Purpose.
1. To regulate dispensaries in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the
residents, merchants, and customers; and
2. To assure dispensaries operate with the highest professional and ethical standards.
B. Licensing documents. The following information shall be provided to the City Clerk as part of
the annual licensing process:
1. State Certificate of Registration.
2. Letter from the Ellsworth Police Chief confirming: that the security plan and the antidiversion
policy and amendments are on file and found to be acceptable; the receipt of
the summary report of incidents and illegal activities for the previous year; and the semiannual
receipt of the employee lists and that the employees were found to be acceptable.
3. Letter from the Ellsworth Fire Chief confirming the receipt of the material safety data
sheets and annual updates.
C. Authority to Impose Conditions on License.
The City Council shall have the authority to impose such reasonable terms and conditions on a
medical marijuana license as shall be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to obtain compliance with requirements of this Article, other ordinances, and applicable
laws.
D. Security Plan. A dispensary shall have a security plan approved by and filed with the Ellsworth
Police Department. The policy shall address means of preventing a continuing pattern of offenses
against the public peace; drug-related criminal conduct within the premises of the dispensary or
the immediate area surrounding the dispensary; and criminal conduct directly related to or
arising from the operation of the dispensary. The policy shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
1. Devices or a series of devices, including, but not limited to, a signal system
interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular, private radio signals, or
other mechanical or electronic device to detect unauthorized intrusions.
2. The interior must be equipped with electronic monitoring, video cameras, and panic
buttons,
3. Qualified security staff may be required by the Ellsworth Police Chief.
4. The dispensary shall have a policy to consistently and systematically prevent loitering.
5. Surveillance records shall be kept for a minimum 30 days and be available to the City of
Ellsworth Police upon requests.
6. A service delivery plan.
E. Incident Reporting. A dispensary shall submit to the City of Ellsworth Police Department a
copy of the State of Maine incident report form on the next business day after it discovers a
violation of the requirements set out in the State rules regarding the operation of a dispensary.
The report must indicate the nature of the breach and the corrective actions taken by the
dispensary.
20
F. Illegal Activity Reporting. Any suspected illegal activity involving the operation of a
dispensary must be reported to the City of Ellsworth Police Department by the dispensary in a
timely manner.
G. Anti-diversion. A dispensary shall have an anti-diversion policy designed to prevent diversion
of medical marijuana for non-medical uses approved by and filed with the Ellsworth Police
Department.
H. Employees. A dispensary shall semi-annually provide to the Ellsworth Police Chief a list of all
employees. Staff changes shall be reported to the Ellsworth Police Chief or disgnee within 10
days of hiring.
I. Chemical. A dispensary shall maintain a material safety data sheet file with the Ellsworth Fire
Department for all chemical stored or used. The list of stored chemical shall be reviewed and
updated annually.
J. Unrestricted Access. The City of Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer, Police Chief, Fire Chief
or their designees requesting admission for the purpose of determining compliance with these
standards shall be given unrestricted access at reasonable time. Failure to cooperate with City
inspectors may be grounds to revoke the dispensary’s business license, as set forth in this
ordinance. During inspection, the City inspectors may identify violations of this ordinance.
K. Handling of Product.
1. A cultivation facility shall not possess more than 6 live marijuana plants for each
registered patients who have designated the dispensary to cultivate marijuana for the
registered patient’s medical need.
2. In addition to the 6 live marijuana plants per registered patient, the cultivation facility
shall have plants in varying stages of processing or cultivation in order to ensure that the
retail facility is able to meet the needs of its registered patients.
3. When there is a decrease in the number of patients who have designated the cultivation
facility to cultivate marijuana, the cultivation facility shall have 10 business days to
adjust to meet this intent of the State law.
4. Prepared marijuana must be kept under double lock and inventoried daily by two
qualified employee cardholders.
5. Quantities of prepared marijuana must be weighted, logged in and signed out by two
qualified employee cardholders.
L. Consumption. The consumption or inhalation of marijuana on or within the premises of a
dispensary is prohibited.
M. Medical Marijuana Food Establishment: A dispensary must obtain a food establishment
license, pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A section 2167 and section 420 Victuallers’ License of this
ordinance.
N. Denial, Revocation, and Suspension of License. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Chapter, the following procedures shall apply to the denial, revocation, or suspension of a
medical marijuana license.
1. The City may deny a medical marijuana dispensary license application, or suspend or revoke
a license for any of the following reasons.
21
a) If the licensee violates any condition or requirement of licensing under state or
federal law or local ordinance;
b) If there is fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of applying
for a license, or judicial finding of fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made
to the City in the course of operating the dispensary;
c) If there is judicial finding that the licensee conducted business in an unlawful manner
or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to
the health, safety, or welfare of the public;
d) For failure to comply with terms or conditions of approval as specified in the license
application or other approvals or permits such as but not limited to, building permit,
development permit, and inspections; or
e) For failure to abide by a license condition imposed by the City Council.
2. Prior to suspending or revoking a license, the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee,
shall:
a) Notify the licensee in writing that it is in violation of one or more City regulation with
specific reference to regulation alleged to be in violation, and order compliance within
ten (10) days of notification.
b) If the condition or conditions leading to the notice are not satisfactorily addressed, the
City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall give the licensee at least seven (7)
days’ advance notice of a hearing on whether to suspend or revoke the license. The
notice shall contain a statement of the reason(s) for the proposed suspension or
revocation, and the time and date of the hearing. The notice shall be made by personal
service, certified mail to the licensee’s address of record, or by other method reasonably
calculated to give actual notice.
c) At the hearing, the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall present the
information regarding the alleged violations to the City Council and the licensee shall
have the opportunity to present and question all witnesses.
d) Following the hearing, the City Council shall vote on whether to suspend or revoke the
license based on the criteria contained in subsection D(1). The Council will issue written
findings and conclusions within ten (10) days of the vote to suspend or revoke the
license.
e) A licensee may appeal the suspension or revocation of a license within thirty (30) days to
Superior Court in accordance with M.R.Civ.P. 80B.
SECTION 414. MOBILE VENDING UNITS
No person shall operate any vehicle, including a lunch wagon, a fixed mobile vending unit or
roaming vending unit which is used for the sale of any prepared food without first obtaining a
license in accordance with Article III Section 304 through 315.
This also includes a restaurant operating for a temporary period in connection with fair, carnival,
circus and public exhibition or in a seasonal capacity. Those Mobile Vending Units parked in one
spot for seasonal sales, must include in such applications a date for removal of vehicle upon the
close of the season.
This removal will be subject to inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer. If the date for removal
is not adhered to shall constitute a violation. If it is the intent of the mobile unit to set up business in
one particular location, the City will require a notarized statement of approval from the landowner.
22
SECTION 415. PARADE PERMIT
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit has
been obtained from the Chief of Police (Chapter 27 “Parade Ordinance of the City of Ellsworth”)
SECTION 416. POLE AND WIRE PERMIT
A. No person shall install or construct utility above or below ground, along or upon City streets or
roads without first obtaining a permit in accordance with 35-A M.R.S.A Section 2503.
B. Designation of Licensing Authority
The Ellsworth City Council hereby designates the City Manager as the licensing authority for the
issuance of facilities located on, over, and under the surface of applicable public ways in the City of
Ellsworth. All permits shall be issued in accordance with MRSA Title 35-A Section 2501-2520 or
as later amended.
SECTION 417. SEWER HOOK-UP PERMIT
No person shall install or connect building sewers or discharge water or wastes into the public sewer
system without first obtaining a Sewer Connection Permit in accordance with Chapter 5 "Sewer
Ordinance".
SECTION 418. STREET OPENING PERMIT
No person shall grade, excavate, dig or open along or upon any City street or road without first
obtaining approval in accordance with conditions stated within the application.
SECTION 419. STREETS, USE OF
A. No person engaged in the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise shall deposit, pile, place or
display for purposes of sale or cause or permit to be deposited, piled, placed or displayed for the
purpose of sale, any such goods, wares or merchandise upon or overhanging any sidewalk or street
without obtaining a permit from the City Council in accordance with Chapter 11 "Use of Streets".
B. Parades refer to Chapter 27 (“Parade Ordinance of the City of Ellsworth”) this permit is under
jurisdiction of the Ellsworth Police Department.
SECTION 420. TAXICABS, TAXI DRIVERS, AND TAXI STANDS
No person shall operate any business or vehicle intended for the transport or livery of persons for a
fee within the City of Ellsworth without first obtaining a license in accordance with Chapter 8,
Taxicab Ordinance. All drivers of taxicabs shall obtain a driver's license in accordance with said
Chapter 8. No parking space in the City of Ellsworth shall be used exclusively as a taxi stand unless
the owner of the taxicab shall first obtain a permit in accordance with Section 412 of Chapter 7,
Traffic Code.
SECTION 421. TOWING LICENSE PERMIT
23
No person shall operate any business or vehicle intended for the transport of other vehicles for a fee
within the City of Ellsworth without first obtaining a license in accordance with Article III Section
304 through 315.
SECTION 422. TRANSIENT SELLER LICENSE
A. No person shall offer for sale any merchandise or service, other than at their place of business,
without first obtaining a license in accordance with Section 415.B.
Such license shall be valid and effective for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of issuance,
unless revoked, and the validity of such license may be extended for an additional period of thirty
(30) days if so approved by the licensing authority.
B. License approval includes but is not limited to:
1. Copy of State License issued in accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3001 et seq. and 32
M.R.S.A. Section 468 1.
2. Approvals of Police and Fire Chiefs.
3. Statement containing: name of company, product/service, number of sellers in City, names of
sellers, length of time to be in area.
4. If it is the intent of the transient seller to set up business in one particular location, the City
will require a notarized statement of approval from the landowner.
C. Off premises consumption catered by a State Licensee of any organization including non-profit
which provides alcohol for a fee.
D. This section shall not apply to:
1. Persons selling by lists, catalog, or merchandise for future delivery.
2. Persons selling fish, farm, dairy, orchard or garden products of their own production.
3. Persons selling bark, wood, manure or forest products.
4. Persons selling newspapers or religious literature.
SECTION 423. VICTUALERS’
A. No person shall operate any business intending to prepare or serve food for consumption on or off
the premises without first obtaining a license in accordance with Article III Section 304 through 315.
B. Charitable, religious or fraternal organizations holding breakfasts, dinners or suppers shall be
exempt from the monetary licensing requirement of this section, but still subject to inspections
pursuant to Article III Section 304 through 315.
ARTICLE V
BUSINESS LICENSE/PERMITS
SECTION 501. PURPOSE
Requires the registration of all business activities and enterprises physically located within the City
of Ellsworth and to provide the City with necessary information concerning the businesses within the
City, including but not limited to the nature of the business operation, the number of employees,
24
location of business, and emergency contacts, to protect the health, welfare and safety of the City's
inhabitants.
SECTION 502. PERMIT (S) REQUIRED
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a business, or to conduct a special event,
without complying with the regulations specified in this ordinance and obtaining a business
permit from the City of Ellsworth.
B. Non Business enterprises, conducting business like activities on a regular basis are
required to obtain a permit. Upon receipt of an application from "Non Business" enterprises
the Code Enforcement Officer will review the application and determine if the applicant
qualifies for a fee exemption.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct a business or special event
without first obtaining a Business Permit.
SECTION 503. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. A separate permit must be obtained for each branch establishment or location where a business is
conducted.
B. When more than one business is operated, transacted or practiced in the same location by
the same person, then only one permit shall be required for such business.
C. When more than one business is operated, transacted, or practiced in one location by a
person other than the primary person, a separate permit shall be obtained for each person
conducting such business.
D. For special events, only the sponsor of the primary event shall be required to obtain
business permit. The City Council, however, may require all vendors participating in the
event to obtain a permit if it is deemed necessary for preserving the general safety, health,
and welfare of the community.
E. This excludes fundraising activities sponsored by schools, churches, athletic groups or
nonprofit organizations, which have a minimal impact on surrounding properties.
SECTION 504. ISSUANCE OF BUSINESS PERMITS
A. Upon receipt of a complete business permit application and fee; the Code
Enforcement Officer will review, verify, and process the application within 10 days
or the permit is automatically approved. The review by the Code Enforcement
Officer will also include a review by the Police and Fire Chiefs for compliance with
local regulations.
B. If the business permit is issued for a special event, the Code Enforcement Officer,
Police, and Fire Chiefs or their designees shall have the right to impose conditions on
the permit, including but not limited to, conditions relating to insurance, parking,
health and sanitation, hours of operation, permissible noise levels, and other public
safety concerns.
25
SECTION 505. FEES FOR THE BUSINESS PERMIT
A. Applicants applying for a business permit shall pay a one-time fee for an indefinite period
of time or until changes occur. Such fee shall be due and payable before the business permit
is approved.
B. Business activities that are located in the Development District may be required to
pay a Development Fee based on the “Traffic Trip Generation”. The City or a
designee shall calculate development Fee based on the number of vehicle “trips”.
SECTION 506. EXEMPTION OF FEES
Any organization operated exclusively for educational, religious, charitable public service,
fraternal or other non-profit purposes and having a permanent address within the City of
Ellsworth may be exempted from the monetary provisions of this ordinance, but still subject
to inspection and permit requirements pursuant to Article III Section 304 through 315.
SECTION 507. EXHIBITION OF PERMIT
Every sponsor of a special event shall post the Business Permit required under this ordinance
in a conspicuous location during all hours of the special event.
SECTION 508. LOCATIONS OF RESTRICTIONS
No permittee, hereunder, shall have any exclusive right to any location in a public street, nor
shall the permittee be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might
impede or inconvenience the public.
For the purpose of this ordinance the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Code Enforcement Officer or
their designee’s shall be deemed conclusive as to whether public safety would be affected,
traffic impeded, and or inconvenienced. No business activity shall be conducted in an area of
the City where such business activity is prohibited by the City of Ellsworth Land Use
Ordinance.
SECTION 509. PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE
No permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall be assignable or transferable to
any other person.
SECTION 510. CHANGE OF PLACE OF BUSINESS
No permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance shall apply to any business location
other than the location designated in the permit application.
SECTION 511. ADOPTION
These regulations are effective as of September 1, 2007.
26
Flow Chart as it pertains to Business Licenses.
Economic Development
? Inquires for site location.
City Hall
Code Enforcement Office
City Clerk’s Department
City Manager’s
Department
Code Enforcement
(Provides applications
and approves)
? Business
Permits
? Driveway
Permits
? Street
Opening
Permits
(application)
? Sewer Hookup
Permits
(application)
City Clerk
(Provides application/issues licenses)
? Amusement License
? Arcade License
? Carnival/Circus/Festival (Public Hearing
required)
? Class A Establishment (Public Hearing
required)
? Class B Establishment (Public Hearing
required)
? Class C Establishment (Public Hearing
required)
? Consumer Fireworks Retail Sales (Public
Hearing required)
? Junkyard/Auto graveyard (Public Hearing
required)
? Liquor License (Public Hearing required)
? Lodging House (Public Hearing required)
? Medical Marijuana (Public Hearing required)
? Mobile Vending Unit (Victualer License)
? Special Amusement (Public Hearing required
? Street Use (letter to be submitted by
applicant, to be placed on Council agenda)
? Taxi Cab
? Taxi Driver
? Towing/Wrecker
? Victualer License
City Manager
(Provides applications
and approves)
? Pole/Wire
Permit
? Street
Opening




City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 17
City Engineer
Ordinance
This ordinance was repealed 6/17/2010.

Page 1 of 5
CHAPTER 18
ELLSWORTH PLANNING BOARD
Adopted April 16, 2007
Amended June 21, 2010
1. ESTABLISHMENT
Pursuant to the Maine Constitution Article VII, pt. 2, Section 1 and 30-A M.R.S.A § 3001, the
City of Ellsworth hereby establishes the Ellsworth Planning Board.
2. APPOINTMENT
A. Appointment: Board members shall be appointed by the City Council and sworn in by the
City Clerk or other person authorized to administer oaths.
B. Structure: The Board shall consist of five (5) Regular members and two (2) Alternate
members. The term "member(s)" as used in this ordinance shall refer to both members and
alternate members unless otherwise expressly stated.
C. Term: The terms of the Planning Board members shall expire in different years. The five
(5) Regular Planning Board members shall have a 5-year term with one (1) seat expiring
every year. The two (2) Alternate Planning Board members shall have a 2-year term with
one (1) seat expiring every year. Individuals appointed to fill unfinished terms will serve for
the remaining time of the respective terms.
D. Vacancy: Where there is a permanent vacancy the municipal officers shall, in a timely
manner, appoint a person to serve the unexpired term. A vacancy shall occur upon the
resignation or death of any member, when a member ceases to be a legal resident of the city
(defined as eligible to vote in City elections) or when a member fails to attend four
consecutive meetings or fails to attend at least 75 % of all meetings during the preceding
twelve (12) month period. When a vacancy occurs, the chairperson of the Board shall
immediately so advise the municipal officers in writing. The Board may recommend to the
municipal officers that the attendance provision be waived for cause, in which case no
vacancy will then exist until the municipal officers disapprove the recommendation of the
Board. The municipal officers may remove members of the Board by a two-thirds majority
vote, for cause, after notice and a hearing.
3. ORGANIZATION AND RULES
A. Officers: The Board shall elect a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary from among its
members in January of each year. The term of each of these officers shall be for a maximum
of one (1) year with eligibility for re-election.
Page 2 of 5
B. Alternates: Alternate members shall attend all meetings of the Board and participate in its
proceedings, but may vote only when there are fewer than five (5) voting regular members
present. Alternate members shall be designated by the chairperson to participate and vote
when a member is unable to act because of a conflict of interest, physical incapacity,
absence or any other reason satisfactory to the chairperson.
C. Disqualification: Any question of whether a member shall be disqualified from voting on a
particular matter shall be decided by a majority of the members of the Board present.
D. Meetings: The chairperson or designee shall call at least one regular meeting of the Board
each month. The chairperson or designee may also call a special meeting. The Board or
designee may impose a fee upon an applicant to cover extra advertising costs to the city for a
special meeting requested for the convenience of the applicant.
E. Quorum: No meeting of the Board shall be held without a quorum consisting of at least
four (4) members authorized to vote. The Board shall act by majority vote, calculated on the
basis of the number of members present and voting. The lack of quorum for any agenda item
shall not render the Board incapable of acting on that item at any meeting where there is a
quorum present to hold that meeting. A tie vote by the Board shall be considered a denial of
the request.
F. Public Notice: The secretary, or designee, shall cause to be published, a notice for public
hearings in a newspaper of general circulation in Ellsworth in accordance with the rules put
forth in the Ellsworth Land Use/Subdivision Ordinances.
G. Public Record: The secretary, or designee, shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, correspondence, findings and determinations.
H. Rules of Order: The Board shall conduct business according to Rules For The Conduct of
Public Proceedings in Section 6 below. The Board shall adopt and affirm annually additional
rules and procedures necessary for the transaction of its business.
4. DUTIES AND POWERS
A. The Board shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as are provided by the
Ordinances of the City of Ellsworth and the laws of the State of Maine.
B. The Board may obtain goods and services necessary to its proper function within the limits
of appropriations made for that purpose by the City Council or as provided by applicable
City ordinances.
5. APPEALS
A. An aggrieved party may appeal any Planning Board final decision made pursuant to the
Ellsworth Land Use Ordinance to the City of Ellsworth Board of Appeals.
B. An aggrieved party may appeal any Planning Board final decision made pursuant to the
Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance to the State of Maine Superior Court pursuant to the rules
of that Court.
Page 3 of 5
C. Any appeal made pursuant to this section must be submitted to the appropriate appellate
authority within thirty (30) days of the Planning Board decision from which the appeal is
taken.
6. RULES FOR THE CONDUCT OF PUBLIC PROCEEDINGS
A. SCOPE OF RULES: These rules govern the practice and conduct of Public Proceedings
(including official meetings and hearings) held by the Planning Board of the City of
Ellsworth hereinafter referred to as the “Planning Board.” These rules shall be liberally
construed so as to enable the Planning Board to accomplish its duties and responsibilities.
B. PRESIDING OFFICER: The Presiding Officer at all public proceedings shall either be the
Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the Planning Board or a member of the Planning Board who
is selected by those members present at proceedings.
The Presiding Officer shall have authority to:
1. Participate in discussion, make or second a motion, and vote;
2. Regulate the course of proceedings;
3. Rule upon issues of evidence and procedure; and
4. Take such other actions that are necessary for efficient and orderly conduct of
proceedings.
C. GENERAL RULES FOR PUBLIC PROCEEDINGS:
1. Rules of Order: To supplement the basic rules of order written in this Section, the
Board shall adopt and affirm annually additional rules and procedures necessary for the
transaction of public proceedings.
2. Regulation of Electronic Recordings: The placement and use of cameras or
microphones for the purpose of recording Planning Board proceedings may be regulated
by the Presiding Officer so as to avoid interference with the orderly conduct of the
proceedings.
3. Public Record: The Planning Board shall make a record of proceedings by appropriate
means. All documents, materials, and objects accepted into evidence during the meeting
shall become part of the public record.
4. Objections: All objections to rulings of the Presiding Officer regarding evidence or
procedure shall be timely made during the course of proceedings.
5. Corrections: If, after the close of proceedings and during its deliberations, the Planning
Board determines that any ruling was in error, it may reopen proceedings to take such
other action, as it deems appropriate to correct the error.
6. Continuances: All proceedings conducted pursuant to these rules may be continued for
reasonable cause and reconvened from time to time and from place to place as may be
Page 4 of 5
determined by a majority of the Planning Board members present. Continuances may be
granted at the request of any person participating in such proceedings if it is determined
that a continuance is necessary. This provision shall not be used to cause unreasonable
or needless delay in any proceedings. All orders for continuances shall specify the time
and place at which such proceedings shall be reconvened. The Presiding Officer or
designee shall notify interested persons and the public in such a manner as is appropriate
to insure that reasonable notice will be given to the time and place of such reconvened
proceedings.
D. SUBMITTALS:
1. Submittal Requirements: Materials that are submitted during public proceedings may
be accepted only if determined by the Presiding Officer to be relevant, necessary, brief
enough to be quickly assimilated and copies are provided in sufficient number and of a
type that is compatible with information technology currently available at City Hall.
2. Public Record Closed: Following the conclusion of proceedings, no further evidence
or testimony will be allowed into the public record of that proceeding except as required
by the Board as part of a conditional approval or a continuance.
3. Common Knowledge: The Planning Board may, at any time, take notice of judicially
cognizable facts, generally recognized facts and physical, technical, or scientific facts
within the knowledge of the Planning Board members whether or not these facts are
submitted into the public record by presenters.
E. PRESENTATIONS:
1. Introduction: The Presiding Officer shall open the proceedings by describing in general
terms the purpose of the proceedings and the general procedures governing its conduct.
2. Speaker Instructions: All speakers shall be required to locate at a microphone and
state for the record their name and residential address. The Chairperson may ask their
business or professional affiliation, the nature of their interest in the proceedings, and
whom they represent.
3. Allowable Testimony: The Presiding Officer may refuse to permit irrelevant,
immaterial, or repetitious comments or questions or other remarks which do not advance
or serve the purpose of the proceedings and shall state the basis for such refusal on the
record when requested to do so by the party asking the question.
4. Time Limits for Speakers: The Presiding Officer may impose limitations on the length
of testimony and questioning.
5. Applicant Presentation: The applicant, and such representatives as he chooses, shall
present the proposal to the Board using duly submitted plans, documentary evidence,
photographs, studies, reports, analyses, and other information as well as materials
otherwise submitted according to this ordinance.
Page 5 of 5
6. Public Hearing: Following the Applicant Presentation, the public shall be given an
opportunity to comment on the proposal. Testimony and properly submitted material
evidence shall be offered in the following order:
Public Hearing Speaker Category:
1) Planning Board members
2) City staff and consultants
3) Other governmental representatives
4) Ellsworth residents and/or tax payers
5) Other interested persons
7. Varying Order of Appearance: When circumstances warrant, the Presiding Officer
may vary the order in which speakers appear or are questioned.
8. Questioning of Speakers: The Presiding Officer may allow questioning of speakers by
Planning Board members, staff, consultants, counsel and others at any time.
9. Follow-up Testimony: At the conclusion of direct testimony and questioning of each
speaker or category of speaker as determined by the Presiding Officer, all persons shall
have the opportunity to submit follow up testimony according to the Presentation Order
provided above. The Presiding Officer shall allow as many rounds of follow-up
testimony as are necessary to provide a full and impartial hearing.
7. COMPENSATION
It is customary that the members of the Ellsworth Planning Board receive no compensation for their
services to the City. However, Members may submit to the City Planner, evidence of personal
expenses associated with their Planning Board duties including, but not limited to, travel mileage
and training fees. For administrative procedures, the City Planner shall use applicable provisions
pertaining to expense reimbursement in the City’s Personnel Ordinance.
8. ADOPTION
These regulations, as amended, are effective as of the date of adoption by the City Council.

City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 21
Mobile Home Park and
Campground
Ordinance
This ordinance was repealed 5/16/2011.

Chapter 22
City of Ellsworth Animal Control Ordinance
Sec. 22-1 Definitions.
Sec. 22-2 Animal control officer.
Sec. 22-3 Penalty for violation of article
Sec. 22-4 Licensing.
Sec. 22-5 Roaming at large; leash requirements.
Sec. 22-6 Impoundment.
Sec. 22-7 Impoundment fees.
Sec. 22-8 Public nuisance.
Sec. 22-9 Disposition of dogs that have bitten persons.
Sec. 22-10 Rabies; quarantine
Sec. 22-11 Duty to dispose of feces.
Sec. 22-12 Fines and fees.
State law reference 7 M.R.S.A. SS 1
Previous Chapter 22 to be replaced and repealed with this version per Council Meeting
4/18/2005.
Sec. 22-1. Definitions
As used in this Ordinance, unless the context indicates otherwise:
“Animal” shall be intended to mean any living, sentient creature that is not a human
being.
“Public or City-Owned Property” includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks,
parking lots, lawns and grounds of public buildings, parks, athletic fields and facilities,
trails, walkways, public rights-of-way or easements and driveways.
“Dog” shall be intended to mean both males and females.
“Keeper” shall be intended to mean a person in possession or control of a dog or
other animal.
“Owner” shall be intended to mean any person or persons, firm, association, or
corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog or animal.
“At large” means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of any
person by means of personal presence and attention as will reasonably control the
conduct of such dog.
Sec 22-2 Animal Control Officer
The City Council shall appoint one or more animal control officers in accordance with
Title 7, M.R.S.A., Section 3947, as amended. Said animal control officers shall have all
of the powers provided under this Ordinance and the laws of the State of Maine.
In addition to the regular duties of animal control officers delineated by the state law and
this Ordinance, the animal control officer is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions
of any other law regarding animals and found in Title 7, Maine Revised Statutes,
Chapter 719 Uncontrolled Dogs
Chapter 720 Rabies Prevention
Chapter 721 Dog Licenses
Chapter 723 Licenses for Kennels, Boarding Kennels, and Pet Shops
Chapter 727 Dangerous Dogs
Previous Chapter 22 to be replaced and repealed with this version per Council Meeting
4/18/2005.
Chapter 729 Damage by Dogs
Chapter 730 Ferrets
Chapter 731 Mistreatment of Animals
Chapter 733 Transportation of Animals
Chapter 737 Calf and Pig Scrambles
Chapter 741 Animal Trespass
Title 17 Crimes 1011 through 1046
Sec. 22-3 Penalty for violation of article.
Whoever keeps a dog contrary to the provisions of this article shall be punished in
accordance with section 22-12 of this article and Title 7 M.R.S.A.
Sec. 22-4 Licensing.
A suitable tag showing the year the dog license was issued in accordance with the
state statutes and bearing such other data as the commissioner of agriculture may
prescribe shall be securely attached to a collar which must be worn at all times by the dog
for which the license was issued. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such tag
or to place either a collar or tag on any dog not described or for which the license was not
issued.
Sec. 22-5 Roaming at large; leash requirements.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, whether licensed or
unlicensed, to permit such dog to run at large, except when used for hunting.
(b) Any dog shall be controlled by a leash of not more than eight feet in length in
the following areas within the City of Ellsworth:
(1) All properties, public ways, and sidewalks located within the
commercial district and downtown.
(2) All school and library properties.
Previous Chapter 22 to be replaced and repealed with this version per Council Meeting
4/18/2005.
Sec. 22-6 Impoundment
(a) Unlicensed dogs, or dogs found roaming at large, shall be taken up and impounded
in a shelter designated by the city, and there confined in a humane manner for a period of
not more than ten days. Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article and
not reclaimed by it’s owner within ten day may be humanely destroyed or placed in the
custody of another person deemed to be a responsible and suitable owner, who will agree
to comply with the provisions of this article.
(b) The city or it’s duly authorized agent may transfer title of all animals held by it at an
animal shelter after the legal detention period has expired and the animal has not been
claimed by it’s owner.
(c) When dogs are found running at large and their ownership is known, such dogs need
not be impounded, but the city through its duly authorized agents may, at its discretion,
cite the owners of such dogs to appear in court to answer violations of this article.
(d) The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded dog upon
compliance with the license provisions of section 22-4 and the payment of impoundment
fees as set forth in this article. Any other animal impounded under the provisions of this
article may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of the impoundment fees as set
forth in this article.
Sec. 22-7 Impoundment fees.
Any animal impounded under this article may be reclaimed as provided in this article
upon payment by the owner of the currently required impoundment fees, as described in
22-12
Sec. 22-8 Public nuisance.
(a) Any owner or keeper of a dog or animal that damages property located within the
City of Ellsworth and belonging to another, said damage occurring while the dog or
animal is not on the property of the owner or keeper commits a civil violation subject to
the penalties set forth in this ordinance.
(b) No owner or keeper of a dog or animal shall allow the dog or animal to
unnecessarily annoy or disturb any person by loud and repeated barking or other noises.
Upon written complaint of the person disturbed, signed and sworn to, any animal control
officer or other law enforcement officer may investigate the allegations of the complaint.
If the agent or officer finds that there are valid grounds for the complaint, the agent or
officer shall serve a written warning upon the owner or keeper, notifying the owner or
Previous Chapter 22 to be replaced and repealed with this version per Council Meeting
4/18/2005.
keeper that such annoyance or disturbance must cease. Warning shall be served by
delivering a copy of the warning to the owner or keeper, in hand, by leaving a copy with
a person of suitable age and discretion at the premises where the dog is kept or where the
owner or keeper resides; or by mailing a copy to the owner or keeper at the address
shown on the license application for that dog or animal. Any owner or keeper who allows
such annoyance or disturbance to continue after notice has been served commits a
violation subject to the penalties set forth in this ordinance.
Sec. 22-9 Disposition of dogs that have bitten persons.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper, when notified that such dog has bitten
any person or has so injured any persons as to cause abrasion of the skin, to sell or give
away such dog or permit or allow such dog to be taken beyond the city limits, except
under the care of a licensed veterinarian. It shall be the duty of such owner or keeper,
upon receiving notice of the character aforesaid, to immediately place such dog under
confinement for a period of at least fourteen days, or deliver such dog to the police
department to be quarantined at the owners expense at a location of the departments
choosing. The city police department shall be notified immediately upon the death of any
dog while under confinement.
(b) Any dog which has been bitten by another dog having or suspected of
having rabies shall be immediately impounded for observation as provided in this
section.
Sec. 22-10 Rabies quarantine
(a) Upon positive diagnosis of rabies in any dog within the city, the health officer may
proclaim and invoke a citywide quarantine for a period of thirty days, and upon invoking
of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets, or permitted to be in the
streets, during such period of quarantine.
(b) During a period of rabies quarantine as described in this section, every animal bitten
by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith destroyed or, at the owners expense
and option, shall be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian, or held thirty
days under quarantine by the owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined.
(c) In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during a period
of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended by the health officer for a
period of six months.
(d) The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall upon demand be surrendered
to the health officer.
Previous Chapter 22 to be replaced and repealed with this version per Council Meeting
4/18/2005.
(e) The health officer shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected
with rabies.
(f) No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction
as required in this section when demand is made therefore by the health or animal control
officer.
Sec. 22-11 Duty to dispose of feces.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person who owns, possesses, or controls a
dog to fail to immediately remove and dispose of any feces left by his or her dog on any
street, sidewalk, or publicly or privately owned property of another.
This section will not apply to a dog accompanying any handicapped person, who,
by reason if his/her handicap, is physically unable to comply with the
requirements of this section.
Sec. 22-12 Fines and fees.
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance commits a civil violation. The
penalty for this violation is a fine of not less then fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation. Each day that a violation continues
constitutes a separate violation. If the city is a prevailing party in an action to enforce any
provision of this ordinance, it must be awarded its reasonable attorney’s fees, expert
witness fees, and costs, unless extraordinary circumstances make the award of these fees
unjust.
The owner of any impounded animal in the City of Ellsworth shall pay a twenty-five
dollar ($25.00) impound fee to the Police Department before being allowed to take
possession of said animal from its place of confinement. A receipt will be given to the
owner or keeper to show proof of payment in order to retrieve their animal. This fee is in
addition to fees accumulated at the animal’s place of confinement.
Previous Chapter 22 to be replaced and repealed with this version per Council Meeting
4/18/2005.
Chapter 23 - Noise
§ 1 - Findings and Purpose
The Ellsworth City Council finds that controlling excessive noise as provided herein is necessary to promote the
health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the City of Ellsworth. It is the purpose of this Chapter to prevent any
person from making, continuing, or causing noise that unreasonably interferes with the comfort, health, or safety
of others within the City of Ellsworth.
§ 2 - Prohibition
A. It shall be unlawful for any person in a public place to intentionally or recklessly cause annoyance to
others by intentionally making loud and unreasonable noises after having been ordered by a law
enforcement officer to cease the noise or similar such noises within the last six months.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person in a private place to make loud and unreasonable noise after having
been ordered by a law enforcement officer to cease the noise or similar such noise within the last six
months that can be heard by another person who is in a public place or in another private place.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term “noise” shall include, but is not limited to:
i. sound created by radios or other electronic or mechanical devices capable of amplifying or
projecting ambient noise, including such devices operated within motor vehicles;
ii. sound created in connection with loading and unloading commercial vehicles between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
iii. sound created from construction activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
iv. sound created from timber harvesting activities between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
and
v. sound created by recreational vehicles, including all-terrain vehicles, snowmobiles, motorbikes,
watercraft, and other such vehicles between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 3 - Exceptions
The following are exempt from the provisions of § 2:
A. Federal, state, and local governmental activities, whether conducted by the governmental agency or by a
private contractor acting on the government agency’s behalf, including, but not limited to, activities of
police, fire, rescue, and public works;
B. Activities of utility agencies, including, but not limited to, vehicles and activities for the provision of
water, electricity, telephone service, and sewer service; and
C. Public assemblies, parades, performances or athletic events held between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
§ 4 - Violations & Penalties
A. Any member of the Ellsworth Police Department is authorized to enforce this Chapter upon complaint or
upon the officer’s own observation of a violation in progress.
B. A person who is a registered owner of a vehicle at the time that vehicle is involved in a violation of this
chapter commits a civil violation. The owner of a business which is involved in a violation of this chapter
commits a civil violation.
C. Any person who violates this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined a civil penalty of not less than $50
and not more than $250 for each separate violation. If the City is the prevailing party to an enforcement
action, it shall be entitled to attorney’s fees and costs unless extraordinary circumstances make such an
award unjust.
§ 5 - Definitions
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the following meanings:
A. “Public place” means a place to which the public at large or a substantial group has access, including but
not limited to:
i. Public ways; public way means any public highway or sidewalk, private way laid out under
authority of statute, way dedicated to public use, way upon which the public has a right of access
or has access as invitees or licensees, or way under the control of park commissioners or a body
having like powers;
ii. Schools and government-owned custodial facilities; and
iii. The lobbies, hallways, lavatories, toilets and basement portions of apartment houses, hotels,
public buildings and transportation terminals.
B. “Private place” means any place that is not a public place.
Adopted: 01-12-2009









City of Ellsworth
Chapter 28
Subdivision Ordinance
Adopted: May 16, 1998
With Revisions through May 21, 1990
Amended April 14, 2003
February 9, 2009
March 16, 2009 – effective May 7, 2009
Amended August, 17, 2009
Amended November 16, 2009
Amended May 16, 2011
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Table of Contents:
Article I Purposes ................................................................................................................................ 3
Article II Authority and Administration ............................................................................................. 5
Article III Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 6
Article IV Administrative Procedure ................................................................................................ 23
Article V Preapplication ................................................................................................................... 23
Article VI Subdivision of New and Existing Structures ................................................................... 24
Article VII Minor Subdivisions ........................................................................................................ 26
Article VIII Preliminary Plan for Major Subdivision ....................................................................... 30
Article IX Final Plan for Major Subdivision .................................................................................... 37
Article X Revisions to Approved Plans ............................................................................................ 44
Article XI Enforcement..................................................................................................................... 45
Article XII General Standards .......................................................................................................... 47
Article XIII Street and Storm Drainage Design and Construction Standards .................................. 54
Article XIV Performance Guarantees ............................................................................................... 56
Article XV Waivers .......................................................................................................................... 58
Article XVI Appeals ......................................................................................................................... 59
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article I Purposes
The purposes of these regulations are to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and
welfare of the people, of the City of Ellsworth, to protect the environment and to promote the
development of an economically sound and stable community. To this end, in approving
subdivisions within the City of Ellsworth, Maine, the Planning Board of the City Ellsworth shall
consider the following criteria and before granting approval shall make findings of fact that the
provisions of these regulations have been met and that the proposed subdivision will meet the
guidelines of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 4404.
The subdivision:
1.1 Will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination, the Planning
Board of the City of Ellsworth shall at least consider the elevation of the land above sea
level and its relation to the flood plains; the nature of soils and subsoils and their ability
to adequately support waste disposal; the slope of the land and its effect on effluents; the
availability of streams for disposal of effluents; and the applicable state and local health
and water resource rules and regulations. (Am 4/03)
1.2 Has sufficient water available for the reasonably foreseeable needs of the subdivision.
1.3 Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be
utilized.
1.4 Will not cause an unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to
hold water so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result.
1.5 Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed.
1.6 Will provide for adequate solid waste and sewage waste disposal.
1.7 Will not cause unreasonable burden on the ability of a municipality to dispose of solid
waste and sewage if municipal services are to be utilized.
1.8 Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area,
aesthetics, historic sites, or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for
physical or visual access to the shoreline.
1.9 Is in conformance with a duly adopted subdivision regulation or ordinance,
comprehensive plan, development plan or land use plan, if any.
1.10 The subdivider had adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the above stated
standards.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
1.11 Whenever situated in whole or in part, within 250 feet of the watershed of any pond, lake
river or tidal waters, will not adversely affect the quality of the body of water or
unreasonably affect the shoreline of that body of water.
1.12 Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the quality or
quantity of ground water.
1.13 Based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Boundary and Floodway
Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, and information presented by the applicant
whether the subdivision is in a flood prone area. If the subdivision, or any part of it, is in
such an area, the subdivider shall determine the 100-year flood elevation and flood
hazard boundaries within the subdivision. The proposed subdivision plan must include a
condition of plan approval requiring that all principal structures within the subdivision
shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least one foot
above the 100-year flood elevation.
1.14 Freshwater Wetlands. All freshwater wetlands within the proposed subdivision have been
identified on any maps submitted as part of the application, regardless of the size of these
wetlands. Any mapping of freshwater wetlands may be done with the help of the local
soil and water conservation district.
1.15 River, Stream or Brook. Any river, stream or brook within or abutting the proposed
subdivision has been identified on any maps submitted as part of the application. For
purposes of this section, “river, stream or brook” has the same meaning as in Title 38,
Section 480-B, Subsection 9.
1.16 Storm Water. The proposed subdivision will provide for adequate storm water
management.
1.17 Spaghetti Lot Prohibited. If any lots in the proposed subdivision have shore frontage on a
river, stream, brook, great pond or coastal wetland as these features are defined in Title
38, Section 480-B, none of the lots created within the subdivision have a lot depth to
shore frontage ratio greater than 5 to 1.
1.18 The long-term cumulative effects of the proposed subdivision will not unreasonably
increase a great pond’s phosphorus concentration during the construction phase and life
of the proposed subdivision.
1.19 For any proposed subdivision that crosses municipal boundaries, the proposed
subdivision will not cause unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to the use of existing public ways in an adjoining municipality in which part of
the subdivision is located.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article II Authority and Administration
2.1 AUTHORITY
A. These standards have been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 30-A
M.R.S.A. sections 4403 and 3001.
B. These standards shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Regulations of the
City of Ellsworth, Maine."
2.2 ADMINISTRATION
A. The Planning Board of the City of Ellsworth, hereinafter call the Board, shall
administer these standards.
B. The provisions of these standards shall pertain to all land proposed for subdivision,
within the boundaries of the City of Ellsworth.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article III Definitions
Accessory Use or Structure: A subordinate use or structure customarily incidental to and
located on the same lot as the principal use or structure, such as a garage, workshop, or the like.
Accessory uses, in the aggregate, shall not subordinate the principal use or structure on the lot.
Accessway: Any public or private street, right-of way, or driveway used to enter or leave a
public or private street or adjacent land using an on-road vehicle. All streets are considered
accessways but not all accessways are considered streets. Within the Shoreland Zone, an
accessway also includes a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel,
asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of
motorized vehicles, excluding a residential driveway less than 500 feet in length.
Acre: A measure of land containing 43,560 square feet.
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land
for which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who
have suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture: The cultivation of soil for the production or raising of food, crops, or other
valuable or useful products including commercial gardening, and the growing of nursery stock.
Alteration: A change, addition, or modification requiring construction, including any change in
the location of structural members of buildings such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or
girders, but not including cosmetic or decorative changes.
Apartment, Accessory: A separate dwelling unit which is located within and subordinate to a
single family detached dwelling.
Automobile Junk Yard: A place occupied by three or more unregistered, unserviceable,
discarded, or junked automotive vehicles, or bodies, engines, or other parts thereof sufficient in
bulk to equal two vehicles or bodies, also referred to as a motor junk yard. (But excluding
vehicle repair garages where autos are being overhauled or held temporarily pending insurance
claims, etc.)
Automobile Oriented Business: A business establishment which serves its customers while
they remain in their motor vehicles such as a drive-in restaurant, drive-up bank teller and a car
wash.
Automobile Repair Shop: A business establishment where motor vehicles and/or their related
parts are repaired, reconditioned, painted, or rebuilt.
Boarding, Rooming, or Lodging House: Any dwelling in which lodging is offered for
compensation to three or more persons either individually or as families with or without meals.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished
grade within twenty (20) feet of a building to the highest point of the building.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Bureau: State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry.
Campground: A business, public or private establishment operated as a recreational site for
tents, campers, trailers, and travel-trailers, or other forms of temporary shelter that can
accommodate two or more parties.
Campsite, Individual private: Private land for exclusive personal use not associated with a
campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed 10
individuals and which involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to a
gravel pad, parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Camper: For the purpose of this ordinance, a "camper" shall be defined as a travel trailer or a
recreational vehicle equipped with sleeping accommodations
Cemetery: A burial ground for the interment of the dead.
Change in Use: The change from an existing use to another use, including without limitation,
the addition of a new use to an existing use.
Church: A building or group of buildings arranged, designed, intended, or used for the conduct
of religious services, and accessory uses associated therewith.
Club: Any voluntary association of persons organized for fraternal, social, religious, benevolent,
recreational, literary, patriotic, scientific, or political purposes whose facilities are open to
members but not the general public, and which is principally engaged in activities which are not
customarily carried on for pecuniary gain.
Cluster Subdivision: A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally
required in the zoning district in which the development is located in return for the provision of
permanent open space owned in common by lot unit owners, the City, or a land conservation
organization.
Code Enforcement Officer: A person appointed by the Municipal Officers to administer and
enforce this Ordinance. Reference to the Code Enforcement Officer shall include the Building
Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector, and the like, where applicable.
Commercial Recreation - Indoor: A business establishment providing indoor recreation
facilities such as a bowling alley, skating rink, swimming pool, tennis or racquet ball courts, but
not including mechanical, electronic, or video game arcades.
Commercial Recreation - Outdoor: A business establishment providing recreational facilities
such as a golf course, tennis courts, swimming pool, ice skating rink, or riding stables, but not
including campgrounds, drive-in movie theaters, race tracks, water slides or mechanical or
motorized rides.
Community Building: A building owned by a non-profit organization available to the
community for purposes of public assembly and community activities.
Community Use: A governmental or public service use for the general benefit of the citizens
funded in whole or in part by the City of Ellsworth or a quasi-public organization, including by
way of illustration and without limitation, municipal buildings, schools, public parks and
recreational facilities, fire stations, ambulance services and sewage treatment plants.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the
required fee and all information required by these regulations for a Final Plan, or by a vote by the
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Board to waive the submission of required information. The Board shall issue a receipt to the
applicant upon its determination that an application is complete.
Complete Substantial Construction: The completion of a portion of the improvements which
represents no less than thirty percent of the costs of the proposed improvements within a
subdivision. If the subdivision is to consist of individual lots to be sold or leased by the
subdivider, the cost of construction of buildings on those lots shall not be included. If the
subdivision is a multifamily development, or if the applicant proposes to construct the buildings
within the subdivision, the cost of building construction shall be included in the total costs of
proposed improvements.
Comprehensive Plan or Policy Statement: Any part or element of the overall plan or policy
for development of the municipality, as defined in Title 30 M.R.S.A., 4961.
Conservation Easement: A non-possessory interest in real property imposing limitations or
affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic or
open space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational or
open space use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality.
Conditional Use: A use permitted by the Planning Board subject to certain conditions and
standards consistent with the General Purposes section for each zoning district. In addition to the
specific uses listed for each zoning district, a conditional use may include uses similar to those
listed. The Board shall only grant approval of a similar use after having found that the impact of
the use will not be any greater than the impact of the use to which it is being compared.
Contiguous Lots: Lots which adjoin at any line or point, or are separated at any point by a
body of water less than fifteen feet wide.
Customary Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession, which is accessory to a
residential use, and provided that:
1. The home occupation is to be conducted by a member of the family residing in the dwelling;
2. All activity associated with the home occupation is conducted wholly within the dwelling unit or
wholly within a structure accessory to a dwelling unit in order that no external structural change
or alteration or external activities are required which change the residential character or
appearance of the dwelling;
3. No machinery or equipment which emits audible sounds, air pollutants or other wastes apparent
from outside the dwelling will be utilized in the home occupation;
4. The home occupation will not involve retail sales as a primary activity, but articles may be sold
from the dwelling, which are incidental to the providing of the service involved in the home
occupation;
5. The family member conducting the home occupation may employ at the dwelling no more than
two (2) additional persons who are not members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling
to assist in the home occupation (maximum of five (5) people including family members);
6. Adequate off-street parking will be provided within the lot upon which the dwelling is located in
accordance with the requirements in Chapter 56, Unified Development ordinance, Article 11
Parking Standards.
Deck: A level structure adjacent to a building elevated above the surface of the ground which
may have a railing but no roof, awning, or other covering.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Decorative Changes: Repainting, residing, reroofing; adding, removing or replacing trim,
railing, or other non-structural architectural details; or adding, removing or changing the location
of windows and doors.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including
buildings, landscaping, parking lots, and streets.
Development: Uses including but not limited to the construction of a new building or other
structures on a lot or below the shoreline or in a wetland, the relocation of an existing building
on another lot, or the use of open land for a new use; any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to parking, temporary uses, clearing of land or
vegetation, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations; it
includes a building, a development site under the same ownership, a consolidated development,
and phased development.
Driveway, Commercial: Any accessway serving a commercial use generating less than 50
average daily traffic (ADT).
Driveway, Residential: A means of access from a public or private road which will serve no
more than two dwelling units.
Dwelling: Any building or structure or portion thereof containing one or more dwelling units,
but not including a motel, hotel, inn, or similar use
a. Single-Family Dwelling - A building designed or intended to be used exclusively for
residential occupancy by one (1) family only and containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
b. Two Family Dwelling or Duplex – A building designed or intended to be used
exclusively for residential occupancy by no more than two (2) families and containing
two (2) separate dwelling units in one (1) structure.
c. Multiple Dwelling: A building designed or intended to be used, or used exclusively for
residential occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of one another
and containing three (3) or more dwelling units, including apartment buildings and
condominiums, but excluding single-family and two-family dwellings.
Dwelling Unit: Any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including
provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation, as required by the State of Maine and/or
the City of Ellsworth, for not more than one household, or a congregate residence for 6 or less
persons. A dwelling unit shall have minimum of 500 square feet.
Earth: Topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, rock, or other minerals.
Emergency Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land used to accommodate several mobile homes
for a temporary period.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare,
such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and
operations to rescue human beings and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury. (Am
4/03)
Essential Services: Facilities for the transmission or distribution of water, gas, electricity or
communication or for the collection, treatment or disposal of wastes, including, without
limitation, towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories, but not buildings.
Family: One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single non-profit housekeeping
unit whether or not related to each other by birth, marriage, or adoption, but not to consist of
more than five (5) unrelated persons.
Farmstand: A roadside stand not exceeding 400 square feet in floor area selling only farm,
garden, greenhouse, or nursery products, and between Labor Day and Christmas, cut Christmas
trees, garlands, wreaths, and wreath materials.
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of subdivision is presented to the
Board, for approval and which, if approved, must be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
Fishing Equipment: Personal property designed, intended, or used in connection with
commercial and/or recreational fishing activities including boats, nets, buoys, traps, and line.
Fish Processing: The loading, unloading, packing, processing and packaging of edible fish and
other seafood products but not including processing of fish wastes or fish by-products.
Floor Area: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior
walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and
decks.
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden
sills and post supports, but including but not limited to basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base
consisting of concrete, block, brick or similar material.
Forestry: See "Timber Harvesting” and "Timber Management Activities."
Frontage - Street: The horizontal distance measured in a straight line between the intersections
of the side lot lines of a lot with the right-of-way of a street.
Frontage - Shore: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a
straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Functionally Water-Dependent Uses: Those uses that require, for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland
waters and that cannot be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited
to dams, commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat
storage buildings; finfish and shellfish processing; fish storage and retail and wholesale fish
marketing facilities; waterfront dock and port facilities; shipyards and boat building facilities;
marinas, navigation aids; basins and channels; retaining walls; industrial uses dependent upon
water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot
reasonably be located or operated at an inland site; and uses that primarily provide general public
access to coastal or inland waters.
Gasoline Service Station: A business establishment selling fuel and related products for motor
vehicles.
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of 10
acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in
excess of 30 acres. For the purposes of this Ordinance, Ellsworth’s Great Pond are Branch Lake,
Graham Lake, Green Lake, Jesse Bog, Little Duck Pond, Little Rocky Pond, Lower Patten Pond,
Upper Patten Pond, Wormwood Pond, and Leonard Lake.
Half Story: That portion of a building immediately beneath a sloping roof when there is less
than four feet vertically between the floor and the intersections of the bottoms of the rafters at the
plate with the interior faces of the walls. A half story may be as completely used for any purpose
as a full story.
Hand Crafts: The manufacturing of handcrafted articles, such as ceramics, leather goods, and
jewelry.
Health Institution: A hospital, nursing home; boarding care facility or any other place for the
treatment or diagnosis of human ailments, excluding professional offices.
Height: See "Building Height."
High Intensity Soil Survey: A map prepared by a certified Soil Scientist, identifying the soil
types down to 1/8 acre or less at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The soils
shall be identified in accordance with the National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map shall show
the location of all test pits used to identify the soils, and shall be accompanied by a log of each
sample point identifying the textural classification and the depth to seasonal high water table or
bedrock at that point. Single soil test pits and their evaluation for suitability for subsurface
wastewater disposal systems shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil surveys.
Home Occupation: See "Customary Home Occupation."
Hotel: A building or group of buildings having ten (10) or more guest rooms in which lodging,
or meals and lodging, are offered for compensation, including motels, tourist courts, motor
lodges, and cabins.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Impervious Area: The total area of a principal and accessory structures and areas that will be
covered with a low-permeability material such as asphalt, concrete and compacted gravel used
for parking and roadways. A natural or man-made waterbody is not considered an impervious
area except for the purpose of stormwater calculations.
Industrial Park or Development: A subdivision in an area zoned exclusively for industrial
uses, or a subdivision planned for industrial uses and developed and managed as a unit usually
with provisions for common service for the users.
Inn: A business establishment having nine (9) or less guest rooms in which lodging is offered to
guests for compensation, and meals may be offered for compensation only to the lodgers.
Institutional: A non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for
public purposes.
Junkyard:
a. Automobile Graveyard - a yard, field, or other area used as a place of storage for three
(3) or more unserviceable, discarded worn-out or junked automobiles.
b. Junkyard - a yard, field, or other area used as a place of storage for discarded, worn-out
or junked plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances, furniture, discarded scrap
and junked lumber, old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber
debris, waste and scrap iron, steel and other ferrous and non-ferrous material, including
garbage dumps, waste dumps, and sanitary landfills.
Kennel: Any commercial establishment where dogs and/or cats are kept or boarded for a fee or
where animal grooming is performed for a fee.
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one (1) building and the
accessory buildings or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are
required by ordinances and having frontage upon a public street, right-of-way, or private way.
Lot Area: The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath
accessways serving more than two lots.
Lot - Corner: A lot with at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a street or right-of-way.
Lot Coverage: The percentage of the lot covered by structures.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Lot Coverage, Shoreland: The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other nonvegetated
surfaces, within the shoreland zone for the lot or for a portion thereof that is located
within the shoreland zone, including land area previously developed.
Lot Frontage: The horizontal distance measured in a straight line connecting the intersections of
the front lot line with the side lot lines.
Lot - Interior: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Lines: The property lines bounding a lot as defined below:
a. Front Lot Line - On an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street or right-ofway.
On a corner or through lot, the line separating the lot from each street or right-of -
way.
b. Rear Lot Line - The lot line opposite the front lot line. On a lot pointed at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be an imaginary line between the side lot lines parallel to the front lot
line, not less than ten (1O) feet long, lying furthest from the front lot line. On a corner lot,
the rear lot line shall be opposite-the front lot line of least dimension.
c. Side Lot Line - Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot Minimum Area: The lot area, less the area of any land subject to rights-of-way or
easements, other than utility easements servicing the lot, and also excluding lands which are
below the normal high water mark or which are covered with water for at least three months
per year.
Lot, Minimum Width, Shoreland: The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
When only two lot lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be
side lot lines.
Lot Width: The width of any lot as measured wholly within the lot at the required front setback
along a line parallel to a straight line connecting the intersections of the front lot line with the
side lot line.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are
recorded on a document or map on file with the Hancock County Register of Deeds.
Manufactured Housing: A structural unit or units designed for occupancy and constructed in a
manufacturing facility and transported, by the use of its own chassis or an independent chassis,
to a building site. The term includes any type of building that is constructed at a manufacturing
facility and transported to a building site where it is used for housing and may be purchased or
sold by a dealer in the interim. For purposes of this section, two (2) types of Manufactured
Housing are included. Those two (2) types are:
(1) Those units constructed after June 15, 1976, commonly called "newer mobile homes," that
the manufacturer certifies are constructed in compliance with the United States Department of
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Housing and Urban Development standards, meaning structures transportable in one or more
sections, that in the traveling mode are 14 body feet or more in width and are 750 or more square
feet, and that are built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as dwellings, with or
without permanent foundations, when connected to the required utilities including the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit.
(2) This term also includes any structure that meets all the requirements of this subparagraph
except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification required by the Secretary of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, United States Code, Title 42, Section
5401, et seq.; and
Those units commonly called "modular homes" that the manufacturer certifies are constructed in
compliance with Title 10, chapter 951, and rules adopted under that chapter, meaning structures,
transportable in one or more sections, that are not constructed on a permanent chassis and are
designed to be used as dwellings on foundations when connected to required utilities, including
the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning or electrical systems contained in the unit.
Mobile Home: Housing units that comply with the “newer mobile home” standards of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, as defined herein under
“Manufactured Housing.” Substandard housing units shall not be installed in a Mobile Home
Park or elsewhere in the City of Ellsworth.
Marina: A use of waterfront land involved in the operation of a marina including structures and
activities normally integral to the operation of a marina, such as servicing, fueling, pumping-out,
chartering, launching, and dry-storage and boating equipment.
Mineral Extraction: Any operation within any 12 month period which removes more than one
100 cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from
its natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Mobile Home Pad: That portion of a mobile home site reserved for the placement of a mobile
home, appurtenant structures or additions.
Mobile Home Site [aka mobile home park lot]: An area of land in a Manufactured Housing
Park used for installation of a mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants that shall be
designated on the Mobile Home Park plan meeting all of the requirements of this Section.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land under unified ownership approved the City for the
placement of three (3) or more Manufactured Housing units.
Motel: See "Hotel."
Multifamily Development: A subdivision which contains three or more dwelling units on land
in common ownership, such as apartment buildings, condominiums, or mobile home parks. (Am
4/03)
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Municipal Officers: Municipal Officers shall mean the Ellsworth City Council.
Net Residential Acreage: The total acreage available for the subdivision as shown on the
proposed subdivision plan, minus the area for streets or accessways and the areas which are
unsuitable for development.
Non-conforming Structure or Building: A structure or accessory facility, such as parking areas
lots or other conditions to which the requirements of this ordinance apply, which does not meet
any one or more of the following dimensional requirements: setback, height, or lot coverage, or
other standards contained in this ordinance, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful
existence at the time this ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonconforming Use: Any activity on the premises or in a structure not permitted as a land use
in the district in which it lies, which existed prior to the passage of the district requirements
prohibiting it. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a Conditional Use, as a permitted use, is not a
nonconforming use.
Normal High-Water Line (non-tidal waters): That line which is apparent from visible
markings, changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in
vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation
and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great
pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Nursing Home: Any dwelling in which three or more aged, chronically ill or incurably ill
persons, or persons convalescing from an illness are housed and furnished with meals and
nursing care for compensation.
Official Submittal Date: The date upon which the Board issues a receipt, indicating that a
complete application has been submitted.
Open Space: The portion of a lot or site which is maintained in its natural state or planted with
grass, shrubs, trees, or other vegetation and which is not occupied by buildings, structures, or
other impervious surfaces.
Patio: A level area adjacent to a dwelling unit constructed of stone, cement or other material
located at ground level, with no railing or other structure above the level of the ground.
Parking lot, private: Parking for the exclusive use of the owners, tenant, lessees, or occupants
of the lot on which the parking area is located or their customers, employees or whomever else
they permit to use the parking area.
Parking lot, public: Parking available to the public, with or without payment or fee.
Parking Lot: An open area other than an accessway used for the parking of two or more
vehicles, excluding an area associated with a residential driveway serving no more than two
residential dwelling units.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Parking, commercial: Parking or storage of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise for
which any fee is charged independently of any other use of the premise.
Parking, excess: Required parking which has been demonstrated as being unused by an existing
land use or exceeds the minimum ordinance requirements.
Parking, Satellite: Parking not located on a parcel or lot that is contiguous or adjacent to the
parcel or a lot not containing the use for which the parking is intended.
Parking, shared: A public or private parking area used jointly by two or more users.
Parking, Valet: Parking of vehicles by an attendant provided by the establishment for which the
parking is provided.
Piers, Docks, Wharves, Breakwaters, Causeways, Marinas, Bridges, and Uses Projecting
Into Water Bodies:
a. Temporary - Structures which remain in the water for less than seven (7) months in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
b. Permanent - Structures which remain in the water for seven (7) months or more in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Person: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other
legal entity.
Planned Unit Development: A development controlled by a single developer for a mix of
residential commercial, and industrial uses. A PUD is undertaken in a manner that treats the
developed area in its entirety to promote the best use of land, including the creation of open
space, a reduction in the length of road and utility systems, and the retention of the natural
characteristics of the land.
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the City of Ellsworth created by the Ellsworth City
Charter in accordance with State Statutes.
Preliminary Subdivision Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision to be submitted to the Board for its consideration.
Principal Building: The building in which the primary use of the lot is conducted.
Principal Use: A use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on
the same premises.
Privy: A pit in the ground in which human excrement is placed.
Professional and Business Offices: The place of business, other than a residential unit, of
doctors, lawyers, accountants, financial, architects, surveyors, real estate and insurance agents,
psychiatrists, psychologists, counselors, and the like, or in which a business conducts its
administrative, financial and clerical operations and also including providers of personal services
such as barbers, hairdressers, and beauticians.
Public Utility: Any person, municipal department or other entity organized to furnish water, gas,
electricity, waste disposal services, communication facilities, or transportation to the public.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Public Water System: A water supply system that provides water to at least 15 service
connections or services water to at least 25 individuals daily for at least 30 days a year.
Recent Floodplain Soils: The following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey: Fryeburg; Hadley; Limerick; Lovewell; Medomak; Ondawa; Alluvia;
Cornish; Charles; Podunk; Rumney; Saco; Suncook; Sunday; and Winooski.
Recording Plan: A copy of the Final Plan which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds and which
need not show information not relevant to the transfer of an interest in the property, such as
sewer and water line location and sizes, culverts, and building lines.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and
designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may
include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be
considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground,
and must be registered with the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Residual Basal Area: The average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Restaurant: An establishment where food and drink are prepared and served to the public and
where no food or beverages are served directly to occupants of motor vehicles.
Resubdivision: The division of an existing subdivision or any change in the plan for an
approved subdivision which affects the lot lines, including land transactions by the subdivider
not indicated on the approved plan.
Retail Business: A business establishment engaged in the sale of goods or services to an
ultimate consumer for direct use or consumption, and not for resale, not including automobile
oriented businesses and, not including electronic, mechanical, or video game arcades.
River: A free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands. For the
purposes of this Ordinance Ellsworth’s only River is the Union River from the Graham Lake
dam to Leonard Lake. The Union River below the Leonard Lake dam is a tidal estuary
considered a coastal wetland.
Road: this word is used interchangeably with the word Street.
Rubbish: Any discarded, worn-out abandoned, or non-functioning article or articles or materials
including but not limited to tin cans, bottles, used wood products, junk appliances, junk
automobiles, or parts thereof, old clothing, or household goods. The word "rubbish" shall include
the words "trash," "waste materials," and "refuse."
School: An institution for education or instruction including a college, university, and public or
private school conducting classes pursuant to a program approved by the State Board of
Education or similar governmental agency, but not including commercially operated schools
such as schools of beauty, culture, business, dancing, driving, music or recreation which shall be
deemed retail business.
Setback: The horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a structure.
Setback, Shoreline: The horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, accessway,
parking lot or other regulated object or area.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Shoreland Zone: The land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet of the upland edge of
a freshwater wetland; or within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
stream, as defined in Chapter 56, Article 4. Shoreland Zoning Regulations and/or streams
mapped on the Official Land Use Map.
Sign: An object, device or display, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is directed
at persons outside the premises, used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to
an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any
means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or
projected images.
Sketch Plan: Conceptual maps, renderings, and supportive data describing the project proposed
by the applicant for initial review prior to submitting an application for subdivision approval.
Solar Collector: A device, or combination of devices, structure, or part of a device or structure
that transforms direct solar energy into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy and that
contributes to a building's energy supply.
Solar Energy System: A complete design or assembly consisting of a solar energy collector, an
energy storage facility (when used), and components for the distribution of transformed energy.
Story: That portion of a building contained between any floor and the floor or roof next above it,
but not including any portion so contained if more than one half of such portion vertically is
below the average mean finished grade of the ground adjoining such building.
Street: A public or private way including but not limited to roads, alley, and other rights- of-way
for vehicular and/or pedestrian use.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or
property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in
the ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and
patios. Only structures covering more than 10 square feet must comply with the requirements of
zoning districts, exclusive of shoreland zoning districts, where all structures, regardless of size,
must comply with the shoreland zoning requirements.
The following are not considered structures: fences, poles, wiring and other aerial equipment
normally associated with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors, a retractable awning
or shade used solely to shade a door or window.
The following are not considered structures outside of shoreland zoning districts: parking lots,
driveways, an awning or tent for a temporary event and backyard tents used for sleeping.
Subdivision: Means the division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots within any 5-year
period that begins on or after September 23, 1971. This definition applies whether the division is
accomplished by sale, lease, development, buildings, or otherwise. The term “subdivision” also
includes the division of a new structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more
dwelling units within a 5-year period, the construction or placement of 3 or more dwelling units
on a single tract or parcel of land and the division of an existing structure or structures previously
used for commercial or industrial use into 3 or more dwelling units within a 5-year period.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
a. In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into 3 or more lots,
the first dividing of the tract or parcel is considered to create the first 2 lots and the next
dividing of either of these first 2 lots, by whomever accomplished, is considered to create
a third lot, unless:
1. Both dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots for
the subdivider’s own use as a single-family residence that has been the subdivider’s
principal residence for a period of at least 5 years immediately preceding the 2nd
division; or
2. The division of the tract or parcel is otherwise exempt under this subchapter.
b. The dividing of a tract or parcel of land and the lot or lots so made, which
dividing or lots when made are not subject to this subchapter, do not become subject to
this subchapter by the subsequent dividing of that tract or parcel of land or any portion of
that tract or parcel. The municipal reviewing authority shall consider the existence of the
previously created lot or lots in reviewing a proposed subdivision created by a subsequent
dividing.
c. A lot of 40 or more acres will be counted as a lot.
d. A division accomplished by devise does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of
this subchapter.
e. A division accomplished by condemnation does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of
this subchapter.
f. A division accomplished by order of court does not create a lot or lots for the
purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of
this subchapter.
g. A division accomplished by gift to a person related to the donor of an interest
in property held by the donor for a continuous period of 5 years prior to the division by
gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the
transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter. If the real estate exempt under
this paragraph is transferred within 5 years to another person not related to the donor of
the exempt real estate as provided in this paragraph, then the previously exempt division
creates a lot or lots for the purposes of this subsection. “Person related to the donor”
means a spouse, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, child or grandchild related by blood,
marriage or adoption. A gift under this paragraph can not be given for consideration that
is more than ½ the assessed value of the real estate.
h. A division accomplished by a gift to a municipality if that municipality
accepts the gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the
intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter.
i. A division accomplished by the transfer of any interest in land to the owners
of land abutting that land that does not create a separate lot does not create a lot or lots
for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the
objectives of this subchapter. If the real estate exempt under this paragraph is transferred
within 5 years to another person without all of the merged land, then the previously
exempt division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of this subsection.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
j. The division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots and upon each of
which lots permanent dwelling structures legally existed before September 23, 1971 is
not a subdivision.
k. In determining the number of dwelling units in a structure, the provisions of
this subsection regarding the determination of the number of lots apply, including
exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land.
l. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, leased dwelling units are
not subject to subdivision review if the municipal reviewing authority has determined that
the units are otherwise subject to municipal review at least as stringent as that required
under this subchapter.
m. The grant of a bona fide security interest in an entire lot that has been
exempted from the definition of subdivision under paragraphs E to I, or subsequent
transfer of that entire lot by the original holder of the security interest or that person’s
successor in interest, does not create a lot for the purposes of this definition, unless the
intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of this subchapter.
Subdivision – Major: Any division containing more than four lots or dwelling units, or any
subdivision containing a proposed street.
Subdivision - Minor: Any division containing four lots or less, and in which no street is
proposed to be constructed.
Subdivision of New and/or Existing Structure: Any division of a new or existing structure
which creates, through sale or lease, three (3) or more dwelling units, or three (3) or more units
for commercial or industrial use, within a five-year period.
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System also referred to as Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
System: Any system designed to dispose of waste or waste water on or beneath the surface of the
earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields; grandfathered cesspools;
holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used for
those purposes; does not include any discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. section 414,
any surface waste water disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste
water treatment system.
Terrace: See "Patio."
Theater: A fully enclosed building used for-display or presentation to the public of films, plays,
or other kinds of performances.
Timber Harvesting: The cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has
less than two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such
cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Chapter 56, Article 4, Section 410.14,
Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Timber Harvesting and Related Activities: Timber harvesting, the construction and
maintenance of accessways used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities conducted to
facilitate timber harvesting.
Tract (or Parcel) of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, whether or not the tract
is separated at any point by an intermittent or non-navigable stream, tidal waters where there is
no flow at low tide, or a private road established by the abutting land owners.
Trailer: A vehicle without motive power and not intended for human occupancy, designed to be
towed by a motor vehicle including a utility trailer, boat trailer, horse trailer, or snowmobile
trailer.
Travel Trailer: See "Recreational Vehicle."
Tributary Stream: Means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface
water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed,
devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock;
and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not
include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural
vegetation cover has been removed by human activity. This definition does not include the term
"stream" as defined elsewhere in Chapter 56, Article 4, and only applies to that portion of the
tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland.
Upland edge of a wetland: The boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a
coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant
vegetation and/or the highest annual tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For
purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for
a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are 6 meters
(approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.
Use: The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed or intended, or
for which it is occupied.
Variance: A realization of the terms of the zoning ordinance which impose restrictions of lot
coverage, lot size, or setback as permitted by Article VII of the Ordinance.
Warehouse: A structure or building used primarily for the storage of articles, goods or materials.
Water Body: Any great pond, river, or stream.
Water Crossing: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects
include but may not be limited to accessways, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines,
and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for
timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Water Dependent Use: A use which, by its nature, requires a shorefront or surface water
location, including, without limitation, boat yards, marinas, boat houses, boat launching ramps,
ship chandleries and commercial fishing facilities. The location of a use, which does not by its
nature require a shorefront or surface water location, on a pier, boat, or barge, shall not qualify it
as a water dependent use.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Wetland: A freshwater or coastal wetland.
Wetland, Forested: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters
tall (approximately 20 feet) or taller.
Wetland, Freshwater: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which are:
1) Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface
water body, excluding any river, stream or brook, such that in a natural state, the combined
surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2) Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient
to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Freshwater wetlands may contain small
stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition.
Wetland, Coastal: All tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant of
salt water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog,
beach, flat or other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest tide level
for the year in which an activity is proposed as identified in tide tables published by the National
Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands may include portions of coastal sand dunes.
Wholesaling: A business establishment engaged in the bulk sale of goods or materials not
manufactured or processed on the premises.
Yard: On the same lot with a principal building, a space which is open to the sky and
unoccupied by any structures except a fence not more than six (6) feet in height.
Yard Sale: Display and sale of property owner’s possessions (may include multi-families and
their possessions). Yard sales exceeding three (3) consecutive days and/or held more frequently
than (3) times in any calendar year will be considered a commercial use and require Site Plan
Review.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article IV Administrative Procedure
4.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to establish an orderly, equitable and expeditious procedure
for reviewing subdivisions.
4.2 AGENDA
In order to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for subdivision review,
the Board shall prepare an agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. Applicants shall
request to be placed on the Board's agenda by contacting in writing, the Code
Enforcement Officer at least two (2) weeks in advance of a regularly scheduled meeting.
Applicants who attend a meeting but who are not on the Board's agenda may be heard but
only after all agenda items have been completed, and then only if a majority of the Board
so votes.
Article V Preapplication
5.1 PROCEDURE
A. Applicant presentation and submission of sketch, plans. Twelve
(12) copies of all information accompanying the plan shall be submitted. (Am
4/03)
B. Question and answer period. Board makes specific suggestions to
be incorporated by the applicant into subsequent submissions.
C. Scheduling of on-site inspection.
5.2 SUBMISSION
A. Subdivision of New or Existing Structures: The preapplication
Sketch Plan shall show the name of the property owner, address of structure to be
subdivided, including tax map, lot number and zoning district; lot size; outline
and dimensions (width, length, height) of existing building; outline and
dimensions of proposed addition, if applicable; proposed floor plan indicating
entrances and exits; parking spaces for additional dwelling units; type and
availability of water supply; and the location and capacity of sewer/septic
facilities.
B. Major and Minor Subdivisions: The Preapplication Sketch Plan shall show, in
simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots, buildings and other
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan, which may be a freehand
penciled sketch, should be supplemented with general information to
describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed
development. It is recommended that the sketch plan be superimposed on or
accompanied by a copy of the Assessor's Map(s) on which the land is located. The
Sketch Plan shall also contain a locus map in the upper right hand corner showing
where the subdivision is located within the City of Ellsworth, in what zone, and
contain the Assessor’s Map Number and Lot Number.
5.3 ON-SITE INSPECTION
Within 30 days of submission, the Board or designee may hold an on-site inspection of
the property. The applicant shall place "flagging" at the centerline of any proposed
streets, and at the approximate intersections of the street center and lot corners, prior to
the on-site inspection. The board shall not conduct on-site inspection when there is more
than one foot of snow on the ground.
5.4 RIGHTS NOT VESTED
The submittal or review of the preapplication sketch plan shall not be considered the
initiation of the review process for the purpose of bringing the plan under the protection
of Title 1, M.R.S.A. section 302.
Article VI Subdivision of New and Existing Structures
6.1 GENERAL
The Board may require, where it deems necessary, for the protection of public health,
safety, and welfare, that a subdivision of a new or existing structure comply with all or
any of the submission requirements for a minor or major subdivision.
6.2 PROCEDURE
A. Within 30 days of receipt of a preapplication, the Board will
notify the applicant of any further information which will be needed for a
complete application for Subdivision of new and existing structures or if, for the
protection of public health, safety, and welfare, the applicant will be required to
comply with all or any of the submission requirements for a Minor or Major
Subdivision. Unless otherwise directed by the Board, a complete application will
be considered when all the questions on the application form have been answered
and supporting documentation attached. The application must be signed by the
applicant or his/her agent. Twelve (12) copies of all information accompanying
the plan shall be submitted.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
B. At the time the application is accepted as complete, the Board
shall notify in writing all owners of abutting property that an application for
subdivision approval has been submitted.
C. Upon determination that a complete application has been
submitted, the Board shall issue a dated receipt to the subdivider.
D. The Board shall hold a public hearing within thirty (30) days of
receipt of a complete application and shall publish notice of the date, time and
place of hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least
once, the date of the first publication to be at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
hearing.
E. Within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, the Board shall make
findings of fact on the application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the application. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of facts and
reasons for any conditions or denial.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article VII Minor Subdivisions
7.1 GENERAL
The Board may require, where it deems it necessary for the protection of public health,
safety, and welfare, that a Minor Subdivision comply with all or any of the submission
requirements for a Major Subdivision.
7.2 PROCEDURE
A. Within six months after the on-site inspection by the
Board, the subdivider shall submit an application for approval of a Final Plan at
least fourteen (14) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board. Failure to do
so shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Board. The Final Plan
shall approximate the layout shown on the Sketch Plan, plus any
recommendations made by the Board. Twelve (12) copies of all information
accompanying plan shall be submitted.
B. All applications for Final Plan approval for Minor
Subdivision shall be accompanied by an application fee of $100.00 payable by
check to the municipality. If a public hearing is deemed necessary by the Board,
an additional fee shall be required to cover the additional costs of advertising and
postal notification.
C. Upon receipt of an application for Final Plan approval of
a minor subdivision, the Board shall notify in writing all owners of abutting
property that an application for subdivision approval has been submitted.
D. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative,
shall attend the meeting of the Board to discuss the Final Plan. Failure to attend
the meeting to present the preliminary plan application shall result in a delay of
the Board’s receipt of the plan until the next meeting that the project is on the
agenda and that the applicant, or his duly authorized representative, is in
attendance.
E. Upon determination that a complete application has been
submitted for review, the Board shall issue a dated receipt to the subdivider. The
Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing on the Final Plan
application.
F. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold
the hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application, and shall
publish notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of the first
publication to be at least seven days prior to the hearing. (Am 4/03)
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
G. Within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within
sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, if no hearing is held, or
within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board
and the subdivider, the Board shall make findings of fact on the application, and
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Final Plan. The Board shall specify
in writing its findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or denial.
7.3 SUBMISSIONS
A. The subdivision plan for a Minor Subdivision shall consist of two reproducible, stable
based transparent originals, one to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other
to be filed at the Municipal Office and twelve (12) copies of one or more maps or
drawings drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch.
Plans for subdivisions containing more than one hundred (100) acres may be
drawn at a scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to the inch provided all
necessary detail can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches
in size, and shall have a margin of two inches outside of the border lines on the
left side for binding and a one-inch margin outside the border along the remaining
sides. Space shall be provided for endorsement by the Board. Twelve (12) copies
of all information accompanying the plan shall be submitted.
The application for approval of a Minor Subdivision shall include the following
information:
1. Location Map: The location map shall be drawn at a size adequate to show
the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties, and
to allow the Board to locate the subdivision within the municipality. The
location map shall show:
a. Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
b. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
c. Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
d. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion
of the owner’s property if the final plan submitted covers only a
portion of the owner’s entire contiguous holding.
2. Proposed name of the subdivision, or identifying title, and the
name of the municipality in which it is located, plus the Assessor's Map
and Lot numbers.
3. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
4. A field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving
complete descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by
a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall be located on the
ground and marked by monuments. The plan shall indicate the type of
monument to be set or found at each lot corner.
5. A copy of the deed from which the survey was based. A copy
of all deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances
currently affecting the property.
6. A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part
of the lots in the subdivision.
7. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the
subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the
public sewer, a written statement from the Sewer Department
stating the Department has the capacity to collect and treat the
wastewater shall be provided.
b. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point to
a sewer line must connect to the public system as approved by the
Sewer Department Supervisor.
c. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface
wastewater disposal systems, test pit analyses, prepared by a
licensed Site Evaluator shall be provided. A map showing the
location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
8. Indication of the type of water supply system(s)to be used in the
subdivision.
a. When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written
statement from the Water Department shall be submitted indicating
there is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision and
approving the plans for extensions where necessary. Where the
Water Department’s supply line is to be extended, a written
statement from the Fire Chief, stating approval of the location of
fire hydrants, if any, and a written statement from the Water
Department approving the design of the extension shall be
submitted.
b. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point to
a water line must connect to the public system as approved by the
Water Department Supervisor.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
c. When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of
adequate ground water supply and quality shall be submitted by a
well driller or a hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
9. The date the Plan was prepared, north point, graphic map scale, names and
addresses of the record owner, subdivider, and individual or company who
prepared the plan, and the names of adjoining property owners. If the
subdivider is not the owner of the property, evidence of the subdivider's
right, title or interest to the property.
10. A copy of the portion of the Hancock County Soil Survey covering the
subdivision. When the medium intensity soil survey shows soils which
are generally unsuitable for the uses proposed, the Board may require the
submittal of a high intensity soil survey or a report by a Registered Soil
Scientist or Registered Professional Engineer experienced in geotechnics,
indicating the suitability of soil conditions for those uses.
11. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property
lines, existing buildings, watercourses, vegetative cover type, and other
essential existing physical features.
12. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Planning Board, showing
elevation in relation to Mean Sea Level.
13. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of
any flood hazard areas and the l00-year flood elevation shall be delineated
on the plan.
14. A hydrogeologic assessment prepared by a certified Geologist or Registered
Professional Engineer, experienced in hydrogeology, when the subdivision
is not served by public sewer, and:
a. Any part of the subdivision is located over a sand and gravel
aquifer, as shown on a map entitled “Hydrogeologic Data for
Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifer,” by the Maine Geological
Survey, 1981; and
b. The subdivision has an average density of less than 100,000 square
feet per dwelling unit.
15. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated on a
daily basis and at peak hours.
16. The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision. If any portion of the proposed subdivision is
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
located in the direct watershed of a great pond, the application shall
indicate which great pond.
17. A storm water management plan and erosion control management plan,
per City of Ellsworth Code of Ordinance chapter 56, Article 10 -
Stormwater Management and Construction Standards.
18. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been
identified as High or Moderate Value Wildlife Habitat by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or within the Ellsworth
Comprehensive Plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located within
an area designated as a critical natural area by the comprehensive plan or
the Maine Natural Areas Program the plan shall indicate appropriate
measures for the preservation of the values, which qualify the site for such
designation.
19. All areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which are either
listed on or eligible to be listed on the Local Register of Historic Places, or
have been identified in the comprehensive plan as sensitive or likely to
contain such sites.
20. The location and method of disposal for land clearing and construction
debris.
Article VIII Preliminary Plan for Major Subdivision
8.1 PROCEDURE
A. Within six months after the on-site inspection by the Board, the
subdivider shall submit an application for approval of a Preliminary Plan at least
fourteen (14) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board. Failure to do so
shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Board. The Preliminary Plan
shall approximate the layout shown on the Sketch Plan, plus any
recommendations made by the Board. Twelve (12) copies of all information
accompanying plan shall be submitted.
B. All applications for Preliminary Plan approval for a Major
Subdivision shall be accompanied by an application fee of $15.00 per lot or
dwelling unit, payable by check to the municipality. In addition, the applicant
shall pay a fee of $25.00 per lot or dwelling unit to be deposited in a special
account designated for that subdivision application, to be used by the Planning
Board for hiring independent consulting services to review the application. If the
balance in this special account shall be drawn down by 75% of the original
deposit, the Board shall notify the applicant, and require that an additional $10.00
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
per lot or dwelling unit be deposited as necessary. Any balance in the account
remaining after a decision on the Final Pan application by the Board shall be
returned to the applicant. If a public hearing is deemed necessary by the Board,
an additional fee shall be required to cover the costs of advertising and postal
notification.
C. The applicant, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend
the meeting of the Board to discuss the Preliminary Plan. Failure to attend the
meeting to present the preliminary plan application shall result in a delay of the
Board’s receipt of the plan until the next meeting that the project is on the agenda
and that the applicant, or his duly authorized representative, is in attendance.
D. Upon receipt of an application for Preliminary Plan approval of a
Major Subdivision, the Board shall notify in writing all owners of abutting
property that an application for subdivision approval has been submitted.
E. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a Preliminary Plan
application form and fee, the Board shall notify the applicant in writing whether
or not the application is complete, and what, if any, additional submissions are
required for a complete application.
F. Upon determination that a complete application has been
submitted for review, the Board shall issue a dated receipt to the subdivider. The
Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing on the Preliminary Plan
application. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing
within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application, and shall publish
notice of the date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least two times, the date of the first publication
to be at least seven days prior to the hearing.
G. The Board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or
within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete application, if no hearing is held,
or within another time limit as may be otherwise mutually agreed to by the Board
and the subdivider, make findings of fact on the application, and approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the Preliminary Plan. The Board shall specify in writing
its findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or denial.
H. When granting approval to a Preliminary Plan, the Board shall
state the conditions of such approval, if any, with respect to:
1. The specific changes which it will require in the Final Plan;
2. The character and extent of the required improvements for which
waivers may have been requested and which in the Board's opinion may
be waived without jeopardy to the public health, safety, and general
welfare; and
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
3. The amount of all performance guarantees which it will require
as prerequisite to the approval of the Final Plan;
I. Approval of a Preliminary Plan shall not constitute approval of the Final Plan or
intent to approve the Final Plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of
approval of the design of the Preliminary Plan as a guide to the preparation of the
Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be submitted for approval of the Board upon
fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the conditions of
preliminary approval, if any. Prior to the approval of the Final Plan, the Board
may require additional changes as a result of the further study of the subdivision
or as a result of new information received.
8.2 SUBMISSIONS
A. Location Map.
The Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a location map adequate to show
the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the adjacent properties, and to
allow the Board to locate the subdivision within the municipality. The Location
Map shall show:
1. Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed street.
3. Boundaries and designation of zoning districts.
4. An outline of the proposed subdivision and any remaining portion of the
owner's property if the Preliminary Plan submitted covers only a portion
of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
B. Preliminary Plan.
The Preliminary Plan shall be submitted in twelve (12) copies of one or more
maps or drawings which may be printed or reproduced on paper, with all
dimensions shown in feet or decimals of a foot. The Preliminary Plan shall be
drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred feet to the inch. The Board may
allow plans for subdivisions containing more than one hundred acres to be drawn
at a scale of not more than two hundred feet to the inch provided all necessary
details can easily be read. In addition, one copy of the Plan(s) reduced to a size of
8 1/2 by 11 inches or 11 by 17 inches, and all accompanying information shall be
mailed to each Board member no less than fourteen days prior to the meeting. The
following information shall either be shown on the Preliminary Plan or
accompany the application for preliminary approval:
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
1. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which
it is located, plus the Tax Assessor's Map and Lot numbers.
2. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
3. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a
licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall be located on the
ground and marked by monuments.
4. A copy of the deed from which the survey was based. A copy of all covenants
or deed restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances
currently affecting the property.
5. A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of
the lots in the subdivision.
6. Contour lines showing elevations in relation to Mean Sea Level. 6
7. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property
lines, existing buildings, watercourses, vegetation cover type, and other
essential existing physical features.
8. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the
public sewer, a letter from the Sewer Department indicating there
is adequate capacity within the Sewer Department system to
transport and treat the sewage shall be submitted.
b. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point to
a sewer line must connect to the public system as approved by the
Sewer Department Supervisor.
c. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface sewage
disposal systems, test oil analyses, prepared by a licensed Site
Evaluator shall be provided. A map showing the location of all
test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
9. Indication of type of water supply system(s) to be used in the
subdivision.
a. When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a letter from
the servicing Water Department shall be submitted indicating there
is adequate supply and pressure for the subdivision.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
b. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point to
a water line must connect to the public system as approved by the
Water Department Supervisor.
10. The date the Plan was prepared, magnetic north point, true north,
graphic map scale, names and addresses of the record owner, subdivider,
and individual or company who prepared the plan. If the subdivider is not
the owner of the property, evidence of the subdivider's right, title or
interest to the property.
11. The names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent
property, including any property directly across an existing public street
from the subdivision.
12. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
13. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water
mains, culverts, and drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be
subdivided.
14. The location, names, and present widths of existing and proposed
streets, highways, easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces
on or adjacent to the subdivision.
15. The width and location of any streets or public improvements
shown upon the Official Map and the Comprehensive Plan, if any, within
the subdivision.
16.
17. The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot
areas.
18. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the
conditions of such dedication.
19. The location of any open space to be preserved and a description
of proposed improvements and its management.
20. A copy of that portion of the Hancock County Soil Survey
covering the subdivision. When the medium intensity soil survey shows
soils which are generally unsuitable for the uses proposed, the Board may
require the submittal of a high intensity soil survey or a report by a
Registered Soil Scientist or Registered Professional Engineer experienced
in Geotechnics, indicating the suitability of soil conditions for those uses. (
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
21. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the
boundaries of any flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation
shall be delineated on the plan.
22. A hydrogeologic assessment, prepared in accordance with
Section 12.12 by a Certified Geologist or Registered Professional
Engineer, experienced in hydrogeology, when the subdivision is not
served by public sewer, and:
a. Any part of the subdivision is located over a sand and gravel
aquifer, as shown on a map entitled “Hydrogeologic Data for
Significant Sand and Gravel Aquifers,” by the Maine Geological
Survey 1981; and
b. The subdivision has an average density of less than 100,000 square
feet per dwelling unit.
The Board may require a hydrogeologic assessment in other cases where
site considerations or development design indicate greater potential of
adverse impacts on ground water quality.
22. An indication of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated
on a daily basis and at peak hours, proposed general mitigation, access
management, and consideration of pedestrian and non-automotive needs.
23. The location of all rivers, streams and brooks within or adjacent to the
proposed subdivision. If any portion of the proposed subdivision is
located in the direct watershed of Branch Lake, the application shall
contain a Phosphorus Control Plan.
24. Areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which have been
identified as High or Moderate Value Wildlife Habitat by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife or within the Ellsworth
Comprehensive Plan. If any portion of the subdivision is located within
an area designated as a unique natural area by the Comprehensive Plan or
the Maine Natural Areas Program the plan shall indicate appropriate
measures for the preservation of the values, which qualify the site for such
designation.
25. Determination that the project is or is not in whole or in part located in the
direct watershed of a Great Pond, as defined in the Ellsworth Code of
Ordinance Chapter 56, Article 10 – Stormwater Management, Design and
Construction Standards.
26. All areas within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision which are either
listed on or eligible to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places,
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
or have been identified in the Comprehensive Plan as sensitive or likely to
contain such sites.
27. Show the limits of construction disturbance.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article IX Final Plan for Major Subdivision
9.1 PROCEDURE
A. The subdivider shall, within six months after the approval of the Preliminary Plan,
file with the Board an application for approval of the Final Plan at least fourteen
(14) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board. If the application for the
Final Plan is not submitted within six months after Preliminary Plan approval, the
Board may refuse without prejudice to act on the Final Plan, and require
resubmission of the Preliminary Plan. The Final Plan shall approximate the
layout shown on the Preliminary Plan, plus any recommendations made by the
Board.
B. All applications for Final Plan approval for Major Subdivision
shall be accompanied by an application fee of $20.00 per lot or dwelling unit
payable by check to the municipality. If a public hearing is deemed necessary by
the Board, an additional fee shall be required to cover the costs of advertising and
postal notification.
C. Prior to submittal of the Final Plan application, the applicant
shall show written proof that applications have been filed for the following, where
appropriate:
1. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location
of Development Act, Alteration of Coastal Wetlands Act, Great Ponds
Act, Fresh Water Wetland Act, Alteration of Streams and Rivers Act, or if
a Wastewater Discharge License is needed.
2. Maine Department of Human Services, if the subdivider proposes to
provide a central water supply system.
3. Maine Department of Human Services, if a centralized or shared
subsurface sewage disposal system is to be utilized.
4. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Natural
Resources Protection Act or if a storm water management permit or a
waste water discharge license is needed.
5. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, if a permit under Section 404 of the Clean
Water Act is required.
D. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of
the Board to discuss the Final Plan.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
E. Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted for review,
the Board shall issue a dated receipt to the subdivider. The Board shall determine
whether to hold a public hearing on the Final Plan application.
F. A public hearing may be held by the Board within thirty (30) days after the
issuance of a receipt for the submittal of a complete application. This hearing
shall be advertised in a newspaper of local circulation at least two times. The date
of the first publication to be at least seven days before the hearing and the notice
of the hearing shall be posted in at least three prominent places at least seven days
prior to the hearing. When a subdivision is located within 500 feet of a municipal
boundary, and a public hearing is to be held, the Board shall notify the Clerk and
the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality involved, at least ten days prior to
the hearing. (Am 4/03)
G. The Board shall notify the Road Supervisor, Police Chief, and Fire Chief of the
proposed subdivision, the number of dwelling units proposed, the length of
roadways, and the size and construction characteristics of any multi-family,
commercial or industrial buildings. The Board shall request that these officials
comment upon the adequacy of their department's existing capital facilities to
service the proposed subdivision.
H. Before the Board grants approval of the Final Plan, the subdivider shall meet the
performance guarantee requirements contained in Article XIV.
I. If the subdivision is located in more than one municipality, the Board shall have a
joint meeting with the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality to discuss the
Plan.
J. The Board, within thirty (30) days from the public hearing or within sixty (60)
days of receiving a complete application, if no hearing is held, shall make
findings of fact, and conclusions relative to the standards contained in Title 30-A,
section 4404 and in these regulations. If the Board finds that all standards of the
Statute and these regulations have been met, they shall approve the Final Plan. If
the Board finds that any of the standards of the Statute or these regulations have
not been met, the Board shall either deny the application or approve the
application with conditions to ensure all of the standards will be met by the
subdivision. The reasons for any conditions shall be stated in the records of the
Board.
9.2 SUBMISSIONS
The Final Plan shall consist of twelve (12) maps drawn to a scale of not more than one
hundred feet to the inch. Plans for subdivisions containing more than one hundred acres
may be drawn at a scale of not more than two hundred feet to the inch provided all
necessary detail can easily be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size,
and shall have a margin of two inches outside of the border line on the left side for
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
binding and a one inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides. Space shall
be reserved on the plan for endorsement by the Board. Two reproducible, stable based
transparent originals, one to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other be filed at the
Municipal Offices, shall be submitted. In addition, one copy of the Final Plan, reduced to
a size of 8 ½ by 11 inches or 11 by 17 inches, and all accompanying documents shall be
mailed to each Board member no less than fourteen days prior to the meeting. (Am 4/03)
The application for approval of the Final Plan shall include the following information.
A. Proposed name of the subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is
located, plus the Assessor's Map and Lot numbers.
B. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete
descriptive data by bearings and distances, made and certified by a licensed land
surveyor. The corners of the tract shall be located on the ground and marked by
monuments. The plan shall indicate the type of monument set or found at each lot
corner.
C. The number of acres within the proposed subdivision, location of property lines,
existing buildings, and essential existing physical -features.
D. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the subdivision. When
sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public sewer, a
written statement from the Sewer Department indicating the Department has
reviewed and approved the sewerage design shall be submitted.(Am 4/03)
E. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the subdivision.
1. When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written statement
from the Water Department shall be submitted indicating the Department
has reviewed and approved the water system design. A written statement
shall be submitted from the Fire Chief approving all hydrant locations or
other fire protection measures deemed necessary.
2. When water is to be supplied by private wells, evidence of adequate
ground water supply and quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a
hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
3. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point to a
water line must connect to the public water system as approved by the
Water Department Supervisor.
F. The date the Plan was prepared, magnetic and true north point, graphic map scale,
names and addresses of the record owner subdivider, and individual or company
who prepared the plan.
G. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the subdivision.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
H. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and
drainage ways on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
I. The location, names, and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways,
easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the
subdivision. The plan shall contain sufficient data to allow the location, bearing
and length of every street line, lot line, and boundary line to be readily determined
and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be tied to reference points
previously established. The length of all straight lines, the deflection angles radii,
length of curves and central angles of curves, tangent distances and tangent
bearings for each street shall be included.
J. The width and location of any streets or public improvements shown upon the
Official Land Use Map and the Comprehensive Plan, if any, within the
subdivision.
K. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication. Written offers of cession to the municipality of all public open spaces
shown on the Plan, and copies of agreements or other documents showing the
manner in which open spaces to be retained by the developer or lot owners are to
be maintained shall be submitted. If open space or other land is to be offered to
the municipality, written evidence that the Municipal Officers are satisfied with
the legal sufficiency of the written offer of cession shall be included.
L. If any portion of the subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any
flood hazard areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on the
plan.
M. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point must connect to
the public sewer system as approved by the Sewer Department Supervisor.
N. A storm water management plan and an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan,
prepared by a registered professional engineer in accordance with the Ellsworth
Code of Ordinance – Chapter 56, Article 10 Stormwater Management, Design and
Construction Standards.
O. A phosphorus impact analysis and control plan conducted using the procedures set
forth in Phosphorus Control in Lake Watersheds A long-term maintenance plan
for all phosphorus control measures, per Ellsworth Code of ordinance Chapter 56,
Article 10 - Stormwater Management, Design, and Construction Standards.
P. The contour lines shown on the plan shall be at an interval of no less than two feet.
Q. Areas with sustained slopes greater than 25% covering more than one acre shall be
delineated.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
R. The location and method of disposal for land clearing and construction debris.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
9.3 FINAL APPROVAL AND FILING
A. No plan shall be approved by the Board as long as the subdivider is in violation of
the provisions on a previously approved Plan.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all standards in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A.
section 4404, and these regulations have been met, and upon voting to approve
the subdivision, the Board shall sign the Final Plan. The Board shall specify in
writing its findings of facts and reasons for any conditions or denial. One copy of
the signed plan shall be retained by the Board as part of its permanent records.
One copy of the signed plan shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor. One copy of
the signed plan shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer. Any
subdivision not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the
date upon which the plan is approved and signed by the Board shall become null
and void.
C. At the time the Board grants Final Plan approval, it may permit the Plan to be
divided into two or more sections subject to any conditions the Board deems
necessary in order to insure the orderly development of the Plan. If any municipal
or quasi-municipal department head notified of the proposed subdivision informs
the Board that their department or district does not have adequate capital facilities
to service the subdivision, the Board shall require the Plan to be divided into two
or more section subject to any conditions the Board deems necessary in order to
allow the orderly planning, financing and provision of public services to the
subdivision.
D. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any Final Plan
after approval has been given by the Board and endorsed in writing on the Plan,
unless the revised Final Plan is first submitted and the Board approves any
modifications, except in accordance with Article IX. The Board shall make
findings that the revised plan meets the standards of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. section
4404, and these regulations. In the event that a Plan is recorded without
complying with this requirement, it shall be considered null and void, and the
Board shall institute proceedings to have the Plan stricken from the records of the
Registry of Deeds.
E. The approval by the Board of a subdivision plan shall not be deemed to constitute
or be evidence of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or
other open space shown on such plan. When a park, playground, or other
recreation area shall have been shown on the plan to be dedicated to the
municipality, approval of the plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the
municipality of such areas. The Board shall require the Plan to contain
appropriate notes to this effect. The Board may also require the filing of a written
agreement between the applicant and the Municipal Officers covering future deed
and title, dedication, and provision for the cost of grading, development,
equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
F. Except in the case of a phase development plan, failure to complete substantial
construction of the subdivision within five years of the date of approval and
signing of the Plan shall render the Plan null and Void. Upon determining that a
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
subdivision's approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have a
notice placed in the Registry of Deeds to that effect.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article X Revisions to Approved Plans
10.1 PROCEDURE
An applicant for a revision to a previously approved plan shall, at least fourteen days
prior to a scheduled meeting of the Board, request to be placed on the Board’s agenda. If
the revision involves the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for
preliminary plan approval shall be followed. If the revision involves only modifications
of the approved plan, without the creation of additional lots or dwelling units, the
procedures for final plan approval shall be followed.
10.2 SUBMISSIONS
The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plan, as well as twelve (12) copies of
the proposed revisions. The application shall also include enough supporting information
to allow the Board to make a determination that the proposed revisions meet the
standards of these regulations and the criteria of the statute. The revised plan shall
indicate that it is the revision of a previously approved and recorded plan and shall show
the title of the subdivision and the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the
original plan is recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
10.3 SCOPE OF REVIEW
The Board's scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plan which are
proposed to be changed.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article XI Enforcement
11.1 INSPECTION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
A. At least five days prior to commencing each major phase of construction of required
improvements, the subdivider or builder shall:
1. Notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when he/she
proposes to commence construction of such Improvements, so that the
Municipal Officers can cause inspection to be made to assure that all
municipal specifications and requirements shall be met during the
construction of required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory
completion of improvements and utilities required by the Board.
2. Show proof of a signed agreement between the subdivider and a Licensed
Civil Engineer that the Engineer will accept responsibility for on-site
inspection and certification that all specifications have been met. Such
agreement will contain a fee schedule and dates for which the agreement is
valid.
B. If the inspecting official finds upon inspection of the improvements that any of the
required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans
and specifications filed by the subdivider, he shall so report in writing to the
Municipal Officers, Planning Board, and the subdivider or builder. The
Municipal Officers shall take any steps necessary to preserve the municipality's
rights.
C. If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it
appears to be necessary or desirable to modify the required improvements, the
Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to approve minor modifications due to,
unforeseen circumstances such as encountering hidden outcrops of bedrock,
natural springs, etc. The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue any approval
under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of the approval to the
Board. Revised plans shall be filed with the City. For major modifications, such
as relocation of rights-of-way, property boundaries, changes of grade by more
than 1%, etc., the subdivider shall request on-site inspection and approval from
the Review Board.
D. At the close of each summer construction season the City shall, at the expense of
the subdivider, have the site inspected by a qualified individual. By December 1st
of each year during which construction was done on the site, the inspector shall
submit a report to the Board based on that inspection, addressing whether storm water
and erosion control measures (both temporary and permanent) are in place, are
properly installed, and appear adequate to do the job they were designed for. The
report shall also include a discussion and recommendations on any problems
which were encountered.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
E. Prior to the sale of any lot, the subdivider shall provide the Board with a letter from
a Registered Land Surveyor, stating that all monumentation shown on the plan
has been installed.
F. The subdivider or builder shall be required to maintain all improvements and
provide for snow removal on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the
improvements by the municipality.
11.2 VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
A. No plan of a division of land within the municipality which would constitute a
subdivision shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a Final Plan has been
approved by the Board in accordance with these regulations.
B. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or agree to
convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved by the Board and
recorded in the Registry Deeds.
C. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or agree to
convey any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown on the Final Plan
as a separate lot.
D. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who conveys, offers or agrees to
convey any land in a subdivision which has not been approved as required by
these regulations shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100, and not more
than $2500 for each such conveyance, offering or agreement. The Municipality
may institute proceedings to enjoin the violation of this section, and may collect
attorneys' fees and court costs if it is the prevailing party.
E. No public utility, water district, sanitary district and/or utility company of any kind
shall serve any lot in a subdivision for which a Final Plan has not been approved
by the Board.
F. Development of a subdivision without Board approval shall be a violation of law.
Development includes grading or construction of roads, grading of land or lots, or
construction of buildings which require a Final Plan approved as provided in these
regulations and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
G. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed before the street
upon which the lot fronts is completed in accordance with these regulations up to
and including the entire frontage of the lot. No unit in a multi-family
development shall be occupied before the street upon which the unit is accessed is
completed in accordance with these regulations.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article XII General Standards
In reviewing applications for a subdivision, the Board shall consider the following general
standards and make findings that each has been met prior to the approval of a Final Plan. In all
instances the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant.
12.1 CONFORMANCE WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
All proposed subdivisions shall be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan or policy
statement of the municipality and with the provisions of all pertinent state and local codes
and ordinances.
12.2 RETENTION OF OPEN SPACES AND NATURAL OR HISTORIC FEATURES
A. If the proposed subdivision contains any identified historical or archaeological sites,
or any areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan or by the Maine Critical Areas
Program as rare and irreplaceable natural areas, these areas shall be included in
the open space, and suitably protected by appropriate covenants and management
plans.
B. Any public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body shall be maintained by
means of easements or rights-of-way, or should be included in the open space,
with provisions made for continued public access.
12.3 LAND NOT SUITABLE FOR DEVELOPMENT
The following lands shall not be included in the calculations of lot area for the purpose of
meeting the requirements of the Minimum Lot Size Law.
A. Land which is situated below the normal high water mark of any water body.
B. Land which is located within the 100 year frequency floodplain as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, Flood Insurance Administration, unless the subdivider
shows proof though the submittal of materials prepared by a Registered Land
Surveyor which show that the property in question lies at least two (2) feet above
the 100 year flood level. The elevation of filled or made land shall not be
considered.
C. Land which is part of a right-of-way, or easement, including utility easements.
D. Land that has been created by filling or draining a pond of or wetland.
E. Wetlands.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
12.5 LOTS
A. All lots shall meet the minimum requirements of the Land Use Ordinance for the
zoning district in which they are located. The lot configuration should be designed
to maximize access to solar energy on building sites with suitable orientation.
B. Lot configuration and area shall be designed to provide for adequate off-street
parking and service facilities based upon the type of development contemplated.
Wherever possible, parking areas lots shall be laid out to coincide with building
locations to maximize solar energy gain.
C. Lots with multiple frontages shall be avoided wherever possible. When lots do have
frontage on two or more roads, the plan, and deed restrictions shall indicate
vehicular access on the less traveled way. See Ellsworth Code of Ordinances,
Article 9 – Street Design and Construction Standards 910.3.
D. Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the street.
E. The subdivision of tracts into parcels with more than twice the required minimum
lot size shall be laid out in such a manner as either to provide for or preclude
future resubdivision. Where public utilities could be extended to the subdivision
in the foreseeable future, the subdivision shall be designed to accommodate the
extensions of utilities.
F. If a lot on one side of a stream, tidal water, road, utility easement or wetland fails to
meet the minimum requirements for lot size, it may not be combined with a lot on
the other side of the stream, tidal water, or road to meet the minimum lot size.
G. The ratio of lot length to width shall not be more than three to one. Flag lots and
other odd shaped lots in which narrow strips are joined to other parcels in order to
meet minimum lot size requirements are prohibited.
H. Lots shall be numbered in such a manner as to facilitate mail delivery. Even
numbers shall be assigned to lots on one side of the street, and odd numbers on
the opposite side. Where the proposed subdivision contains the extension of an
existing street or street approved by the Board, but not yet constructed, the lot
numbers shall correspond with the existing lot numbers. The lot numbering shall
be reviewed by the Postmaster and his comments considered by the Board.
I. Where a major subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed State-owned
street, permits must be obtained from the Maine Department of Transportation for
entrance/driveway. This requirement shall be noted on the Plan and in the deed of
any lot with frontage on the State-owned street.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
12.6 UTILITIES
A. Utilities, with the exception of electric, telephone and television cable, shall be
installed underground except as otherwise approved by the Board.
B. Underground utilities shall be installed prior to the installation of the final gravel
base of the road.
C. The size, type and location of street lights, electric and gas lines, telephone, and
other utilities shall be shown on the plan and approved by the Board.
12.7 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
The following improvements are required for all subdivisions unless waived by the Board
in accordance with provisions of these regulations.
A. Monuments
1. Stone monuments shall be set at all street intersections and points of
curvature or minimum 4’ rebar, but no further than 750 feet apart along
street lines without curves or intersections.
2. Stone monuments shall be set at all corners and angle points of the
subdivision boundaries where the interior angle of the subdivision
boundaries is 135 degrees or less or minimum 4’ rebar.
3. Stone monuments shall be a minimum of four inches square at the top and
four feet in length or minimum 4’ rebar , and set in the ground at final
grade level. After they are set, drill holes, ½ inch deep shall locate the
point or points described above.
4. All other subdivision boundary corners and angle points, as well as all lot
boundary corners and angle points shall be marked by suitable
monumentation.
B. Water Supply
1. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point to a
water line must connect to the public water system.
a. The subdivider shall provide a written statement from the
servicing water department or district that adequate water for both
domestic and fire fighting purposes can be provided without
placing an undue burden on the source, treatment facilities or
distribution system involved. The subdivider shall be responsible
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
for paying the costs of system improvements necessary to serve the
subdivision.
b. The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and
service connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing by
the Water Department and the Fire Chief.
2. When the location of a subdivision does not allow for a financially
reasonable connection to a public water system, the Board may allow the
use of individual wells or a private community water system.
C. Sewage Disposal
1. Public System
a. Any proposed subdivision located within 200’ at its closest point to a
sewer line must connect to the public sewer system.
b. A sanitary sewer system shall be installed at the expense of the
subdivider when there is a public sanitary sewer line located within 200
feet of the proposed subdivision at its nearest point. The Sewer
Department shall certify that providing service to the proposed
subdivision is within the capacity of the system's collection and
treatment system.
2. Private Systems
a. The developer shall submit evidence of soil suitability for
subsurface sewage disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site
Evaluator or Soil Scientist in full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules. In addition, on lots in which the limiting factor
has been identified as being within 24 inches of the surface, a
second site with suitable soils shall be shown as a reserve area for
future replacement of the disposal area. The reserve area shall be
shown on the plan and restricted so as not to be built upon.
b. In no instance shall a disposal area be permitted on soils or on a lot
which requires a New System Variance from the Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules.
D. Surface Drainage per the Ellsworth Code of Ordinance – Chapter 56, Article 10
Stormwater Management, Design and Construction Standards.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
12. 8 LAND FEATURES
A. Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be removed from
the site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas lots, and building
excavations.
B. Except for normal thinning, landscaping, and cutting trees to provide to direct
sunlight, existing vegetation shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion and to
minimize storm water runoff.
C. To prevent soil erosion in shoreline areas, tree cutting in the strip extending one
hundred feet inland from the normal high water mark of any waterbody shall be
limited in accordance with Article 10, Section 1, Subsection C.11.
12.9 CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS
A. Purpose.
The purpose of these provisions is to allow for innovative concepts of housing
development where maximum variations of design may be allowed, provided that
the net residential density shall be no greater than is permitted in the Zoning
District in which the development is proposed. To this end, the layout, and
dimensional requirements of the Land Use Ordinance may be altered without
restriction except height limitations.
B. Basic Requirements
1. All the requirements and standards of these regulations, except those
dealing with lot layout and dimensions shall be met.
2. The minimum area of land in a cluster development shall be ten acres,
except where there is public water and sewer.
3. The plan shall indicate the location of all proposed roads, structures,
parking lots, footpaths and common open space.
4. No building shall be constructed on soil types classified by the S.C.S. as
being poorly or very poorly drained.
5. Where a cluster development abuts a waterbody, a portion of the
shoreline, as well as reasonable access to it, shall be part of the common
land.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
6. In cluster developments with individual lot sizes of 20,000 sq.ft. or less,
all dwelling units shall be connected to a common water supply and
distribution system, either public or private.
7. In cluster developments with individual lot sizes of 20,000 sq.ft. or less,
all dwelling units shall be connected to a public sewer system or to a
central collection and treatment system.
8. Buildings shall be oriented with respect to scenic vistas, natural
landscape features, topography, south-facing slopes, and natural drainage
areas, in accordance with an overall plan for site development and
landscaping.
12.10 DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE OF COMMON OPEN SPACE AND
SERVICES
A. The developer or subdivider shall be responsible for its maintenance until
development sufficient to support the association has taken place.
B. The by-laws of the proposed Homeowners Association shall specify
maintenance responsibilities and shall be submitted to the Board prior to Final
Plan approval.
C. Covenants for mandatory membership in the Homeowners Association setting
forth the owner’s rights, interests, and privileges in the association and the
common property, shall be reviewed by the Board and included in the deed for
each lot or dwelling.
12.11 CONSTRUCTION IN FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
When any part of a subdivision is located in a special Flood Hazard Area as identified by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the plan shall indicate that all principal
structures on lots in the subdivision shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including
the basement, at least one foot above the 100-year flood elevation. Such a restriction shall
be included in the deed to any lot which is included or partially included in the flood
hazard area.
12.12 IMPACT ON GROUND WATER
A. When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, the assessment shall contain at least
the following information:
1. A map showing the basic soils types.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
2. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the
subdivision.
3. Drainage conditions throughout the subdivision.
4. Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the
subdivision or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
5. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the subdivision on groundwater
resources. In the case of residential developments, the evaluation shall, at
a minimum, include a projection of post development nitrate-nitrogen
concentrations at any wells within the subdivision, at the subdivision
boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination
sources, whichever is a shorter distance. For subdivisions within the
watershed of a lake, projections of the subdivision's impact on
groundwater phosphate concentrations shall also be provided.
6. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and drinking water wells within the subdivision and within 200
feet of the subdivision boundaries.
B. Projections of groundwater quality shall be based on the assumption of drought
conditions (assuming 60% of annual average precipitation).
C. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the groundwater to
more than one half of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. No subdivision
shall increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water to more than
the Secondary Drinking Water Standards.
D. If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the Primary Drinking Water
Standards, and the subdivision is to be served by on-site groundwater supplies, the
applicant shall demonstrate how water quality will be improved or treated.
E. If groundwater contains contaminants in excess of the Secondary Drinking Water
Standards, the subdivision shall not cause the concentration of the parameters, in
question to exceed 150% of the ambient concentration.
F. Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be
constructed as shown on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction
standards for drinking water wells are recommended in the assessment, those
standards shall be included as a note on the Final Plan, and as restrictions in the
deeds to the affected lots.
12.13 ACCESS CONTROL AND TRAFFIC IMPACTS
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
A. General
Provisions shall be made for vehicular access to the subdivision and circulation
within the subdivision in such a manner as to safeguard against hazards to traffic
and pedestrians in existing streets and within the subdivision, to avoid traffic
congestion on any accessways and to provide safe and convenient circulation on
public streets and within the subdivision. More specifically, access and circulation
shall conform to the Ellsworth Code of Ordinance – Chapter 56, Article 9 –
Street Design and Construction Standards.
Article XIII Street and Storm Drainage Design and Construction Standards
13.1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. The Board shall not approve any subdivision plan unless proposed streets and
storm water management systems are designed in accordance with Chapter 56
Article 9 – Street Design and Construction Standards and Article 10 -
(Stormwater Managements, Design, and Construction Standards. Approval of the
Final Plan by the Board, shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence of
acceptance by the municipality of any street or easement.
C. Where the subdivision streets are to remain private roads, the following words shall
appear on the recorded plan & within the deed.
"All roads in this subdivision shall remain private roads to be maintained by the
developer or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or maintained by the City of
Ellsworth even if they meet the city street design & construction standards.”
13.7 ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS
A. Erosion Control. The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation
control plan shall be implemented during the site preparation, construction, and
clean-up stages.
B. Cleanup. Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct
a thorough clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right-ofway.
If on-site disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed, the site shall be
indicated on the plan, and be suitably covered with fill and topsoil, lined,
fertilized, and seeded.
C. Street Names, Signs and Lighting. Streets which join and are in alignment with
streets of abutting or neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Names of
new streets shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
existing streets within the Municipality, and shall be subject to the approval of the
City Assessor’s Office. No street name shall be the common given name of a
person. The developer shall reimburse the Municipality for the costs of installing
street names, traffic safety and control signs. Street lighting shall be installed as
approved by the Board.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
Article XIV Performance Guarantees
TYPES OF GUARANTEES
With submittal of the application for Final Plan approval, the subdivider shall provide
one of the following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total
construction costs of all required improvements, taking into account the time-span of the
construction. Performance Guarantees shall be required only when public utilities are
used. (Am 4/03)
A. Either a certified check payable to the City or a savings account or certificate of
deposit naming the Town as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account;
B. A performance bond payable to the City issued by a surety company, approved by
the Municipal Officer, or City Manager;
C. An irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution establishing funding for
the construction of the subdivision, from which the City may draw if construction
is inadequate, approved by the Municipal Officers, or City Manager; or
D. An offer of conditional approval limiting the number of units built or lots sold until
all required improvements have been constructed.
The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by
the Board with the advice of the Road Supervisor, Municipal Officers, and/or
`Town Attorney.
14.2 CONTENTS OF GUARANTEE
The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost estimates for each
major phase of construction taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections of
each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the performance
guarantee to the developer, and a date after which the developer will be in default and the
City shall have access to the funds to finish construction.
14.3 ESCROW ACCOUNT
A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a
certified check made out to the municipality, the direct deposit into a savings account, or
the purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the subdivider, the
municipality shall be named as owner or co-owner, and the consent of the municipality
shall be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account shall be
returned to the subdivider unless the municipality has found it necessary to draw on the
account, in which case the interest earned shall be proportionately divided between the
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
amount returned to the subdivider and the amount withdrawn to complete the required
improvements.
14.4 PERFORMANCE BOND
A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for release of the
bond or portions of the bond to the subdivider, and the procedures for collection by the
municipality. The bond documents shall specifically reference the subdivision for which
approval is sought.
14.5 LETTER OF CREDIT
An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institutions shall indicate that
funds have been set aside for the construction of the subdivision and may not be used for
any other project or loan.
14.6 CONDITIONAL AGREEMENT
The Board, at its discretion may provide for the subdivider to enter into a binding
agreement with the municipality in lieu of the other financial performance guarantees.
Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the Final Plan on the condition that no
more than four lots may be sold or built upon until either:
A. It is certified by the Board or its agent, that all of the required improvements have
been installed in accordance with these regulations and the regulations of the
appropriate utilities; or
B. A performance guarantee, acceptable to the municipality, is submitted in an
amount necessary to cover the completion of the required improvements at an
amount adjusted for inflation and prorated for the portions of the required
improvements already installed.
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be on the Final Plan which is
recorded at the Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the
procedures for release of the performance guarantees contained in Section 13.8.
14.7 PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT
The Board may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in separate and distinct
phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots abutting that
section of the proposed subdivision street which is covered by a performance guarantee.
When development is phased, road construction shall commence from an existing public
way. Final approval of lots in subsequent phases shall be given only upon satisfactory
completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
14.8 RELEASE OF GUARANTEE
Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Board shall determine to
its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the Registered Civil Engineer, the Code
Enforcement Officer, and other agencies and departments involved, that the proposed
improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion
of the improvements for which the release is requested.
14.9 DEFAULT
If, upon inspection, the Registered Civil Engineer or the Code Enforcement Officer finds
that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the
plans and specifications filed as part of the application, he/she shall so report in writing to
the Municipal Officers, the Board, and the subdivider or builder. The Municipal Officers
shall take any steps necessary to preserve the City's rights.
14.10 IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEE
Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all improvements required by Section 11.7
of these regulations and for the construction of the streets.
Article XV Waivers
15.1 WAIVERS AUTHORIZED
Where the Board makes written findings of fact that there are special circumstances of a
particular lot proposed to be subdivided, it may waive portions of the submission
requirements, unless otherwise indicated in the regulations, provided the applicant has
demonstrated that the performance standards of these regulations and the criteria of the
subdivision statute have been or will be met, the public health, safety, and welfare are
protected, and provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, the Land use ordinance, or these regulations.
15.2 FINDING OF FACTS
Where the Board makes written findings of fact that due to special circumstances of a
particular lot proposed to be subdivided, the provision of certain required improvements
is not requisite to provide for the public health, safety or welfare, or is inappropriate
because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities adjacent to or in proximity of the
proposed subdivision, it may waive the requirement for such improvements, subject to
appropriate conditions provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent
and purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, the Land use ordinance, or these regulations,
and further provided the performance standards of these regulations and the criteria of the
subdivision statute have been or will be met by the proposed subdivision.
City of Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance
Amended May 16, 2011
15.3 CONDITIONS
When granting waivers to any of these regulations in accordance with Sections 14.1 and
14.2, the Board shall set conditions so the purposes of these regulations are met.
15.4 WAIVERS TO BE SHOWN ON FINAL PLAN
When the Board grants a waiver to any of the improvements required by these
regulations, the Final Plan, to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, shall indicate the
waivers granted and the date on which they were granted.
Article XVI Appeals
16. 1 An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board under these regulations to
Hancock County Superior Court, within thirty days.


CHAPTER 31
RECREATION COMMISSION
SECTION 1. There is hereby created a Recreation Commission consisting of nine (9) members, eight (8) of
who are regular members and one of who is an alternate member1. Five (5) of the members of the initial
Commission shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and three (3) of the members of the initial
Commission shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter all terms of office of the Commissioners
shall be two (2) years.
SECTION 2. All members of the commission shall be residents of the City of Ellsworth and at least one
member of the Commission shall be appointed from the membership of the Ellsworth City Council.
SECTION 3. The duties of the Recreation Commission are as follows:
(1) To plan, promote, organize and supervise a comprehensive municipal recreation program and
administer the same in the interest of the entire community.
(2) To review the recreational use of playgrounds, playfields, recreation centers, swimming areas, ball
diamonds, and such other recreation areas and facilities as may be made available to carry out the
City’s recreation program.
(3) Conduct and promote any form of recreation, cultural or social activity that will employ the leisure
time of citizens in a wholesome and constructive manner.
(4) Direct the expenditure of all moneys appropriated by the City Council on all matters concerning
recreation.
(5) To serve as the advisory committee to the City Council on all matters concerning recreation.2
(6) The Recreation Commission may adopt rules and regulations governing the facilities over which
they have jurisdiction. Such rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk.3
SECTION 4. The Recreation Commission shall keep books and records of all it’s doing and shall make an
accounting to the City Council of all money appropriated by the City Council for its use.
SECTION 5. The recreation commission shall annually at the first regular meeting of the City Council after the
annual election in November 1of the each year, submit a report to the City Council of its activities for the prior
year. The City Council may from time to time during the year request interim reports form the recreation
commission.
SECTION 6. The members of the recreation commission shall serve without pay.
Adopted 5/21/73
1 Amended 9/16/96
2 Amended 3/2089
3 Amended 2/11/02
City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 32
Solicitation of
Signatures during
Elections Ordinance
This ordinance was repealed 2/13/2006.

CHAPTER33
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy - ~
c-!C__-!- ·3 t- -b ~ If, . I ~( /' -. J1 17 ~- __, (:/'() YlV{ lz
- .f
._ A~t~st: H~di -Noel Grindle
City Clerk
--
'•
tR4.~ ELLSWORTH
.Business, Leisure, Life.
Adopted: October 16, 2006
Amended with revisions through April 2005
Repealed and replaced May 16, 2016
Effective: July 20, 2016
·.
· .
. ·
•.· ...
-,
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
FOR THE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MA.INE
ENACTED: MAY 16 , 2016
Date
EFFECTIVE: J ULY 20, 2016
Date
CERTIFIED ~di--'l}ful G1'()rrolC(
1gnature
CERTIFIED BY: -1-kiJ /def ~(IJ/J..
Print Name
CITY CT ERK
Title A.ffix Seal
)0.3(e)
Prepared 1/25/1 6 by DACF/JP
... - ••""-~ .· ·I
.·
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS ·
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT ............................. ................................................... 2
II. PER11IT REQUIRED .......................................................................................................... 2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT ........................................................................................... 2
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE ........................................... ........................... 4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS ................................................................................................................. 4
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS .................................... ................. ... ............................ ... 6
VII. CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW .............................. .. .... ..... ........ .............. ........ .. .......... .... 13
VIII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE ..................................................................... ............ 14
IX. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS ......................... 14
X. APPEALS AND VARIANCES ........................................................................................ 15
XI. ENFORCEMENT AND PENAL TIES ............... .... ...... .... ..... ...... ... ... .. ........................ .... .. 1 7
XII. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY ................................................................................ : 18
XIII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES ................................................................... 18
XIV. DEFINITIONS ........................................................... -:: ....... ....... ...... .. ................................ 18
XV. ABROGATION ................... .............................................................................................. 23
·-.
60.3 (e) Rev. 01/16
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the City of Ellsworth, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to
properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the City of Ellsworth, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the City of Ellsworth, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in
all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The City of Ellsworth has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future flood
losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38 MRSA, Section
440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the City of
Ellsworth having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a
Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the City of Ellsworth, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, AE, and VE for the City of Ellsworth, Hancock County,
vfaine, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance
Study - Hancock County, Maine," dated July 20, 2016 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map"
dated July 20, 2016 with panels: 544D, 563D, 564D, 568D, 569D, 588D, 589D, 590D, 591D, 593D,
710D, 726D, 727D, 729D, 731D, 732D, 733D, 734D, 736D, 740D, 741D, 742D, 744D, 751D, 752D,
753D, 754D, 756D, 757D, 758D, 759D, 761D, 762D, 763D, 764D, 766D, 767D, 768D, 769D, 956D, and
957D, derived from the county wide digital Flood Insurance Rate Map entitled "Digital Flood Insurance
Rate Map, Hancock County, Maine," are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIV), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer except as provided in
Article VII. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the
codes and ordinances of the City of Ellsworth, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERl\1IT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include: ·
\. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
2
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including. but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.3. apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zones AE and VE from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Hancock County,
Maine," as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA's Quick-2 model, FEMA 265), including information obtained pursuant to
Article VLK. and IX.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a line
perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
3
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect,
that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81 ~65, as amended), to verify that the flood proofing
methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of .Article III.H.4.;
Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
2. a V-Zone Certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high hazard areas, Zone VE, will
meet the criteria of . .\rticle VI.P.; and other applicable standards in P.Jticle VI;
3. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation
walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
4. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
5. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV -APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the City Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the
same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a
violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be
hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such
hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied
with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
fhe Code Enforcement Officer shall:
4
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of
Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Pennit applications:
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Hancock County,
Maine," as described in Article I.;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not provided, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article VLK.; and Article IX.D., in order to administer Article VI
of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
Article III.H. l .b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program.
c. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course and submit
copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements ofthis Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of the
following Flood Hazard Development Permits, based on the type of development:
1. A two-part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a Elevation
Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect based on the Part I permit construction, "as built", for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P. Following review of the
Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part
II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Pennit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are
new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated
5
but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VI.G. l .a., b., and c. The application for this
permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
For development that requires review and approval as a Conditional Use, as provided for in this
Ordina.11ce, the Flood Hazard Development Permit Application shall be acted upon by the Planning Board
as required in Article VII.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications,
corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of Article X of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation
Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VIII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT ST AND ARDS
All developments in areas of spedal flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components du.ring flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
6
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems· All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and
located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the
system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated portions of
a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.l.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D.
3. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure
·located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K. and shall
include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood eievation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H. l.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D., or
7
a. together with anendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of
Article VI.G. l.
3. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no \veight is supported by its wheels and axles; arid,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four comers of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50
feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each comer of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.l.c.(1) & (2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds. ·.
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H. l. b., such that the
lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H. l .b.; Article
V.B; or Article IX.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H. l .c.
3. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A and AE shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
8
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick discmmect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in Article VI.H.l.
2. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of either Article VI.I.1.a. and b., or Article VI.P.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIV, located within Zones A and
AE, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VLF. & G. above, if all other
requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation; ·
2. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of the
accessory structure;
3. be located outside the floodway;
4. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the
primary structure; and,
5. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroaclunents, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which
is designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments
will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development
shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in .,.\rticle VI.K.3. unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the .
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community; and,
9
b: is consistent with the technical criteria contained in FEMA's guidelines and standards for
flood risk analysis and mapping.
3. In Zones AE and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of any
structure in Zones A and AE that meets the development standards of Article VI, including the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or Hand is elevated on posts, columns, piers,
piles, "stilts," or crawl spaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not ·"basements" as defined in Article XIV;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A, AE, and VE shall
be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
10
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of
this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located
within:
1. Zones A, AE, and VE shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
0. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones A, AE, and VE, in and over water and seaward of the mean high tide if
the following requirements are met: ·
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations;
and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
P. Coastal Floodplains -
1. All new construction located within Zones AE and VE shall be located landward of the reach of
mean high tide except as provided in Article VI.P.6.
2. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure located within Zone VE shall:
a. be elevated on posts or columns such that:
( 1) the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the
pilings or columns) is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation;
11
(2) the pile or column foundation and the elevated portion of the structure attached thereto
is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components; and,
(3) water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading
values used shall be those required by applicable state and local building standards.
b. have the space below the lowest floor:
(1) free of obstructions; or,
(2) constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under
wind and water without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting piles or columns; or,
(3) constructed to enclose less than 300 square feet of area with non-supporting breakaway
walls that have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 or more than 20
pounds per square foot.
c. require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
(1) develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
which must meet or exceed the technical criteria contained in the Coastal Construction
Manual, (FEMA-55); and,
(2) certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the criteria of Article VI.P.2.
3. The use of fill for structural support in Zone VE is prohibited.
4. Human alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE is prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that such
alterations will not increase potential flood damage.
5. The area below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking vehicles, building access, and
storage.
6. Conditional Use - Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located seaward of mean high tide and
shall be exempt from the elevation requirement in Article VI.G. only if permitted as a Conditional
Use following review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided in Article VII, and if all the
following requirements and those of Article VI.A., VLK., and VI.L. are met:
a. The conditional use shall be limited to low value structures such as metal or wood sheds 200
square feet or less and shall not exceed more than one story.
12
b. The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building
components.
c. The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris impact forces affecting nearby buildings.
d. The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be used for human habitation.
e. Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must be anchored and either elevated or
floodproofed to one foot above the base flood elevation.
f. All electrical outlets shall be ground fault interrupt type. The electrical service disconnect shall
be located on shore above the base flood eievation and when possible outside the Special Flood
Hazard Area.
ARTICLE VII - CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional uses provided for in this
Ordinance. The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all
applications for conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer that a
Conditional Use Permit is required shall file an application for the permit with the Planning Board.
A. Review Procedure for a Conditional Use Flood Hazard Development Permit
1. The Flood Hazard Development Permit Application with additional information attached
addressing how each of the conditional use criteria specified in the Ordinance will be satisfied,
may serve as the permit application for the Conditional Use Permit.
2. Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
application within thirty days of their receipt of the application.
3. If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant requirements of the
ordinance, the Planning Board must approve the application or approve with conditions within 45
days of the date of the public hearing.
4. A Conditional Use Permit issued under the provisions ofthis Ordinance shall expire if the work
or change involved is not commenced within 180 days of the issuance of the permit by the
Planning Board.
5. The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing over the signature of the
Chairman of the Planning Board that flood insurance is not available for structures located
entirely over water or seaward of mean high tide.
B. Expansion of Conditional Uses
13
1. No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or enlarged without a permit issued
under this section if that building or use was established or constructed under a previously issued
Conditional Use Permit or if it is a building or use which would require a Conditional Use Permit
if being newly-established or constructed under this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VIII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be ~ccupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer: .
1. an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional -engineer,
or architect, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P and,
2. for structures in Zone VE, certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction used are in compliance with Article VI.P.2.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the required certificate(s) and the applicant's written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms to the provisions of this ordinance, shall issue
a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE IX - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law, local ordinances or regulations, and all projects on 5 or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided in order to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway
data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
14
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are
to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included
in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE X - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the City of Ellsworth may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws
or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this
sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
15
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a detem1ination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance as is deemed necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article X and Article VLK. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Va..ria..11ces may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrntive and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party
within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
16
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE XI-ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon identifying a violation, submit
a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a flood
insurance denial. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation
to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
17
ARTICLE XII - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XIII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE XIV - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law, and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; 11 shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
Adjacent Grade - the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I ofthis
Ordinance.
Base Flood - a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year,
commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - area of a building that includes a floor that is subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall - a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through
its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - a document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer- a person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including
~xceptions in Section 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable
omprehensive planning and land use laws.
18
I
Conditional Use - a use that, because of its potential impact on surrounding areas and structures, is
permitted only upon review and approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Article VII.
Containment Wall - wall used to convey or direct storm water or sanitary water from the initial source to
the final destination.
Development - a marunade change to improved or unimproved real estate. This includes, but is not
limited to, buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials.
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - see Flood Insurance Rate Map
Elevated Building - a non-basement building that is:
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones A or AE, so that the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of
a building in Zone VE, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or"stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored to not impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to one
foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones A or AE, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L. In the case of Zone VE, Elevated Building also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Article VI.P.2.b.(3).
Elevation Certificate - an official fom1 (FEMA Form 81-31, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Pro gram; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
19
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph
a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance
Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Floodprone Area - land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of a..11 overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing' flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes,
health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and
erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
"'Jrevention and reduction.
Flood proofing - any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - the lines marking the limits of flood ways on federal, state, and local
floodplain maps.
Free board - a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain
management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge
openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, which could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and flood way conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or
carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department
oflnterior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the National Register;
20
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Loca!!y Established Datum - for purposes of this ordi..11ance, a.."1. elevation established for a specific site to
which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NA VD) or any other
established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be
practically used.
Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described in Article
VI.L. of this Ordinance.
Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level-when related to the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J.,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - the national vertical datum, a standard established in
1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD is based upon mean sea
level in 1929 and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL )".
21
. New Construction - structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective
date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)- means the national datum whose standard was established in
1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) for all new
Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum used by other North American countries
such as Canada and Mexico and was established to replace NGVD because of constant movement of the
earths crust, glacial rebound, and subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot, and
b. when not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be the
channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width
of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, ,brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
:nclude the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
Jwelling units or not pa.rt of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or
22
modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost ofrestoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. ·
Substantial Improvement - means any rec.onstructiori., rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the tenns of a floodplain management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE XV-ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
60.3 (e) Rev. 01/16
Prepared by DACF/JP
23
1
CHAPTER 34
PERSONNEL ORDINANCE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted 04/20/1998
Amended 09/08/2003
Repealed 07/21/2008
New Ordinance Adopted 07/21/2008
Effective 08/22/2008
Amended 09/15/2008
Amended 03/16/2009
Amended 08/17/2009
Amended 06/20/2011
Amended 08/21/2017
2
PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE
The City of Ellsworth Personnel Ordinance is hereby set forth to establish the current policies and
procedures applicable to the City's employees. The Personnel Ordinance does not constitute an
employment contract between the City and any employee.
These rules set forth the principles and procedures which will give reasonable assurance to the City of
Ellsworth and its employees that personnel matters will be dealt with on an equitable basis and that the
citizens of the City of Ellsworth may derive the benefits and advantages which can be expected to result
from a competent staff of city employees.
These rules apply to all employees unless otherwise noted. Volunteers shall be subject to only those
provisions that are specifically stated to include them, if any.
CHAPTER I - Employment Philosophy
1. Employment in the City government shall be based on merit and free of personal political
consideration.
2. Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to
promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the municipal government.
3. Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated for on a
uniform scale.
4. Efforts shall be made to maintain morale by fair administration of this ordinance and by consideration
of the rights and interests of the employees, consistent with the best interests of the public and the City.
5. Continuity of employment shall be subject to satisfactory performance of work, availability of funds
and appropriate employee conduct.
6. Management Rights: The City retains the right to determine working hours, salaries, size of its
employment force and the formulation of ordinance related to personnel matters. In the case of any
unionized department, the City retains these rights through the negotiation of a contract with the union.
CHAPTER II - Selection
Section 1. Recruitment
The City of Ellsworth shall employ the best-qualified persons who are available at the salary levels
established for City employment. The City hiring authority, with the cooperation of department heads,
shall seek out the most desirable employees for vacant positions. Except as provided in Section 2 below,
within the limits of time during which a position must be filled, there shall be as wide a search for
qualified candidates as is practicable.
The character of an employment search will vary from position to position, but may include, but not
limited to; advertising, departmental notices, open competitive examination, and contact with State and
other employment offices.
Section 2. Preference
First preference in filling any vacancy shall be given to the promotion or transfer of present employees
having the qualifications for the vacant position. It is recognized, however, that in order to meet specific
requirements for a position, it may be necessary to hire a non-employee to fill the vacancy. Such a
3
decision, however, shall only be made after a careful review of the qualifications and/or training
requirements of present City employees who apply for the position. In cases where residents of The City
of Ellsworth and non-residents are equally qualified for particular vacant positions, residents shall receive
first consideration in filling such vacancies.
Section 3. Applications
The employment application form shall be as established by the City Manager, in accordance with all
applicable municipal, state and federal laws. Such forms must be signed by the applicant and may require
whatever information is deemed necessary by the Manager for the evaluation of all applicants. The City
of Ellsworth relies upon the accuracy of information contained in the employment application, as well as
the accuracy of other data presented throughout the hiring process and employment. Any willful
misrepresentations, falsifications, or material omissions in any of this information or data may result in
exclusion of the individual from further consideration for employment or, if the person has been hired,
termination of employment
Section 4. Interviews
The hiring authority or his designee may request a personal interview with one or more applicants for any
position to assist in the determination of the best candidate for employment.
Section 5. Recommendations
When the hiring authority has designated another person(s) to evaluate applications and/or conduct
interviews, that designee (s) shall submit in writing a list of names of qualified candidates with a brief
evaluation report of each and a recommendation for appointment to the vacant position. In all cases, the
hiring authority shall have the final decision.
Section 6. Equal Employment Opportunity
The City of Ellsworth provides equal employment opportunity to all applicants and employees. This
policy applies to all employment-related decisions, including recruiting, hiring, assigning, supervising,
training, upgrading, transfer, compensation, benefits, discipline, discharge, promotion, and education.
The City of Ellsworth shall not discriminate in employment opportunities or practices against any
individual with regard to race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, political affiliation, sex, marital
status, age, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, or any other status protected by law.
The City of Ellsworth will make reasonable accommodations for applicants and qualified individuals with
known disabilities unless doing so would result in an undue hardship.
Any employees with questions or concerns about any type of discrimination in the workplace are
encouraged to bring these issues to the attention of their immediate supervisor, Department Head or the
City Manager. Employees can raise concerns and make reports without fear of reprisal. Anyone found to
be engaging in any type of unlawful discrimination will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment.
Section 7. Hiring of Relatives
It is the City’s practice to hire and promote on the basis of an individual’s merit, knowledge, skills and
abilities. The employment of relatives in the same area of an organization may cause serious conflicts
and problems with favoritism and employee morale. For that reason, except as may be authorized in
certain circumstances by the City Manager, such as, circumstances requiring emergency temporary
staffing, employment of relatives within the same department or division where one relative would hire,
4
supervise, discipline, conduct performance reviews or set any other conditions of employment for another
relative is prohibited. These restrictions are also applicable when assigning, transferring or promoting an
employee.
For the purposes of this ordinance, relative includes the following: any person who is related by blood or
marriage, or whose relationship with the employee is similar to that of persons who are related by blood
or marriage such as domestic partners, adopted children, and foster children.
Employees who marry or establish a close personal relationship during employment can continue in their
current positions as long as an employment relationship with one relative supervising the other and/or
establishing the conditions of employment is not created through marriage, reorganization, or other
circumstance. Employees who become subject to the provisions of this ordinance must inform their
supervisor or Department Head as soon as practical. If such a supervisory relationship does occur
between relatives, one of the employees will either be required to transfer to another open position for
which that person is qualified or one of the employees will be required to resign his/her employment with
the City within a period of no more than 30 days from the date on which the situation arose. If neither
employee is willing to resign, the City has the right to terminate either employee at its discretion.
In other cases where a conflict or the potential for conflict arises, even if there is no supervisory
relationship involved, the parties may be separated by reassignment or terminated from employment.
This section shall not apply to 1the Paid On Call Volunteer Firefighter, Seasonal, and Temporary
Employees.
CHAPTER III - General Rules
Section 1. Responsibility
The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the responsibility for administration of the personnel
program consistent with the Personnel Ordinance.
Section 2. Hiring Authority
Oversight of individual employees shall be the responsibility of the hiring authority as provided in the
Ellsworth City Charter. The hiring authority is that person(s) specifically authorized by the City Charter
to hire or appoint the employee.
Section 3. Status
It is the intent of City of Ellsworth to clarify the definitions of employment classifications so that
employees understand their employment status and benefit eligibility. These classifications do not
guarantee employment for any specified period of time.
Personnel status is the category of employment into which an employee falls based upon the method of
hire and/or the nature of tenure. The following are the categories of personnel status and their definitions:
Regular Employee:
Has satisfactorily completed the probationary period (only full-time and part-time employees may
attain regular status).
1 Amended August 17, 2009
5
Probationary Employee:
Hired for an initial/promotional/transferal trial period of six months which may be extended to a
maximum of twelve (12) months upon request of the immediate supervisor and/or the decision of
the City Manager. During the probationary period the employee may be removed or demoted at
any time with or without cause. Such removals or demotions shall not be subject to review or
appeal.
Full-time Employee:
Hired to a position requiring regularly scheduled employment for at least thirty-five (35) hours
per week.
Part-time Employee:
a. Regular Part Time Employee:
Hired to a position requiring regularly scheduled employment for periods of less than
thirty-five (35) hours per week.
b. Intermittent Employee:
Hired to a position, which calls for non-scheduled irregular hours of employment.
(Example: reserve police officer)
c. On-Call Intermittent:
Hired to a position, which may be scheduled regularly or irregularly, but calls for
intermittent work as needed and is compensated only on a per call basis. (Example: call
fire fighter)
d. Seasonal Employee:
Hired to a position established for less than full-year periods and which is expected to be
of a regularly recurring nature.
e. Temporary Employee:
Hired for work not to exceed one hundred and eighty (180) 2consecutive calendar days or
for a particular project with a specified duration of time.
f. Interim Employee:
Hired to a position at the administrative level for the period of time necessary to recruit
and appoint a person to fill the vacant position or in the temporary absence of the
employee regularly holding the position if the absence is of thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days duration or longer.
Any regular full time employee who receives a promotion or a transfer shall be required to serve another
probationary period.
2 Amended March 16, 2009
6
Section 4. Classification
To aid in the determination of applicability of the state and federal wage and hour laws each position
and/or title within the City government shall be categorized as either exempt or non-exempt. Such
classification governs applicability of overtime provisions to the position. It will be the responsibility of
the City Manager, in conjunction with the preparation of the position descriptions, to determine exempt or
non-exempt status.
Section 5. Position Descriptions
Job specifications for each position in the City employment shall be developed by the hiring authority and
shall be periodically updated. These job descriptions shall set forth the following information:
- Job title
- Classification
- Qualifications
- Expected hours
- Responsible to and evaluated by
- Responsibilities
- Duties
Section 6. Evaluation
An evaluation for purposes of this ordinance is the examination and review of job performance for
purposes of determining continuation of employment, promotion, demotion or salary adjustment.
All employees shall be evaluated annually no matter what the status. Employees shall be evaluated at the
completion of the initial probationary period and once each year thereafter.
A written evaluation shall be prepared by the immediate supervisor in a manner, which the department
head shall prescribe. Evaluations shall be conducted by the immediate supervisor in a manner which the
supervisor shall prescribe.
Employees shall be afforded the opportunity to review and discuss their written evaluation with their
immediate supervisor and shall sign their evaluation as proof of discussion and understanding although
they may not necessarily agree with the evaluation. An employee may prepare a written response to any
item included in the evaluation. This response shall be submitted to the evaluator and attached to and
become part of the evaluation. A copy of the complete evaluation will be provided for the employee and
placed in his/her personnel file.
Section 7. Personnel Files
Personnel files are maintained by the City of Ellsworth. In so far as permitted and/or required by law, all
personnel records shall be confidential.
During regular business hours an employee may inspect his/her personnel file. Requests to inspect a
personnel file shall be made to the City Manager, or his designee. No personnel file shall be removed
from the Finance Office. An employee may receive a copy of any document contained within their
personnel file upon request.
Section 8.
New Hire Training Requirements: all newly-hired employees shall meet with the Safety Coordinator to
schedule their mandatory training required as a new employee as soon as practicable.10
7
CHAPTER IV - Compensation
Section 1. Salaries & Wages - General
It is the objective of the City of Ellsworth to pay employees on a basis commensurate with salaries and
wages for municipalities of the same approximate size and for comparable private work in the area and
that will attract and retain well-qualified and responsible employees. Classification of a position and
specific duties and responsibilities of a position as set forth in job descriptions shall be major factors in
determining the rate of compensation. A Wage and Salary Schedule shall be prepared and reviewed
annually. New employees will usually be hired at the minimum rate for the position as specified in The
Wage and Salary Schedule except that in circumstances where qualifications and training indicate, a
higher starting rate may be authorized.
In the case of two or more positions and/or titles being held by one employee, the rate of compensation
shall be determined by the job requirements of the combination of positions and not by the number of
positions. In the event of reorganization or reassignment of duties causing the combination of positions to
change, the rate of compensation may be adjusted if necessary or appropriate. In the event of transfers, the
current rate as specified in the Wage and Salary Schedule for the new position shall apply unless a higher
starting rate is indicated and authorized.
Section 2. Overtime
A non-exempt employee shall be compensated at an hourly wage rate and shall be paid at one and onehalf
(1½) times their regular hourly rate for all hours worked over forty (40) hours within the regular
workweek. Paid holidays, paid leave, and bereavement leave shall not be considered as time worked for
the purpose of computing overtime or compensatory time. Law enforcement officers and fire fighters
have different workweeks and have provisions for computing overtime eligibility under the Fair Labor
Standards Act. Overtime must be authorized in advance by the employee’s supervisor. Employees
whose positions are classified as exempt are not eligible to receive overtime pay.
Section 3. Compensatory Time
A non-exempt regular full time employee may be compensated with one (1) hour of compensatory time
for each hour worked in excess of their regularly scheduled workweek up to forty (40) hours and one and
one-half hour (1½) for work in excess of forty hours per week. Such work shall require the prior approval
of the City Manager or designee. Such compensatory time shall be recorded and may be taken at the time
of the employee's choice provided it does not interfere with the operational needs of the department or
office and has been approved by the City Manager or designee. No employee shall be allowed to
accumulate more than one (1) weeks normally scheduled hours of compensatory time3; beyond that, any
overtime will be compensated at time and ½ rates pursuant to the overtime policy. Upon separation of
employment the employee will be compensated for any earned and unused compensatory time.
Section 4. Salary Increases
All employees may be eligible for a merit increase and/or a market adjustment if deserving every 3 years
from their anniversary date. The merit increase amount if eligible will be between 0 and 5%, at the
discretion of the Department Head, and approval of the City Manager for non-exempt employees, and at
the discretion of the City Manager and approval of the Council for exempt employees and or Department
3 Amended 9/15/2008
10 Amended June 20, 2011
8
Heads. Any merit increases for the City Manager will be at the discretion of the Council. Also every 3rd
year from the anniversary date the position in question will be studied to see if a market adjustment is
required. No employee shall receive more than 1 merit raise within a 3 year period, except during the
implementation of this policy. All merit and/or market adjustments are dependent on the financial status
of the City.
Section 5. Expense Reimbursement
1. Mileage/Tolls/Parking – City-owned or rental vehicles provided by the City will be made available to
employees needing to travel on City business. Employees provided the use of a city-owned vehicle or a
vehicle rented to the City will not receive mileage allowances. In the event a rental vehicle is available to
an employee but the employee chooses instead to utilize his/her personal vehicle, mileage reimbursement
will be permitted only up to an amount equal to the cost to the City of the rental vehicle. In the event no
rental vehicle is available and an employee uses his/her personal vehicle, the employee will be reimbursed
for mileage based on the actual mileage necessary. The reimbursement amount is not to exceed the
maximum reimbursement allowed under the IRS regulations, and will be reviewed annually during the
budget process. Use of an employee’s personal vehicle must be previously authorized by the hiring
authority or designee. Tolls and parking fees shall be reimbursed upon submittal of a receipt.
2. Meals/Lodging – Employees shall be entitled to reimbursement for meals in a reasonable amount and
reasonable expenses for lodging provided those expenses are necessitated directly by the performance of
duties as a City employee. Reimbursement applies only to the City employee. The maximum
reimbursement for breakfast is $10.00; the maximum reimbursement for lunch is $15.00; and the
maximum reimbursement for dinner is $20.00. No reimbursements will be made without an itemized
receipt demonstrating the actual amount spent. No expenses for alcoholic beverages will be reimbursed.
All reimbursement requests must receive approval from the employee's supervisor.
3. Telephone - Reimbursement for telephone toll charges incurred in the conduct of City business as long
as such toll calls were not able to have been made during the regular work day and/or on regular business
telephones, shall be made to any employee. Such reimbursements shall be only as authorized by the
employee's supervisor.
5. Training - The City Council believes that both the City and its employees benefit from training and
educational opportunities.
Employees required or approved to attend seminars or training courses may be eligible for expenses
incurred for same. Should such training occur during normal working hours, the employee may also be
eligible for regular salary or wages for the duration of the training. Eligibility for such training expenses
shall be determined by the individual's department head.
Following completion of any seminar or training course, the employee must submit proof of expenses
accompanied by approval of the department head in order that payment may be effected.
An employee may receive an "advance" of expenses provided departmental approval is received and
application for same is made to the City Manager or his/her designee. Any unused portion of the advance
and all coinciding receipts must be turned into the Treasurer's Office within one week after the training
session or seminar.
Upon recommendation of the department head and approval of the hiring authority, employees may take
college level work-related courses or may pursue specialized training relevant to the employee’s position
with the City. The City will reimburse up to 100% of the cost of tuition, fees, books, and materials.
Reimbursement will be made upon successful completion of the course and/or training and maintenance
9
of at least a “C” grade. Prior approval of the hiring authority is required to take courses/training during
the regular workday.
Payment by the City for such courses/training is considered to be a loan to the employee. The employee
will be required to sign a loan agreement for the amount of the loan. An employee voluntarily
terminating employment with the City will be required to reimburse the City for college course/training
expenses previously paid to them as follows:
Within one year of course/training completion 100%
After one year but before two years 75%
After two years but before three years 50%
After three years but before four years 25%
CHAPTER V - Employee Benefits
Eligible employees at the City of Ellsworth are provided a wide range of benefits. A number of the
programs (such as Social Security, workers' compensation, and unemployment insurance) cover all
employees in the manner prescribed by law.
Benefits eligibility is dependent upon a variety of factors, including employee classification. Your
supervisor can identify the programs for which you are eligible.
Part 1. Cafeteria Plan
The purpose of the cafeteria plan for employee benefits is to provide City employees with the opportunity
to select the benefit package that best meets their needs.
Section 1. Cafeteria Plan Regulations
1. Each employee has a certain number of credits based on the years of full time employment with the
City of Ellsworth. Credit levels will increase as of the employee's service date.
2. On the employee's annual date of full time service with the City (anniversary date) each employee shall
select the desired level of employee benefits applicable to their needs with their credits. This selection
may not be changed during the ensuing year except for significant life changes such as births, deaths,
marital situations, or spousal employment situations. Unused credits are not carried forward from year to
year.
3. The following benefits are provided by the City and are not subject to the Cafeteria Plan: holidays,
bereavement leave, jury duty, and military duty. Workers' Compensation, unpaid leaves of absence and
family and medical leave in accordance with the Family and Medical Leave Policy are also outside the
Cafeteria Plan. However leaves taken under these policies may impact Cafeteria Plan benefits. See the
appropriate policy for details.
4. Department Heads that are new hires previously employed by an entity other than the City of Ellsworth
shall be assigned credit levels as delineated in section 2.
5. Regular part time employees who are assigned a regular schedule of at least twenty (20) hours per
week shall be eligible for pro-rated credits based on their regular weekly hours of work divided by forty.
Temporary, seasonal, and intermittent employees shall be ineligible for credits. Employees going from
part time to full time shall accrue credits based on their full time employment anniversary date.
10
6. Partial credits may be used to purchase additional Medical Services Reimbursement, 4up to the
maximum amount available; for example: .25 credits left, employee can purchase $25 of medical services
account.
7. Any employee who wishes to discontinue an allowable benefit may do so at any time upon written
request to the Deputy Treasurer. Any credits expended to secure the discontinued benefit will not be
refunded. The credits may not be reallocated until the employee’s anniversary date.5
Section 2. Credit Accruals
Years of Service Non-Dept. Heads Dept. Heads
Start 8 Credits 15 Credits
After 6 Months 11 Credits
After 1 Year 13 Credits 16 Credits
After 3 Years 15 Credits
After 5 Years 17 Credits 17 Credits
After 10 Years 19 Credits 19 Credits
After 15 Years 21 Credits 21 Credits
After 20 Years 22 Credits 22 Credits
After 25 Years 23 Credits 23 Credits
After 30 Years 24 Credits 24 Credits
After 35 Years 25 Credits 25 Credits
Section 3. Health Insurance
Level 1 -POS Plan-Individual 100% 6 Credits
Family Plan 0%
Level 2 - Employee & Children 100% 8 Credits
Family Plan 50%
Level 3 - Family Plan 100% 11 Credits
Explanation of Benefits and Benefit Limitations:
1. Level 2 - Family Plan 50% means the City will pay 50% of the difference in cost between the
Individual Plan and the Family Plan.
2. Family Plan is for legally married spouses or domestic partners as defined by the insurance policy.
Section 4. Medical Services Account
Level 1 $200 City Contribution 1 Credit
Level 2 $300 City Contribution 2 Credits
Level 3 $400 City Contribution 3 Credits
Level 4 $500 City Contribution 4 Credits
Level 5 $600 City Contribution 5 Credits
4 Amended August 17, 2009
5 Added March 16, 2009
11
Explanation of Benefits and Benefit Limitations:
1. The City contribution to the medical services account may be used to reimburse the employee for
medical, dental, and optical service costs not covered by the City's health insurance plan. This would
include reimbursement for deductibles and co-shares under health insurance plans, prescribed eyeglasses,
dental/orthodontic treatments, services, and hardware, medical equipment prescribed by a physician, but
not covered by health insurance. The account can also be used to pay for the employee's share of
psychiatric, counseling or other mental health services.
2. The medical services account cannot be used to reimburse for travel or travel related medical expenses
(hotels, mileage, meals, tolls, parking, airline tickets, etc.). The account can be used to reimburse for
prescription drugs, but not for non-prescribed medical, dental, or optical equipment. The account cannot
be used to pay the employee's share of health insurance premium.
3. The funds in the medical services account are not cumulative. The costs for which reimbursement is
sought have to have been incurred prior to the employee's anniversary date. Any funds remaining shall
revert to the City.
Section 5. Fitness Club Memberships
Level 1 $200 City Contribution 1 Credit
Level 2 $300 City Contribution 2 Credits
Level 3 $400 City Contribution 3 Credits
Section 6. Life Insurance
Level 1 - 1 X Salary .25 Credits
Level 2 - 2 X Salary .50 Credits
Level 3 - 3 X Salary .75 Credits
Explanation of Benefits and Benefit Limitations:
1. Employees enrolled in the City's health insurance program will automatically be covered by a life
insurance policy equal to one time's salary.
Section 7. Income Protection Plan (short-term disability)
Level 1 - 40% of Salary/Wages .25 Credits
Level 2 - 55% of Salary/Wages .50 Credits
Level 3 - 70% of Salary/Wages .75 Credits
Section 8. Retirement - City Contribution to Maine State Retirement and Deferred Compensation Plan
ICMA
Level 1 - 2% of Salary/Wages 1 Credit
Level 2 - 4% of Salary/Wages 2 Credits
Level 3 - 6% of Salary/Wages and 3 Credits
Level 4 - 8% of Salary/Wages and 4 Credits
MSR
Plan A 3 Credits
Plan 4 4 Credits
12
Explanation of Benefits and Benefit Limitations:
1. Employees enrolled in Maine State Retirement Regular Plan A may use credits to participate in the
deferred compensation plan up to Level 1.
2. Employees enrolled in the deferred compensation plan shall be required to match the city contribution.
3. Current employees who enroll in a retirement plan after 7/1/97 shall be required, at the time of
enrollment in the Cafeteria Plan, to continue participation in the deferred compensation plan or MSR for
at least three years, or lose the equivalent credits.
4. Employer contributions to the deferred compensation plan are vested to an employee after five years of
uninterrupted service with the City.
Section 9. Paid Leave
Level - Basic 5 days 1 Credit (Starting Employees Only)
Level 1 10 days 2 Credits
Level 2 15 days 3 Credits
Level 3 20 days 4 Credits
Level 4 25 days 5 Credits
Level 5 30 days 6 Credits
Level 6 35 days 7 Credits
Explanation of Benefits and Benefit Limitations:
1. Paid leave is provided in lieu of sick leave, vacation, or personal days.
2. Paid leave is cumulative from year to year to a maximum of 60 days, not including any new paid leave
days acquired on the employee's anniversary date.
3. City will pay compensation equal to cumulative paid leave upon separation.
4. Employees may select only Level Basic during their first six months of employment, however, the paid
leave does not accrue unless and until the employee successfully completes the probationary period.11
After six months of employment, an employee may move to Level 1, purchasing an additional 5 days
5. Employees may not increase Paid Leave more than two levels on their anniversary date. This shall not
apply to employees who have a significant life change event as defined in subsection 3 in Section 1
Cafeteria Plan Regulations.
6. Sick Leave Accumulated prior to cafeteria plan implementation: The employee may keep the sick
leave accumulation and use it strictly for their own personal illness or injury or if it is necessary for the
employee to provide care for an employee’s child, spouse, or parent. . At the time of separation from
service employees that are immediately eligible for benefits under the Maine State Retirement System or
other City adopted qualified Retirement Plan, shall receive a cash benefit equal to the wage equivalent of
50% of their remaining sick leave accumulation.
7. Use of paid leave. Paid time may be taken at any time during the year except that it must be
scheduled in advance to avoid conflicts with other employees’ paid time and subject to workload
demands. The employee’s Department Head must approve paid time off at least seven days prior to the
anticipated time off. In emergency situations, the Department Head may waive the seven-day advance
approval. Paid time may not be taken during the employee’s probationary period.
13
8. Transfer of Accrued Leave. The purpose of this policy is to establish a procedure by which full-time
employees may voluntarily transfer accrued unused paid time to other full-time employees who meet the
criteria outlined in this policy and who have expended their own accrued paid time off due to catastrophic
illness or injury or other qualifying drastic circumstances as determined by the City Manager, in
accordance with the following procedures and limitations:
a. The request for such leave may be made by the employee seeking the leave or by any person
on that employee’s behalf. The request must be made in writing to the Department Head for
the receiving employee. If the request is submitted by someone other than the receiving
employee, that employee’s consent must be given before the request will be processed.
__________________________________
11 Amended June 20, 2011
b. When the receiving employee has completed at least one year of employment with the City
and has exhausted all of his/her own accrued leave time, other City employees may transfer
to that person a maximum of 40 hours each, up to a total of 160 hours, in any 12 month
period measured backward from the date the receiving employee uses the time.
c. Leave time must be donated in whole hour increments with a 10-hour minimum.
d. Leave time may be transferred only in the event of the receiving employee’s own catastrophic
illness or injury or a catastrophic illness or injury of an immediate family member.
Immediate family member for purposes of this section is defined as spouse, parent, parent-inlaw,
child, stepchild, or domestic partner. When requested, the receiving employee must
provide medical or other sufficient documentation of the need for the leave.
e. This policy does not apply to employees out of work for work-related illness or injury
covered by workers’ compensation.
11 Amended June 20, 2011
f. Any transfer of paid time by the transferring employee must be completely voluntary. No
employee shall be coerced, threatened, intimidated or financially induced into donating time
under this policy.
g. While an employee is on shared leave, he/she will continue to be classified as a City
employee and shall receive the same compensation and benefits he/she would otherwise
receive if using his/her own accrued time.
h. The Finance Department is responsible for computing the values of donated leave and for
adjusting the accrued leave balances to show the transferred leave. The receiving employee
shall be paid his/her regular rate of pay; therefore, one hour of shared leave may cover more
or less than one hour of the receiving employee’s salary. The dollar value of the leave is
converted from the donor to the recipient. Records of all leave transferred will be maintained
and the value of any leave transferred which remains unused will be returned at its original
value to the employee or employees who donated the leave.
i. Inappropriate use of this policy may result in the cancellation of the donated leave or use of
shared leave. In no event will any unused shared leave be paid to the receiving employee in
the event that person leaves employment with the City.
j. The City of Ellsworth, in its sole discretion, may cancel this program at any time.
Part 2: Other Employee Benefits
14
Section 1. Worker's Compensation
The City of Ellsworth provides a comprehensive workers' compensation insurance program at no cost to
employees. This program covers any injury or illness sustained in the course of employment that requires
medical, surgical, or hospital treatment. Subject to applicable legal requirements, workers' compensation
insurance provides incapacity benefits after a short waiting period or, if the employee is hospitalized,
immediately. For a compensable injury resulting in lost time, payment of incapacity benefits is made by
the City’s insurance carrier in lieu of the employee’s regular salary.
The City of Ellsworth may initially send an injured employee to a physician of the City's choice. The
appointing authority may also require a return-to-work medical evaluation to determine if an employee
who has been out of work is able to perform the essential functions of the employee’s position with or
without reasonable accommodation in such a manner that would not pose a direct threat to health and
safety of the employee or others.
6If an employee is out of work due to incapacity resulting from an accepted Workers
Compensation claim, while the employee is receiving Workers Compensation incapacity benefits
the City will pay for any City benefits the employee was paying for at the time of injury. Also
the City will continue to contribute to the employee’s retirement plan at the usual match for the
regularly scheduled work hours as long as the employee is unable to work due to an accepted
Worker’s Compensation injury and has not returned to work in any manner. The City will pay
for these benefits for a period no longer than 6 months. This policy will be retroactive to any
employee out on Worker’s Compensation and receiving payments as of July 1, 2009. If for any
reason other than incapacity due to the injury in question, the employee does not return to work,
the employee agrees to reimburse the City the full amount of benefits paid by the City on the
employee’s behalf under this paragraph.
Employees who sustain work-related injuries or illnesses should inform their supervisor immediately. No
matter how minor an on-the-job injury may appear, it is important that it be reported immediately. This
will enable an eligible employee to qualify for coverage as quickly as possible.
Section 2. Social Security
All employees shall contribute to the Social Security System on a cost sharing basis with the City.
Contributions of the employee shall be made through payroll deductions. The percentage of premium is
periodically subject to change by Federal law and increases in deductions shall be automatic.
Section 3. Holidays
Regular full-time and regular part-time employees shall be entitled to paid holidays' and the concurrent
provisions of this section. Compensation for full-time employees shall be based on their regular workday.
Compensation for regular part-time employees shall be pro-rated based on average hours. Paid holidays
shall be as follows:
New Year's Day (January 1)
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (third Monday in January)
Presidents' Day (third Monday in February)
Memorial Day (last Monday in May)
Independence Day (July 4)
Labor Day (first Monday in September)
6 Amended August 17, 2009
15
Columbus Day (second Monday in October)
Veterans' Day (November 11)
Thanksgiving (fourth Thursday in November)
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas (December 25)
Floating Holiday
The Floating Holiday is based on the calendar year and cannot be accumulated. An employee must
provide one week notice to his/her Department Head of the intent to use a floating holiday and must
receive permission from the Department Head to do so.
If an eligible hourly employee works on a recognized holiday at the request of the City, he or she will be
paid holiday pay plus wages at one and one-half times their straight-time rate for the hours worked on the
holiday.
In the case of the salaried employee who works on a regular holiday, compensatory time shall be granted
equal to the time worked on the holiday.
Initial probationary employees shall not be entitled to paid holidays until after they have completed at
least thirty (30) calendar days employment prior to the holiday.
A recognized holiday that falls on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding Friday. A recognized
holiday that falls on a Sunday will be observed on the following Monday.
If a recognized holiday falls during an eligible employee's paid absence (such as paid leave), holiday pay
will be provided instead of the paid time off benefit that would otherwise have applied.
Paid time off for holidays will not be counted as hours worked for the purposes of determining whether
overtime pay is owed.
Section 4. Court Service
The City of Ellsworth encourages employees to fulfill their civic responsibilities by serving jury duty
when required.
Employees called to perform jury service shall be granted leave to do so and shall be paid their regular
salary for a period of up to 160 hours. Such employees shall turn over any earnings received from such
appearances (other than for mileage reimbursement) to the City Treasurer. Where contractual agreement
has otherwise provided for court service compensation for certain employees, this provision shall not
apply and shall not be deemed to be inconsistent with such contractual agreement.
Employees must show the jury duty summons to their supervisor as soon as possible so that the
supervisor may make arrangements to accommodate their absence. Employees are expected to report for
work whenever the court schedule permits.
The City of Ellsworth will continue to provide health insurance benefits for the full term of the jury duty
absence. Employees will be eligible for paid holidays during jury duty leave.
Section 5. Bereavement Leave
Employees shall be granted up to three (3) consecutive workdays from the date of death, with pay, for
absence resulting from the death of a member of the immediate family. Immediate family shall mean the
16
spouse or domestic partner, the parents of the spouse, and the parents, stepparents, guardian, children,
stepchildren, brothers, sisters, wards, grandparents and grandchildren of the employee. Up to One (1) day
with pay may be granted by the City Manager or, in the case of library employees the Library Director, in
situations involving any other death for attendance at the funeral.
Section 6. Military Duty Leave
The City of Ellsworth complies with state and federal military leave laws. Any individual with questions
about such leave should direct them to their supervisor or Department Head.
Section 7. Special Leave For Emergency Service
Any employee of the City who wishes to participate as a volunteer for the City Fire Department shall be
allowed to be "on call" during normal working hours provided prior arrangements have been made with
the City Manager to insure that primary job requirements are met. There shall be no reduction in salary or
wages for response to such emergency calls provided there is no additional compensation received for
such calls.
Section 8. Family and Medical Leave
In accordance with the federal Family and Medical Leave Act, The City of Ellsworth will grant job
protected unpaid family and medical leave to eligible employees for up to twelve (12) weeks per twelve
(12) month period for any one or more of the following reasons:
1. The birth of a child and in order to care for such child or the placement of a child with the employee for
adoption or foster care (leave taken for this reason must be taken within the 12-month period following
the child's birth or placement with the employee); or
2. In order to care for an immediate family member (spouse, child, or parent) of the employee if such
immediate family member has a serious health condition; or
3. The employee's own serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions
of his/her, position.
Definitions
12 Month Period - means a rolling 12 month period measured backward from the date the leave is
taken and continuous with each additional leave day taken.
Spouse - includes unmarried domestic partners. If both parties work for the City of Ellsworth
their total leave in any 12 month period may be limited to an aggregate of 12 weeks if the leave is
taken for either a birth, placement for adoption or foster care of a child, or to care for a sick
parent.
Child - means a child either under 18 years of age, or 18 years of age or older who is incapable of
self-care because of a mental or physical disability. An employee's child includes a biological,
adopted, foster, or stepchild.
Serious Health Condition, - means an illness, injury, impairment, or a physical or mental
condition as defined by federal law. This may include a condition that involves inpatient care;
17
any period of incapacity requiring absence from work for more than (3) three calendar days and
that involves continuing treatment by a health care provider; or continuing treatment by a health
care provider for a chronic or long-term health condition that is incurable, or which if left
untreated, would likely result in a period of incapacity of more than three (3) calendar days; or
prenatal care by a health care provider.
Coverage and Eligibility
To be eligible for federal family/medical leave an employee must:
1. Have worked for the City of Ellsworth for at least twelve (12) months, and
2. Have worked at least 1250 hours during the 12 month period immediately preceding the
commencement of the leave.
Intermittent or Reduced Leave
A. An employee may take leave intermittently (a few days or a few hours at a time) or on a reduced leave
schedule to care for an immediate family member with a serious health condition or because of a serious
health condition of the employee when "medically necessary."
1. "Medically necessary" means there must be a medical need for the leave and that the leave can
best be accomplished through an intermittent or reduced leave schedule.
2. The employee may be required to transfer temporarily to a position with equivalent pay and
benefits that better accommodates recurring periods of leave when the leave is planned based on
scheduled medical treatment.
B. An employee may take leave intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule for birth or placement for
adoption or foster care of a child with the employer's consent.
Substitution of Paid Leave and Other Paid Time
A. As permitted by law, an employee will be required to substitute accrued paid leave and compensatory
time for family/medical leave taken. Any leave taken up to the total of 12 weeks permitted by law
following use of accrued time off will be unpaid.
Notice Requirement
A. An employee is required to give thirty (30) days notice in the event of a foreseeable leave. A "Request
for Family/Medical Leave" form (see attached) must be completed by the employee and returned to the
City Manager at the City Manager's Office. In unexpected or unforeseeable situations, an employee must
provide as much notice as is practicable, usually verbal notice within one or two business days of when
the need for leave becomes known, followed by a completed "Request for Family Medical Leave" form.
B. If an employee fails to give thirty (30) days notice for a foreseeable leave with no reasonable excuse
for the delay, the leave may be denied until thirty (30) days after the employee provides notice.
Medical Certification
18
A. For leave taken because of the employee's or a covered family member's serious health condition, the
employee must submit a completed "Physician or Practitioner Certification" form (see attached) and
return the certification to the City Manager at the City Manager's Office. Medical certification must be
provided by the employee within fifteen (1 5) days after requested, or as soon as is reasonably possible.
B. The City of Ellsworth may require a second or third opinion (at its own expense), periodic reports on
the employee's status and intent to return to work, and a fitness-for-duty report to return to work.
C. All documentation related to the employee’s or his/her family members’ medical condition will be held
in strict confidence.
Effect on Benefits
A. An employee granted leave under this policy will continue to be covered under the City of Ellsworth
health insurance, life insurance or income protection disability plan under the same conditions as
coverage would have been provided if they had been continuously employed during the leave period.
B. Employee contributions, as appropriate, will be required either through payroll deduction or by direct
payment to the Deputy Treasurer. The employee will be advised in writing at the beginning of the leave
period as to the amount and method of payment. Employee contribution amounts are subject to change in
rates that occur while the employee is on leave.
C. If an employee's contribution is more than thirty (30) days late, the City of Ellsworth may terminate
the employee's insurance coverage.
D. If the City of Ellsworth pays the employee contributions missed by the employee while on leave, the
employee will be required to reimburse the Employer for delinquent payment (on a payroll deduction
schedule) upon return from leave. The employee will be required to sign a written statement at the
beginning of the leave period authorizing the payroll deduction for delinquent payments.
E. If the employee fails to return from unpaid family/medical leave for reasons other than (1) the
continuation of a serious health condition of the employee or a covered family member, or (2)
circumstances beyond the employee's control (certification required within thirty (30) days of failure to
return for either reason), the City of Ellsworth may seek reimbursement from the employee for the portion
of the premiums paid by the City of Ellsworth on behalf of the employee (also known as the employer
contribution) during the period of leave.
F. An employee is not entitled to seniority or benefit accrual during periods of unpaid leave but will not
lose anything accrued prior to leave.
Job Protection
A. If the employee returns to work before or at the conclusion of the permitted 12 weeks of leave
permitted under federal law, he/she will be reinstated to his/her former position or an equivalent position
with equivalent pay, benefits, status, and authority.
B. The employee's restoration rights are the same as they would have been had the employee not been on
leave. Thus, if the employee's position would have been eliminated or the employee would have been
terminated but for the leave, the employee would not have the right to be reinstated upon return from
leave.
C. If the employee fails or is unable to return to his or her regular position at the conclusion of the
available FMLA time, the employee will be reinstated to his/her same or similar position, only if
19
available, in accordance with applicable laws. If the employee's same or similar position is not available,
the employee may be terminated.
State Family Medical Leave
In some circumstances, employees may be eligible for FMLA leave time under state law instead of or in
addition to federal law. State law permits an eligible employee to take up to 10 weeks of unpaid leave
during a 2 year period. In order to qualify for state FMLA leave, an employee must have worked for The
City for at least 12 consecutive months prior to the need for the leave.
Leave under the state FMLA is available for the following reasons:
? A serious health condition of the employee;
? The birth of the employee’s child or the employee’s domestic partner’s child;
? The placement of a child age 16 or less with the employee or with the employee’s domestic
partner in connection with the adoption of the child by the employee or the employee’s domestic
partner;
? A spouse, domestic partner, child, domestic partner’s child, or parent with a serious health
condition;
? The donation of an organ of the employee for a human organ transplant; or,
? The death or serious health condition of the employee’s spouse, domestic partner, parent, or child
if the spouse, domestic partner, parent or child as a member of the state military forces, or the US
Armed Forces, including the National Guard and Reserves, dies or incurs a serious health
condition while on active duty.
Many of the same provisions regarding the application of the federal FMLA detailed above also apply to
leave under the state law. If an employee believes he/she qualifies for leave for one of these conditions,
he/she should speak to his/her supervisor or Department Head immediately as to specific rights and
obligations under state law.
Family/Medical Leave Forms to Be Submitted by the Employee
1. Request for Family/Medical Leave
2. Physician or Practitioner Certification Family Member/Serious Health Condition (2A)
Employee Serious/Health Condition (2B)
3. Authorization for Payroll Deduction for Benefit Plan Coverage Continuation During a Family
Medical Leave of Absence
4. Fitness for Duty to Return From Leave
Section 10. Other Unpaid Leave of Absence
A regular employee who needs an absence for work for a reason other than those covered elsewhere in
this ordinance may be granted a leave of absence without pay by the City Manager upon recommendation
of the Department Head. The maximum leave granted is 180 days.
20
An employee desiring such time off must apply in writing to the Department Head at least one week in
advance of the requested leave time. The request must specifically state the reasons for such leave and the
length of time requested. Such requests will be determined on an individual basis by the City Manager, at
the recommendation of the Department Head.
An employee must have completed six months of continuous service before the effective date of the leave
of absence. The employee must exhaust any accrued leave at the inception of the leave of absence.
If such leave is granted, the employee will maintain any benefits and/or service accrued through the date
of the inception of the leave but no benefits shall accrue during the absence nor shall the employee be
eligible for other city-paid benefits during the absence. For instance, holidays falling within the leave of
absence shall be unpaid. Upon completion of such a leave of absence, the employee may be able to return
to their regular position if that position is still available and suitable. In the event that the position has
been abolished or reassigned in their absence or is otherwise no longer available or suitable, the employee
shall be given a position of equal classification, status and salary if such position is available. If no such
positions are available, the employee may apply for any other job that is vacant and for which the
employee is qualified for. If no such positions exist or if the employee is not the best candidate for such
position, the employee’s employment may be terminated.
If an employee on an unpaid leave of absence from the City starts a business, operates a business,
undertakes a new career, or engages in similar activity, the leave will be terminated and the employee
may be terminated from employment.
The granting or denial of a leave of absence shall be solely within the discretion of the hiring authority
and shall not be subject to the grievance procedure.
CHAPTER VI - Work Week and Wage Administration
Section 1. Hours of Work
The hours of the regular workweek for regular full-time and regular part-time employees shall be as
prescribed by individual departmental requirements and/or as called for by the job description(s) for the
position(s). Exempt employees shall accomplish the work assigned to them regardless of the hours
required to do the work.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance the hiring authority reserves the right to alter,
amend and/or otherwise determine the hours of work in any and all departments where it deems it
necessary.
Section 2. Records of Hours Worked
Accurately recording time worked is the responsibility of every hourly employee. Federal and state laws
require The City of Ellsworth to keep an accurate record of time worked in order to calculate employee
pay and benefits. Time worked is all the time actually spent on the job performing assigned duties.
Hourly employees should accurately record the time they begin and end their work, as well as the
beginning and ending time of each meal period. They should also record the beginning and ending time of
any split shift or departure from work for personal reasons. Overtime work must always be approved
before it is performed.
Altering, falsifying, tampering with time records, or recording time on another employee's time record
may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment.
21
It is the employees' responsibility to sign their time records to certify the accuracy of all time recorded.
The supervisor will review and then initial the time record before submitting it for payroll processing. In
addition, if corrections or modifications are made to the time record, both the employee and the
supervisor must verify the accuracy of the changes by initialing the time record.
Section 3. Paydays
All employees are paid weekly on Friday. Each paycheck will include earnings for all work performed
through the end of the previous payroll period.
In the event that a regularly scheduled payday falls on a day off such as a weekend or holiday, employees
will receive pay on the last day of work before the regularly scheduled payday.
If a regular payday falls during an employee's paid time off, the employee may receive his or her earned
wages before departing if a written request is submitted at least one week prior to the departure.
Employees may have pay directly deposited into their bank accounts if they provide advance written
authorization to the City of Ellsworth. Employees will receive an itemized statement of wages when the
City of Ellsworth makes direct deposits.
CHAPTER VII - Changes in Status
Section 1. Seniority
Seniority, for purposes of this Ordinance, shall mean length of continuous service in a particular status
within a particular department and may be the governing factor in all matters of shift assignments, layoffs,
recall, vacation preference or overtime work provided all other qualifications are equal. Probationary
employees shall not be afforded any seniority. Once the probationary period is completed, seniority shall
be retroactive to the date of initial hire. The seniority rules apply to regular full-time employees only. A
break in service shall only be caused by resignation, dismissal, retirement or failure to report for work
within five (5) workdays of being recalled from layoff. Transfer or promotion to another department will
not constitute a loss of seniority. Demotion, for any reason, shall not constitute a loss of seniority.
Seniority lists shall be established and maintained for each department by the department head or their
designee.
Section 2. Promotion Policy
The City encourages employees to develop skills, attain greater knowledge of their work and make known
their qualifications for promotion to more responsible positions. No department head shall deny an
employee permission to apply for a promotional opportunity in any City department but no such
promotion is guaranteed. When the hiring authority determines that an insufficient number of wellqualified
employees are available from within the City's ranks, he/she may consider outside applicants
along with employees in order to provide an adequate number of candidates for consideration.
Section 3. Standards for Promotion
22
The hiring authority shall apply the following standards with respect to promotions and the filling of job
vacancies within the City service: The job-related skills, knowledge, ability, experience, education and
past performance which will contribute to the satisfactory performance of duties of the position.
Section 4. Demotion
An employee may be demoted to a lower position for which he/she is qualified for any of the following
reasons:
A. When an employee would otherwise be laid off because his position is being abolished, lack of
work, a cut-back in City personnel due to the City's financial condition or because of the return to
work from authorized leave of another employee to such position in accordance with these rules
(leave of absence).
B. When an employee does not possess the necessary qualifications to render satisfactory service
in the position he holds. A demotion under this provision shall be rendered pursuant to the
procedures contained in Chapter VIII.
C. When an employee does not render satisfactory service after being advised of his shortcomings
and given ample opportunity to improve his performance. A demotion under this provision shall
be rendered pursuant to the procedures contained in Chapter VIII.
D. When an employee voluntarily requests such demotion.
Section 5. Resignation
An employee may resign from the City service in good standing by submitting in writing the reasons
thereof and the effective date to the hiring authority at least fourteen (14) calendar days in advance. The
hiring authority may permit a shorter period of notice if extenuating circumstances exist. The resignation
shall be accompanied by a statement by the department head as to the resigned employee's service
performance and pertinent information concerning the cause of resignation. Failure to comply with this
rule may be cause for denying future employment with the City.
Section 6. Layoffs
Any employee may be laid off by the City whenever it is necessary because of a shortage of funds, lack of
work, or related reasons, which do not reflect discredit upon the employee. Work record and seniority in
each particular case shall be the basis for determining layoffs. If rehired within two years of the date of
layoff, the employee will retain all accrued benefits.
Section 7. Unapproved Absences
An employee absent from work for five (5) consecutive days without approval shall be deemed to have
resigned after written notice, by the hiring authority, to the employee (or to the employee's last known
address).
Section 8. Severance Pay
23
The City will pay severance pay equal to two (2) weeks of regular compensation, in addition to
accumulated paid leave to employees leaving service for the following reasons;
a. retirement from service provided employee is immediately eligible for benefits under the
Maine State Retirement System or other City adopted qualified Retirement Plan,
b. layoff,
c. death of the employee (payment will be made to the employee’s estate).
7If an employee retires from service, and then decides to return to active employment, as far as
the City is concerned that employee will start again as a NEW hire, with the wage and benefits of
a new hire, with no seniority. The time previously employed may count towards FMLA
eligibility or as otherwise required by law. The employee retiring must also follow any rules that
the retirement plan they contribute to requires. For example, re-hire date, benefit eligibility etc.
CHAPTER VIII Disciplinary Action and Grievance Procedure
Section 1. Disciplinary Action
Disciplinary action will be handled in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. Nothing
in this Chapter shall limit the City of Ellsworth’s right to suspend or discharge a probationary
employee during the employee’s probationary period with or without cause.
A. Levels of Discipline
The City of Ellsworth subscribes to the concept of “progressive discipline.” Under
normal circumstances, instances of minor misconduct or poor performance will result in
oral or written reprimands. Subsequent misconduct or poor performance by the same
employee may result in increasing levels of disciplinary severity, including suspension
and ultimately discharge. Notwithstanding the policy of progressive discipline, the City
of Ellsworth may issue discipline at whatever level of discipline it deems appropriate to
the circumstance, including, for example, termination for a significant single instance of
misconduct. Possible disciplinary actions include the following:
i. Oral Reprimand
ii. Written Reprimand
iii. Suspension Without Pay
iv. Dismissal
Informal counseling shall not be considered discipline and is not subject to this section.
B. Procedure
Whenever a department head has cause to believe that disciplinary action may be
appropriate, the department head shall give reasonable notification to the employee
7 Amended August 17, 2009
24
concerned of the time and place of a disciplinary hearing. If appropriate, an employee
may be placed on paid administrative leave pending the disciplinary hearing.
The purpose of the disciplinary hearing is to inform the employee of the facts that are
believed to warrant possible disciplinary action and to give the employee the opportunity
to respond.
If the department head determines that discipline is warranted, the department head shall
determine the appropriate level of discipline. A department head may issue an oral
reprimand, written reprimand, or suspension of up to five (5) days, or may recommend
dismissal to the City Manager, or his or her designee.
i. If an oral reprimand is warranted, the department head shall document the oral
reprimand with a “counseling memo” placed in the employee’s personnel file.
ii. If a written reprimand is warranted, the department head shall prepare the written
reprimand, review it with the employee, have the employee sign it (to
acknowledge that the employee has received and reviewed the reprimand, even if
the employee disagrees with the reprimand), and place it in the employee’s
personnel file.
iii. If a suspension without pay is warranted, the department head shall prepare a
memorandum to be placed in the employee’s personnel file and shall designate on
which days the suspension will be served. The department head may allow the
suspension to be served as a block or as individual days over the course of a
number of weeks.
iv. If a department head recommends termination, the City Manager, or his or her
designee, shall review the matter and determine whether termination is
appropriate, and either terminates the employee’s employment or institute some
lesser form of discipline, as the City Manager deems appropriate.
An employee who receives disciplinary action may grieve the action taken within five (5)
work days as provided in section 2, below, except that a grievance of disciplinary action
shall begin at Step 2 for non-termination discipline or Step 3 for cases of termination.
The disciplinary action shall be stayed pending outcome of the grievance.
C. Causes for Discipline
Causes for disciplinary action include, but are not limited to:
i. Misconduct, indolence, or insubordination, such as failure to obey a department
rule or lawful and reasonable direction from a supervisor;
ii. Inefficiency, incompetence, or unsatisfactory work performance;
iii. Excessive absenteeism, tardiness, or early departure from work;
25
iv. Misuse of sick time;
v. Malfeasance or conviction of any criminal offense;
vi. Violation of Personnel Rules, Chapter IX, Conduct of Employees;
vii. Violation of the Code of Ethics;
viii. Finding by a Court of a violation of any other City ordinance;
ix. Engaging in off-duty employment or other activity that is incompatible with the
employee’s duties, functions, and responsibilities as a City employee;
x. Engaging in physical violence or threatening violence;
xi. Failure to maintain a polite and cooperative attitude; and
xii. Any other action that reflects poorly on or negatively impacts the City of
Ellsworth.
Section 2. Grievance Procedure
Any regular full-time and regular part-time employee shall have the right to present a grievance
in any matter, which directly affects his/her condition of employment according to the following
procedure:
Step 1:
The grievance shall first be discussed with the employee’s department head. The department
head shall then take such steps as are advisable, including consultation with the employee’s
immediate supervisor in an effort to resolve the grievance informally.
Step 2:
If the grievance is not resolved within five (5) workdays of initial discussion in Step 1, the
grievance may then be submitted in writing to the City Manager who shall provide the
employee with a decision in writing within five (5) workdays of submission.
Step 3:
If the grievance is not resolved within five (5) workdays after the receipt of the written
decision from the City Manager at Step 2, the grievance, if it involves a matter of policy or
termination of employment, may then be submitted in writing to the City Council. The City
Council, or a sub-committee of the Council established to hear the grievance, shall call and
conduct a hearing of all parties involved within thirty (30) days after submission. The City
Council, or subcommittee, shall provide the employee with a written decision within ten (10)
workdays of the hearing.
26
CHAPTER IX - Conduct of Employees
Section 1. General
Employees are expected to conduct themselves at all time during their hours of employment in a manner
that will bring no discredit to the City. All employees of the City are expected and required to treat the
public with promptness, patience, courtesy and respect. Information about members of the public, gained
from their positions, is to be considered confidential.
Section 2. Compliance with Federal, State, and Local Laws
Employees of the City shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations. Failure to
comply may result in disciplinary action.
Section 3. Departmental Rules, Regulations, and Standard Operating Procedures
Written departmental regulations will supplement this ordinance and will be binding on the employees of
the individual departments. In case of conflict between this ordinance and the departmental regulations,
the more restrictive wording shall take precedence.
This section shall not apply to employees otherwise provided for by contractual agreement and shall not
be deemed to be inconsistent therewith.
Section 4. Working Relationships and Interdepartmental Cooperation
Employees of the City shall maintain high standards of cooperation, efficiency, and economy in their
work. City employees shall cooperate with the public and employees in other City departments to the
fullest extent practical. Department heads and supervisors shall organize and direct the work of their work
units so as to achieve these objectives.
Under emergency situations, when an employee's supervisor or department head is not available, the
employee shall perform such duties as shall be assigned by the department head or designee present or
overseeing the emergency situation.
Section 5. Attendance at Work
Employees shall be at their respective places of work in accordance with the general or departmental
regulations pertaining to hours of work. In the event of necessary absences because of illness or any other
cause, it is the responsibility of the employees to notify the department supervisor prior to the time the
employee is required to report for work.
27
All departments shall furnish periodic work, attendance, and request for leave reports, as the City
Manager shall request.
Section 6. Inclement Weather and Emergency Closings
It is the employee's responsibility to arrive at work on time even during periods of inclement weather.
Infrequent instances of tardiness of less than one hour, due to weather conditions, may be excused by the
department head without loss of pay.
At times, emergencies such as severe weather, fires, power failures, or earthquakes, can disrupt City
operations. In appropriate cases, determined by the City Manager, circumstances may require the closing
of City Hall. When operations are officially closed due to emergency conditions, the time off from
scheduled work will be paid.
Section 7. Rest and Meal Periods
Each workday, full-time hourly employees are provided with two paid rest periods of fifteen (15) minutes
in length. To the extent possible, rest periods will be provided in the middle of work periods. Since this
time is counted and paid as time worked, employees shall be absent from their workstations only for the
allotted rest period time.
All full-time employees are provided with one unpaid meal period each workday. Department Heads will
schedule meal periods to accommodate operating requirements. Employees will be relieved of all
municipal duties during meal periods. In the event that a situation occurs requiring the employee to go
back on duty, the meal period may be resumed later for the remaining meal period time.
Section 8. Strikes and Slowdowns
No municipal employee of any status may participate in a work stoppage, sympathy work stoppage or
slowdown.
Any employee, who instigates, promotes, sponsors, or engages in a work stoppage, sympathy work
stoppage or slowdown may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal.
Section 9. Outside Employment
Employees may engage in other employment outside of their City working hours provided it is
understood and accepted that their primary duties and responsibilities shall be to the City of Ellsworth.
Employees accepting secondary employment shall notify the City Manager in writing, in advance of
taking such employment. If, in the opinion of the City Manager there is a conflict with the City
employment, because, for instance, the outside employment may negatively affect the employee’s ability
to fully satisfy the job-related requirements of his or her position at The City of Ellsworth or may involve
the use of confidential information acquired directly or indirectly through employment at The City of
Ellsworth, the employee shall be so advised. After discussion with the employee the City Manager shall
determine if the outside employment inappropriately conflicts with City employment. If the City Manager
so determines, he/she shall notify the employee, in writing, to cease the outside employment. If the
employee fails to cease the outside employment as directed by the City Manager it is grounds for
termination.
28
Section 10. Political Activity
While working for the City, employees shall not seek or accept nomination or election to any office in the
City Government8. Employees shall not use their authority of influence for the purpose of interfering with
or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office. Employees shall not take part in the
management or campaigns of candidates for City Council, nor shall they circulate petitions, distribute
campaign literature, or solicit or receive funds from any person, pertaining to the nomination of City
Council members.
City employees shall not directly or indirectly, coerce, command, or advise state or local employees to
pay, lend or contribute anything of value to a party, committee, organization, agency, or person for
partisan political purposes.
No officer or employee of the City shall directly or indirectly interfere with the participation of any City
employee in the non-partisan affairs of Ellsworth (except as provided in the first paragraph of this
section), provided that no conflict of interest results. A "conflict of interest" shall mean a situation in
which an employee's participation in the affairs of the City results in financial gain to him or his family
other than a regular compensation paid to him as an officer of the City.
9No employee shall wear a City uniform or clothing provided by the City for purposes other than
City work purposes.
Nothing in the paragraph shall be construed to prohibit any City employee from donating his or her own
funds, time, or services for a political cause (except as provided in the first paragraph of this section),
provided such donation of time or services is not made during the employee's City working hours or upon
the premises of the City or by using the facilities or the services of the City.
Section 11. Receipt of Gifts
A City employee is prohibited from soliciting or accepting any gift, gratuity, favor, entertainment, loan or
any other thing of monetary value from any person who has or is seeking to obtain business with the City
of Ellsworth or from any person within or outside City employment whose interests may be affected by
the employee's performance or non-performance of his official duties.
Acceptance of nominal gifts in keeping with special occasions, such as marriage, retirement, Christmas or
unsolicited advertising or promotional materials, e.g., pens, note pads, calendars of nominal intrinsic
value, is permitted.
Section 12. Conflict of Interest
No employee shall participate in the decision to make purchases or enter into contracts where the
employee has any interest, either directly or indirectly, in the vendor or contract with the City. An
"interest" shall include any financial interest or other interest other than that possessed by the general
public, held by the employee, the employee’s immediate family, or individuals residing in the employee’s
household. No City employee shall sell materials to the City unless such material is awarded under a
sealed bid.
Section 13. City Property
8 Amended August 17, 2009
9 Amended August 17, 2009
29
Employees must not, directly or indirectly, use or allow the use of City property of any kind for other than
official activities, except as authorized by the City Manager. Please also refer to the Vehicle Policy.
Section 14. Use of Phone and Mail System
Employees should practice discretion in using city telephones when making local personal calls and shall
be required to reimburse the City of Ellsworth for any charges resulting from their personal use of the
telephone.
The use of the City of Ellsworth-paid postage for personal correspondence is not permitted.
Section 15. Use of City of Ellsworth Data Processing Equipment
Computer information systems and networks are an integral part of business at The City of Ellsworth. The
City has made a substantial investment in human and financial resources to create these systems. The
intent of these rules is to provide employees with general requirements for utilizing the City of
Ellsworth’s computers, networks and Internet services. More specific administrative procedures and rules
governing day-to-day management and operation of the computer system may supplement these rules.
The policies and directives have been established in order to:
• Protect this investment.
• Safeguard the information contained within these systems.
• Reduce business and legal risk.
• Protect the good name of The City.
These rules provide general guidelines and examples of prohibited uses for illustrative purposes but do
not attempt to state all required or prohibited activities by users. Employees who have questions
regarding whether a particular activity or use is acceptable should seek further guidance from the
Technology System Administrator (TSA) or City Manager.
Failure to comply with these rules and/or other established procedures or rules governing computer use in
accordance with employee’s, standard operating procedures, and other related policies, may result in
disciplinary action, up to and including restricted access and/or dismissal. Illegal uses of the City of
Ellsworth’s computers and/or networks will also result in referral to law enforcement authorities.
Violations
Violations will result in disciplinary action by The City, up to and including termination, in accordance
with City policy. Actions will be predicated upon the following factors:
• The type and severity of the violation.
• The presence of any repeated violations.
• Whether it causes liability or loss to The City.
Administration
30
The TSA is responsible for the administration of this policy.
Contents
The topics covered in this document include:
• Statement of responsibility
• Expectation of Privacy
• Internet and e-mail
• Computer viruses
• Access codes and passwords
• Physical security
• Copyrights and license agreements
Statement of Responsibility
General responsibilities pertaining to this policy are set forth in this section. The following sections list
additional specific responsibilities.
Manager Responsibilities
The City Manager and Supervisors must:
• Ensure that all personnel that use or have access to City computers are aware of, and
comply with, this policy.
• Create appropriate performance standards, control practices, and procedures designed to
provide reasonable assurance that all employees observe this policy.
TSA Responsibilities
The TSA must:
• Develop and maintain written standards and procedures necessary to ensure
implementation of, and compliance with, these policy directives.
• Provide appropriate support and guidance to help employees fulfill their responsibilities
under this directive.
Expectation of Privacy
The City of Ellsworth retains control, custody and supervision of all computers, networks and
Internet services owned or leased by the City. The City reserves the right to monitor all computer
and Internet activity by employees and other system users. Employees have no expectation of
privacy in their use of computers, and/or networks, including e-mail messages and stored files.
31
The Internet and E-mail
The Internet is a very large, publicly accessible network that has millions of connected users and
organizations worldwide. E-mail is an integral feature of the Internet.
Policy
Access to the Internet is provided to employees for the benefit of The City of Ellsworth and its citizens.
With it, employees are able to access a variety of information resources around the world.
Unfortunately, the Internet also contains considerable risk and inappropriate material. To ensure that all
employees are responsible and productive Internet users, and to protect The City's interests, the following
guidelines have been established for using the Internet and e-mail.
Use of City supplied e-mail or Internet implies acceptance of these policies.
Acceptable Use
Employees using the Internet are representing the City. Employees are responsible for ensuring that the
Internet is used in an effective, ethical, and lawful manner. Examples of acceptable use are:
• Using a Web browser to obtain City related business and government information from commercial and
governmental websites.
• Accessing databases for information as needed by the City.
• Using e-mail to conduct City business.
• Minimal personal use is acceptable within the parameters of this policy. Minimal use is
considered to be on an irregular basis for a short period of time during the work period. Personal use of
the Internet should not interfere with the performance of the employee’s job duties.
• Using personal break or lunch periods on personal messages or web browsing.
Unacceptable Use
Employees must not use the Internet for purposes that are illegal, unethical, harmful to the City, or
nonproductive. Examples of unacceptable use are:
• Sending or forwarding chain e-mail or any messages containing instructions to forward the
message to others.
• Indiscriminately broadcasting e-mail or sending the same message to multiple recipients or
distribution lists.
• Subscribing to mailing lists unrelated to work.
• Using excessive time for personal e-mail. It is understood that some personal messages will be
sent and received, and time spent on personal activities should be kept to a minimum.
• Conducting a personal business using City resources.
32
• Transmitting or accessing any content that is offensive, harassing, fraudulent or in violation of the
City’s sexual harassment policy. It is possible to connect to offensive web sites
accidentally in the course of legitimate research, and this should not cause alarm.
Employees are expected to close or back out of these windows immediately. Examples
include, but are not limited to, pornography, gambling, and potentially offensive stories
or jokes. Employees needing to access this type of content, such as the police department
during normal investigative procedures, should get supervisor approval before accessing
these sites.
• Streaming transmissions, audio or video, this includes, but is not limited to; radio and television
web-casts unrelated to business must be approved prior to viewing. This does not include
web-casts for business purposes.
• Intentionally using internet facilities to disable, impair or overload the performance of any
computer system or network, or to circumvent any system intended to protect the privacy
or security of another user.
Downloads
Employees should not upload or download files that are not related to City business. Employees should
get prior approval from their department head prior to downloading files. If the department head is unsure
whether or not it is safe to download, then they should contact the TSA or their designee.
Employee Responsibilities
An employee who uses the Internet or Internet e-mail shall:
• Ensure that all communications do not interfere with their productivity or the productivity
of others.
• Be responsible for the content of all text, audio, or images placed or sent over the Internet.
• All outbound communications should have the employee's name attached.
• Not transmit copyrighted materials without written permission from the copyright holder.
• Know and abide by all applicable City policies dealing with security and confidentiality of
City records. Police department employees must know and abide by general order 2-21 as
of the date of this policy.
• Run a virus scan on all files received through the Internet.
• Avoid transmission of confidential information. If it is necessary to transmit confidential
information, employees are required to take reasonable steps to ensure that the
information remains confidential, is delivered to the intended recipient, that the intended
recipient is authorized to receive such information, and that the intended use is legitimate.
Data encryption is the only known reasonable method at this time.
• Be responsible for any unauthorized charges including but not limited to credit card
charges, subscriptions, long distance telephone charges, equipment and line costs, or for
any illegal use of its computers such as copyright violations.
33
Copyrights
Employees using the Internet are not permitted to copy, transfer, rename, add, or delete information or
programs belonging to others without express written permission from the copyright owner. Failure to
observe copyright or license agreements may result in disciplinary action by the City and legal action by
the copyright owner.
Monitoring
All messages created, sent, or retrieved over the Internet are the property of The City of Ellsworth and are
regarded as public information. The City of Ellsworth reserves the right to access the contents of any
messages sent over its facilities if The City believes, in its sole judgment, that it has a business need to do
so.
All communications, including text and images, can be disclosed to law enforcement or other third parties
without prior consent of the sender or the receiver. This means, don't put anything into your e-mail
messages that you wouldn't want to see on the front page of the newspaper, or be required to explain in
a court of law.
At this time, it is not policy, practice or desire to monitor messages or Internet traffic. However logs with
this information exist, they may be spot checked. Please be aware that legal obligations (court decisions,
decrees, notice of pending relevant legal action) or gross abuse can force a change to this policy at any
time without prior notice.
Remember that e-mail is a written form of communication that can survive electronically for a very long
time (even after deletion). It cannot be un-sent, and it cannot be considered private.
Computer viruses
Computer viruses are programs designed to make unauthorized changes to programs and data. Therefore,
viruses can cause destruction of City resources.
Background
It is important to know that:
• Computer viruses are much easier to prevent than cure.
• Defenses against computer viruses include protection against unauthorized access to
computer systems, using only trusted sources for data and programs, and maintaining
anti-virus software.
TSA responsibilities
The TSA shall:
• Install and maintain appropriate anti-virus software on all computers.
34
• Respond to all virus attacks and destroy any virus detected.
Employee responsibilities
These directives apply to all employees:
• Employees shall not knowingly introduce a computer virus into City computers.
• Employees shall not load diskettes, CDs or other media of unknown origin.
• Employees shall not tamper with the configuration of anti-virus software except as directed
by the TSA or their designee.
• Incoming files/data (diskettes, cd’s, and other) shall be scanned for viruses before they are
read.
• Never open e-mail attachments that end with “.exe”, “.bat”, “.bas” or other known
executable identifiers.
• Any employee who suspects that their workstation has been infected by a virus shall
immediately contact the TSA or their designee.
Access Codes and Passwords
The confidentiality and integrity of data stored on City computer systems must be protected by access
controls to ensure that only authorized employees have access. This access shall be restricted to only
those capabilities that are appropriate to each employee's job duties.
TSA responsibilities
The TSA shall be responsible for the administration of access controls to all networked City computer
systems. The TSA will process user adds, deletes, and changes upon the request from the end user's
supervisor.
The TSA will maintain a list of administrative access codes and passwords and keep this list in a secure
area.
Accounts that remain inactive for an extended period of time will be deactivated, and then purged by the
TSA or designee.
Employee Responsibilities
Each employee:
• Shall be responsible for all computer transactions that are made with their User ID and
password.
• Shall not disclose passwords to others. Passwords must be changed immediately if it is
suspected that they may have become known to others. Passwords should not be recorded
where they may be easily obtained.
• Will change passwords when prompted to by the TSA or their designee.
35
• Should use passwords that cannot be easily guessed by others.
• Should log out or lock their workstation when leaving it unattended for any length of time.
• Each employee must use their personal username and password. Usernames and passwords
must not be shared.
• Store data and files in a data repository designated by the TSA. Because servers are backed
up routinely, this protects against data loss.
Supervisor's Responsibility
Department heads should notify the TSA or designee promptly whenever an employee leaves the City, or
transfers to another department, so their access can be revoked or changed. Involuntary terminations must
be reported concurrent with, or prior to, termination.
Physical and Data Security
It is City policy to protect computer hardware, software, data, and documentation from misuse, theft,
unauthorized access, and environmental hazards.
Employee Responsibilities
The directives below apply to all employees:
• Media (diskettes, CDs, tapes, or other data storage devices) should be stored out of sight
when not in use. If they contain sensitive or confidential data, they must be locked up.
Employees are strongly encouraged to store such data in their designated data repository.
• Media should be kept away from environmental hazards such as heat, direct sunlight, and
magnetic fields.
• Critical computer equipment, such as file servers and network equipment must be protected
by an uninterruptible power supply (UPS). Other computer equipment must be protected,
by a surge suppressor at minimum. Laser printers will be plugged into separate electrical
outlets and not into UPS’s.
• Computer and network hardware should not be exposed to environmental hazards such as
food, smoke, liquids, high or low humidity, and extreme heat or cold. Where these
hazards are unavoidable, appropriately hardened equipment must be used.
• Since the TSA is responsible for all equipment installations, disconnections, modifications,
and relocations, employees are not to perform these activities. This does not apply to
portable computers for which an initial connection has been made by the TSA or their
designee.
• All data stored on City owned equipment belongs to the City, any attempt to delete, erase
or otherwise conceal information stored on this equipment with out TSA approval may
result in disciplinary action.
36
• Information belonging to the City of Ellsworth is ONLY to be accessed to conduct City
business, any attempts to access information not belonging to the employee, or not
necessary in conducting City business may result in disciplinary action.
• Employees shall not take shared portable equipment such as laptop computers off the
premises without the informed consent of their supervisor. Informed consent means that
the manager knows what equipment is leaving, what data is on it, and for what purpose it
will be used.
• Employees should exercise care to safeguard the valuable electronic equipment assigned to
them. Employees who neglect this duty may be accountable for any consequent loss or
damage.
• Employees must remember that existing policy concerning care and handling of City
property also applies to computer equipment.
Copyrights and License Agreements
It is the City's policy to comply with all laws regarding intellectual property.
Legal Reference
The City and its employees are legally bound to comply with the Federal Copyright Act (Title 17 of the
U. S. Code) and all proprietary software license agreements. Noncompliance exposes the City and the
responsible employee(s) to civil and criminal penalties.
Scope
This directive applies to all software that is owned by the City, licensed to the City, or developed using
City resources by employees or vendors. Software not owned or licensed to the City must not be installed
on City computers.
TSA Responsibilities
The TSA will:
• Maintain records of all software owned or licensed by City, including software license
details and assignments for all software applications, utilities, and modules.
• Periodically scan City computers to verify that only properly licensed, City owned software
is installed.
Employee Responsibilities
Employees shall not:
• Install software unless authorized by the TSA. Only authorized software that is licensed to
or owned by the City is to be installed on City computers.
• Copy software unless authorized by the TSA.
• Download software unless authorized by the TSA.
37
Civil Penalties
Violations of copyright law expose The City and the responsible employee(s) to the following civil
penalties:
• Liability for damages suffered by the copyright owner.
• Any lost profits attributable to the copying.
• Large monetary damage awards for each illegal copy.
Criminal Penalties
Violations of copyright law that are committed "willfully and for purposes of commercial advantage or
private financial gain” that is, to save or make money, expose The City and those employees responsible
to the following possible criminal penalties:
• Fines up to $500,000.00 for each illegal copy.
• Jail terms of up to five years.
(as of the date of this policy)
Section 16. Use of Equipment and Vehicles
Equipment and vehicles essential in accomplishing job duties are expensive and may be difficult to
replace. When using property, employees are expected to exercise care, perform required maintenance,
and follow all operating instructions, safety standards, and guidelines. Employees are to notify the
Department Head or designee if any equipment, machines, tools, or vehicles appear to be damaged,
defective, or in need of repair. The improper, careless, negligent, destructive, or unsafe use or operation of
equipment or vehicles, as well as excessive or avoidable traffic and parking violations, may result in
disciplinary action.
Employees whose work requires operation of a motor vehicle must present and maintain a valid vehicle
operator’s license that is neither suspended nor revoked and must be able to provide proof of adequate
insurance coverage. Any changes to such an employee’s driving record or license status must be
reported to the employee’s supervisor immediately. Where applicable, failure to maintain a valid driver's
license may be sufficient cause for immediate termination.
Employees traveling on behalf of the City must comply with all state, federal, and local traffic rules and
regulations. The City of Ellsworth is not responsible for and will not reimburse an employee for any fine
incurred by the employee for violating a traffic or criminal law while traveling on behalf of the City.
Employees traveling on City business are expected to wear seatbelts at all times.
Any accident, no matter how minor, which occurs while any employee is operating a vehicle on City
business, must be reported immediately to the City Manager.
Employees who operate personal vehicles on City business are strictly prohibited from operating such
vehicles under the influence of alcohol or controlled substances, except for prescription medication
authorized by a physician who does not cause unsafe performance.
Employees are not permitted to use City vehicles for personal business/activity.
38
Failure to follow these rules may result in disciplinary action, up to and including immediate termination.
Section 17. Safety
To assist in providing a safe and healthful work environment for employees, customers, and visitors, the
City of Ellsworth has established a workplace safety program. This program is a top priority for the City
of Ellsworth. The City Manager has responsibility for implementing, administering, monitoring, and
evaluating the safety program.
Section 18. Use of Tobacco Products
In keeping with the City of Ellsworth's intent to provide a safe and healthy work environment, use of
tobacco products is prohibited within all City buildings and vehicles. Exterior designated smoking areas,
as appropriate, shall be determined by the City Manager.
Section 19. Employee Dress and Appearance
As representatives of the City of Ellsworth, employees are expected to maintain a neat and professional
appearance. The following types of clothing are prohibited: pants made of jean material of any kind;
shorts (unless part of a suit); tank or halter tops; strapless tops; cropped tops; clothing that does not
adequately provide coverage or that shows undergarments; torn clothing; clothing with holes; flip flops;
sweatsuits or similar attire; and leggings. This list is not exhaustive. If an employee has a question about
whether a particular type of clothing is permitted under this policy, it should be directed to his/her
supervisor or Department Head.
Professional appearance also means maintaining good hygiene and grooming while working. Facial hair
is permitted as long as it is neat and clean. Earrings are acceptable as long as they are not a safety hazard;
however, no more than two earrings may be worn in each ear while working. Rings through the nose,
eyebrow, tongue, or other body parts visible to the public may not be worn while working. All tattoos
must be small in size and not offensive or covered at all time while working. Employees are expected to
be conservative in the wearing of makeup and scented products.
Employees who violate this policy in the opinion of their Department Head or the City Manager may be
asked to leave the workplace until they are in compliance. Repeated infractions of this policy may be
cause for disciplinary action.
Under certain limited circumstances, an exception to this policy may be made for an employee with a
bona fide health and/or religious need. To request such an exception, the employee must contact the City
Manager as soon as the need for the exception arises.
Section 20. Violence in the Workplace
The safety and security of all employees is of primary importance. Threats, stalking, threatening and
abusive behavior, or acts of violence against employees, visitors, customers, and/or City facilities or
property by anyone on City property, on a City-controlled site, or in connection with City employment or
business will not be tolerated (even those made in jest). Violations of this policy will lead to corrective
action up to and including termination and/or referral to appropriate law enforcement agencies for arrest
and prosecution. The City of Ellsworth reserves the right to take any necessary legal action to protect its
employees.
39
All employees are responsible for notifying their Department Head immediately of any threats that they
witness or receive or that they are told another person witnessed or received. Even without a specific
threat, all employees should report any behavior they have witnessed that they regard as potentially
threatening or violent or that could endanger the health or safety of an employee when the behavior has
been carried out on City premises, on a City-controlled site, or is connected to City employment or
business. Employees are responsible for making this report regardless of the relationship between the
individual who initiated the threatening behavior and the person or persons being threatened.
Section 21. Drug and Alcohol Use and Drug Testing
It is The City of Ellsworth's desire to provide a healthful and safe workplace. To promote this goal,
employees are required to report to work in appropriate mental and physical condition to perform their
jobs in a satisfactory manner.
Drug and Alcohol Use
While on the City of Ellsworth premises and while conducting City-related activities off the City of
Ellsworth premises, no employee may use, possess, distribute, sell, or be under the influence of alcohol,
legal drugs prescribed to someone other than the employee, or illegal drugs. The legal use of prescribed
drugs is permitted on the job only if it does not impair an employee's ability to perform the essential
functions of the job effectively and in a safe manner that does not endanger other individuals in the
workplace.
Violations of this policy may lead to disciplinary action, up to and including immediate termination of
employment.
Alcohol and Drug Policy and Testing Procedures for City Employees Required to Hold a Commercial
Drivers Licenses
1. Purpose
The City of Ellsworth is committed to a drug and alcohol free workplace. In order to ensure the
safety of its employees and the general public, as well as to comply with 49 CFR Part 382 and
other pertinent federal laws, the City Council has adopted this employment policy.
The City takes pride in its employees who perform critical duties in a tidy effective manner with
safety foremost in their minds. This policy strengthens our commitment to a safe workplace.
2. Program Administrator
The City Manager is designated by the City Council as the Alcohol/Drug Testing Program
Administrator. The Program Administrator is responsible for answering questions from drivers,
employees or the public in general. The Program Administrator will maintain the confidentiality
of all information relating to drug and alcohol testing. The Program Administrator may provide
such information as necessary to enable the appropriate supervisor to take the appropriate action
to ensure compliance with this policy. In addition to his/her duties under this policy, the Program
Administrator is also responsible for compliance with the Program Administrator Guidelines.
3. Scope of Policy
40
This policy applies to all regular full-time, part-time or on-call and temporary employees who are
required to hold a Commercial Driver's License (CDL) for their position. All applicants for
employment positions requiring a CDL are required to pass a drug test as a prerequisite of
employment, prior to final hiring. Any applicant who fails a drug test shall not be hired, although
may re-apply for employment in the future.
Any person who was employed on a part-time or on-call basis for the City of Ellsworth at least
once during calendar year 1995 and is employed at least once annually thereafter shall be
considered a continuing employee for purposes of this policy, and is not subject to preemployment
testing prior to recommencing work. However, such employees are subject to all
other provisions of this policy.
All covered employees shall receive a copy of this policy, as well as educational materials on
alcohol and substance abuse.
4. Compliance with Regulations
All CDL employees subject to alcohol and drug testing must be in compliance with this policy at
all times while working for the City. This includes all time spent operating commercial vehicles,
as well as time spent maintaining or repairing those vehicles.
NOTE REGARDING INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS: Independent contractors and their
employees who must hold a CDL for the contracted activity are subject to the requirements of 49
CFR Part 382 and are responsible for compliance with that and related laws. The City will not
provide or pay for tests, evaluations or rehabilitation for independent contractors or their
employees. The City shall make compliance with the law a condition of any contract, which
requires a CDL driver.
5. Substances Tested
When drug and alcohol screening is required by this policy, a breath test and/or urine test will be
given to allow for determination of the following:
1. Alcohol
2. Marijuana
3. Cocaine
4, Amphetamines
5. Phencyclidine (PCP)
6. Opiates
6. Prescription Drug Use
Employees covered by this policy may use prescription drugs and "over the counter" medications
provided that:
1. The prescription drugs or their generic equivalent have been prescribed to the
employee within the past 12 months by an authorized medical practitioner.
2. The employee does not consume prescribed drugs more often than as prescribed by the
employee's physician.
3. Any employee who has been informed that the medication could cause adverse side
effects while working shall inform his/her supervisor prior to using these substances. The
41
City at all times reserves the right to have a licensed physician determine if use of a
prescription drug or medication by an employee produces an adverse effect. If such a
finding is made, the City may notify the employee's doctor (with employee's permission)
to determine if other medications are available which would not seriously affect the
employee's ability to work safely. If an appropriate substitute medicine is not available,
the City may limit or suspend the employee's work activities to non-safety sensitive
duties.
7. Tests Required
All employees subject to this policy shall be tested for alcohol and/or controlled substances in the
following circumstances:
1. Pre-employment. Drug tests will be conducted when an offer is made to hire an
employee for a CDL position. The offer for employment is contingent on the applicant
passing these tests. This includes existing employees who are applying for CDL
positions.
2. Random. Drug and alcohol tests will be conducted on a random, unannounced basis.
The number of annual drug tests shall equal 50% of the number of CDL required
positions while the number of annual alcohol tests shall equal 25% of the CDL required
positions. The City has entered into an agreement with a third party administrator (TPA)
to randomly select the CDL employees for testing and then notify the Program
Administrator of the person or persons chosen.
3. Post-accident. As soon as is practicable after an accident, the employee shall be tested
for alcohol and drugs if: (A) the accident involved the loss of human life; or (B) the
employee received a citation for a moving traffic violation arising for the accident.
4. Reasonable suspicion. All employees who exhibit to a trained supervisor signs and
symptoms of alcohol and/or drug abuse while on the job, prior to reporting to work, or
just after work will be required to submit to an alcohol and/or drug test. The supervisor
shall document the specific facts, symptoms or observations by completing a
"Reasonable Suspicion Record" form.
NOTE: Do not allow an employee to drive him/herself to the testing facility for a
reasonable suspicion test. Instead, the supervisor or another employee should provide
transportation to the testing facility.
5. Return-to-duty. An employee who engaged in conduct prohibited by Section 9 must
submit to an alcohol test and drug test to return to duty. The results of a drug test must be
negative to return to duty, and the results of an alcohol test must be less than 0.02 to
return to duty.
6. Follow-up. An employee who previously tested positive and has returned to duty must
submit to a combination of at least six (6) alcohol and drug tests during the first year after
returning to work. Follow-up tests will be unannounced and may continue for up to sixty
(60) months after returning to work, not to exceed twelve (12) a year.
8. Testing Procedures
Drug Testing: Drug testing is accomplished by analyzing the employee's urine specimen
(urinalysis). Specimens will be collected at an off-site facility selected by the City. Once the
employee provides a urine specimen, it is sealed and labeled by a certified/authorized agent of the
42
testing facility. A chain of custody document is completed in the presence of the employee, and
the specimen is shipped to a laboratory, which is certified in accordance with DHHS guidelines or
equivalent guidelines.
All urinalysis procedures are required to include split-specimen techniques. Each urine sample is
sub-divided into two containers and labeled as primary and split specimens. Both specimens are
forwarded to the laboratory. Only the primary specimen is used in the urinalysis. In the event of a
confirmed positive test result, the split specimen may be used for a second confirmation test if
requested by the employee.
During testing an initial screening test is performed. If the test is positive for one or more drugs a
confirmation test will be performed for each individual drug using gas chromatography/mass
spectrometry (GCIMS) analysis. This test ensures that over the counter medications are not
reported as positive results.
If the analysis of the primary specimen results in a confirmed positive test, the employee may
within 72 hours request that the split specimen also be tested at a certified laboratory of his/her
choice. The second test is at the employee's expense unless the test result is negative, in which
case the City will reimburse the employee.
All test results are reviewed by a Medical Review Officer (MRO) prior to results being reported
to the City. In the event of a positive test result, the MRO will first attempt to contact the
employee and conduct an interview to determine if there are any alternative legitimate reasons for
the positive results (such as over-the counter or prescription medications). If the MRO determines
there is a legitimate medical explanation for the presence of drugs, the result will be reported as
negative. If the MRO is unable to contact the employee, then the employer will be contacted and
requested to advise the employee to contact the MRO. Urine samples shall be provided in a
private test room, stall or similar enclosure so that employees and applicants may not be viewed
while providing the sample. Employees and applicants may be required to disrobe and will be
given hospital gowns to wear while they are providing test samples in order to ensure that there is
no tampering. Street clothes, bags, briefcases, purses, and other containers may not be carried into
the test area. The water in the commode, if any, shall be colored with dye to protect against
dilution of test samples. An applicant or employee may waive the right to privacy and provide the
urine sample in the presence of a witness (of the same gender) and not be required to disrobe and
wear a hospital gown.
Alcohol Testing: Alcohol testing will be conducted using an evidential breath testing (EBT)
device. The test breath test must be performed by a certified Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT)
trained in the use of EBT and alcohol testing procedures. Under certain circumstances, postaccident
tests conducted by law enforcement personnel or medical personnel will be acceptable.
Two (2) breath tests are required to determine if an individual is over the alcohol concentration
limit permitted. Any result of less than 0.02 concentration is considered a negative result. Any
result of 0.02 or greater requires a confirmation test. A confirmed test of 0.02 or greater is
considered a positive result.
9. Prohibited Conduct
CDL employees shall not:
1. Report to work and/or remain on duty with an alcohol concentration of 0.04 or greater;
43
2. Possess any alcohol while on duty;
3. Use any alcohol while on duty;
4. Use any alcohol within four (4) hours before going on duty;
5. Use any alcohol within eight (8) hours after an accident for which the CDL employee
must be tested for alcohol concentration;
6. Refuse to submit to the following alcohol and/or controlled substance tests: random
test, reasonable suspicion test, post-accident test, or follow-up test;
7. Report to or remain on duty when using any controlled substance, except when used
under a physician's orders and when the physician has informed the CDL employee in
writing that the use will not affect the safe operations of a commercial vehicle. In the case
of a written warning by the physician, the employee shall report this to his/her supervisor
immediately;
8. Report to or remain on duty if the employee tests positive for controlled substances.
Failure to comply with these rules is a violation of this policy and may result in disciplinary
action and shall result in referral to a substance abuse professional.
10. Refusal to Test
An employee's failure to submit to testing may result in disciplinary action up to and including
dismissal, and is also grounds for referral to a substance abuse professional. Failure to submit to
a test by an applicant will result in denial of employment. Specifically, the following
circumstances may be considered a refusal to test:
1. Failure to report to the designated testing area immediately after being notified to
submit to an alcohol or drug test.
2. Failure to accurately provide a sufficient sample to be tested, either breath or urine as
the case may be, unless medically determined to be unable to do so.
3. Engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs or delays the testing process.
11. Alcohol Concentration of 0.02 or Greater but Less Than 0.04
Provided that the employee has not violated Section 9, any employee whose alcohol test results in
a concentration of 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04 shall not be permitted to perform any safetysensitive
function for at least 24 hours following the test. The employee will not be paid for worktime
lost as a result of this section unless he/she works in another capacity for the Municipality
during that time period. The employee will not be required to undergo evaluation by a substance
abuse professional if the test result is 0.02 or greater but less than 0.04, not will a return-to-duty
test be required unless there is reasonable suspicion that the employee is still under the influence
of alcohol or drugs.
NOTE: This Section applies only in limited situations. For example, if an employee last
consumed alcohol more than 4 hours before work, but still has a blood/alcohol level of .0.03
when he/she shows up for work, he/she is not in violation of Section 9 but is subject to this
Section.
44
12. Notice and Consent
Before a drug or alcohol test is administered, employees and job applicants will be asked to sign a
consent form authorizing the test and permitting the release of test results to those officials with a
need to know. The chemical screen consent form shall provide space to indicate current
medication.
All recruitment announcements for any CDL position, including in-house recruitment and
promotion, will disclose that a drug screening test will be required of the applicant.
13. Consequences of Violation of this Policy
1. Any employee who violates Section 9 or 10 of this policy shall be immediately
removed from the safety-sensitive function and will be advised by the City of the
resources available for evaluating and resolving drug and alcohol abuse problems. The
employee is required to be evaluated by a substance abuse professional. All evaluation
and rehabilitation shall be at the employee's cost unless otherwise agreed by the City. An
employee shall not be allowed to return to the safety-sensitive function until he/she has a
return-to-duty alcohol test result of less than 0.02 or a return-to-duty drug test with a
verified negative result.
2. In addition, any employee who violates Section 9 or 10 of this policy may be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including dismissal. Before discipline, reassignment or
dismissal is imposed following a confirmed positive drug test, the employee shall have
the opportunity to participate for up to 6 months in a rehabilitation program unless
otherwise agreed by the City. Factors to be considered in determining the appropriate
disciplinary response include, but are not limited to the following: Employee's work
history, length of employment, current job performance and existence of past disciplinary
actions. Disciplinary action is imposed by municipal policy; it is not required by federal
law. *Under State law, if part of all of the costs of drug abuse rehabilitation are covered
by a group health insurance plan which includes the employee in question, then such
insurance may be used by the employee for that purpose, see 26 M.R.S.A. 685 as
amended by 1995 PL c.344.
3. Further grounds for discipline or dismissal under city policy include, but are not
limited to:
a. Refusal to submit to a rehabilitation program after testing positive.
b. Failure within 6 months to successfully complete a rehabilitation program after
commencing the program, or failure to pass a return-to-duty drug or alcohol test.
c. Evidence that the employee has substituted, adulterated, diluted or otherwise
tampered with his/her urine sample.
d. Failure to contact a substance abuse professional within five (5) regular
working days after being notified of a confirmed (MRO certified) positive test for
the improper use of alcohol or unauthorized substances.
4. During the period the City is awaiting an employee's test result for a post-accident test,
reasonable suspicion test, or return-to-duty test, the City may transfer the employee to
another position with or without a reduction in pay or benefits. The City also reserves the
45
right to place an employee on unpaid suspension to reduce any possible safety hazard. A
determination as to whether an employee is placed in another position or placed on paid
or unpaid suspension may be based on, but is not limited to: who is responsible for and/or
the severity of the accident, if applicable; the observed condition of the employee, if
applicable; the employee's work history; length of employment; current job performance
and the existence of past disciplinary actions. Action taken by the City under this
subsection is a matter of municipal policy, and is not imposed by federal law.
14. Employee/Applicant Rights and Responsibilities
1. In the event of a confirmed positive test result, employees and job applicants shall have
the opportunity to present an alternative explanation for the test result by contacting the
Medical Review Officer (MRO). This shall be done within 72 hours after notification of
the confirmed result. No further action will be taken if there is a justified explanation, or
there is a reasonable doubt as to the accuracy of the result or chain of custody of the
sample.
2. Any employee with a positive test result may upon written request to the Program
Administrator have the right to any information relating to the test result and procedures.
A job applicant may request information concerning the test result within 60 days after
the decision on his/her employment application.
3. Upon successfully completing a rehabilitation program within 6 months after it
commences and upon passing a return-to-duty drug test, the employee is entitled to return
to his/her previous job with full pay (but not back pay) and accrued benefits, unless
conditions unrelated to the employee's previous test make the employee's return
impossible or inappropriate. The rehabilitation or treatment provider in consultation with
the Program Administrator shall determine whether the employee has successfully
completed in the rehabilitation program. The City is not required to hold the employee's
job open for more than 6 months after the employee commences a rehabilitation program.
The employee may apply accrued vacation and sick leave, if any, against any time period
where he or she is unavailable for work due to drug abuse rehabilitation.
15. Confidentiality of Information
Unless the employee or applicant consents, all information acquired by the City in connection
with the testing processes is confidential and may not be released to any person other than to the
employee or applicant who is tested, the Program Administrator, officials with a need to know,
and the rehabilitation provider. The foregoing shall not prevent the release of information that is
required or permitted by state or federal law, or the use of information in any grievance
procedure, administrative hearing or lawsuit relating to the imposition of the test or the use of the
test results.
16. Documents Provided
The City will provide each person subject to this policy a copy of the policy. The City will also
provide printed material, which describes the effects of alcohol and/or controlled substances on
the individual's health, work and personal life, as well as information on the signs and symptoms
of alcohol or controlled substances and methods of treatment or intervention for drug or alcohol
abuse.
Section 22. Sexual and Other Unlawful Harassment
46
It is the policy of the City of Ellsworth that all employees have the right to work in an environment free of
sexual and other forms of unlawful harassment. The City of Ellsworth will not tolerate any form of
sexual or other unlawful harassment by supervisors, co-workers, customers or suppliers against any
employee of The City.
Sexual harassment is illegal and is defined as:
Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature constitutes sexual harassment when (1) submission to such conduct is made either
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment, (2) submission to or
rejection of such by an individual is used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such
individual, or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an
individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working
environment.
The following are types of conduct that may constitute sexual harassment:
- Slurs, jokes or degrading comments of a sexual nature
- Unwelcome sexual advances
- Suggestive or lewd remarks
- Unwelcome hugging, touching or kissing
- Requests for sexual favors
- Repeated offensive sexual flirtation or propositions
- The display of sexually suggestive pictures or objects
- Repeated unwelcome physical contact or touching such as patting, pinching or constant
brushing against another's body.
This policy prohibits any overt or subtle pressure for sexual favors including implying or threatening that
an applicant's or employee's cooperation of a sexual nature (or lack thereof) will have any effect on the
person's employment, job assignment, wage, promotion, or any other condition of employment or future
job opportunities. This policy also prohibits any conduct based on sex or other protected categories,
which creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment.
This policy also prohibits illegal harassment on the basis of any other protected category, such as race,
color, sex, sexual orientation, physical or mental disability, religion, age, ancestry or national origin.
Any employee who feels that he or she is the victim of sexual or other illegal harassment or who has
knowledge of such behavior occurring toward another person should immediately report the matter to his
or her supervisor, Department Head, or the City Manager.
Any questions regarding this policy should be addressed to the employee’s Department Head. No
employee will be retaliated against for reporting sexual or other illegal harassment.
CHAPTER X - Additional Provisions
Section 1. Interpretation of Language
The masculine pronoun, wherever used, is interpreted to include the feminine pronoun as well.
Section 2. Review and Amendments
47
This Personnel Ordinance shall be reviewed periodically by the City Manager and proposed changes to
the ordinance shall be submitted to the City Council. An amendment to this ordinance may be adopted by
a majority vote of the City Council.
Section 3. Severability
If any article, section or provision of this ordinance should be found to be invalid or unenforceable by
decision of the courts, only that article, section or provision specified in such decision shall be of no force
and effect and such decision shall not invalidate any other article, section or provision.
Section 4. Applicability and Inconsistency
Except where enumerated in this section, this ordinance shall apply to all City employees, including those
covered by collective bargaining agreements.
1. Where the specific language in a collective bargaining agreement conflicts with the language in
a section of this ordinance, the collective bargaining agreement language shall prevail.
2. Where the City Council has voted to adopt a different policy for individual cases, the City
Council vote shall prevail.
Provisions of this ordinance shall be applicable to employees of collective bargaining units to the extent
that they are not inconsistent with the language contained within those agreements. In the event that
sections of the personnel ordinance conflict with provisions of collective bargaining agreements the City
shall negotiate the impact of the personnel ordinance language or allow the collective bargaining
agreement language to prevail. Any provisions of this ordinance that are found to be inconsistent with
other general policies or contractual agreements approved by the City Council shall be automatically
amended to be consistent.
CHAPTER XI - Special Provisions Applicable to Highway Department Employees
The following provisions shall apply to employees of the Highway Department. In the event of a
conflict between CHAPTER XI and CHAPTERS I through X of the Personnel Ordinance, the
provisions of CHAPTER XI shall prevail.
ARTICLE 1. SENIORITY
Section 1. The City shall establish a seniority list by job classification for the Highway
Department employees covered by this Ordinance, listing the employee with the greatest seniority
first. Seniority shall be based upon the employee's continuous length of service with the City in the
Highway Department as of the last date of hire as a full-time Highway Department employee. The
seniority list shall be posted annually on the bulletin board on January 2 for a period of not less
than thirty (30) days, and a copy thereof shall be made available to the employees. Any objection
to the seniority list as posted must be reported to the Foreman within ten (10) days from the date of
posting. Objections made after ten (10) days from the date of posting shall be deemed waived and
the seniority list shall be deemed to be accepted.
Section 2. For the purpose of computing continuous service, it is agreed that time spent by an
employee on vacation or sick leave or holidays, shall be included in the computation of continuous
service as time worked. Absence due to disability of more than one (1) year's duration shall not be
included in the computation of continuous service as time worked.
48
Section 3. Vacancies. In the event that the City determines that a job vacancy exists, it shall be
posted on the bulletin board for a period of five (5) working days. Qualified employees are
encouraged to submit applications for the vacancy. In selecting a person to fill the vacancy, the
City shall select the person who is most able and most qualified. Where ability and qualifications
are equal among several candidates, an employee’s seniority will be recognized as the controlling
factor.
Section 4. When a plow route becomes available, an interested employee may submit a written
request to be assigned to the route. The Foreman will consider seniority as one factor in
assigning the route. The ultimate decision will be at the discretion of the Foreman.
ARTICLE 2. LAYOFF
Section 1. In cases of layoffs, the employer shall layoff the least senior employee(s) within
classification(s).
Section 2. Employees shall be recalled from layoff according to their seniority. No new
employees shall be hired until all employees on layoff status have been afforded recall notice.
Employees shall remain on the recall list for twelve (12) months from the date of layoff.
Employees will be recalled by certified letter, return receipt requested, at their last known address.
Failure to respond to the notice or to return to work at the time specified in the notice waives
further rights to recall.
ARTICLE 3. PROBATIONARY PERIOD
All new employees hired shall serve a probationary period of six (6) months. During the
probationary period, an employee may be terminated without cause. Additionally, such an
employee may not file a grievance for a termination during the probationary period.
ARTICLE 4. SEASONAL & PART TIME EMPLOYEES
The City may hire seasonal or part time employees from time to time as conditions warrant it.
ARTICLE 5. HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME
Section 1. Work Week. The regular workweek shall be forty-five (45) hours, which shall consist
of five nine-hour days. The Foreman may alter work schedules as necessary.
Section 2. Overtime Rate of Pay. Each employee shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half of
his regular hourly rate for all hours worked over forty (40) in one week. For the purposes of
computing overtime, holidays shall be included as hours worked.
Section 3. Rest Periods. All employees' work schedules shall provide for a 15-minute rest period
during each morning and afternoon shift. The rest period shall be scheduled at the middle of the
shift whenever this is feasible.
Section 4. The usual unpaid lunch period shall be from 11:30 AM to 12:00 NOON with the
understanding that the circumstances and conditions may require a different time.
49
ARTICLE 6. HOLIDAYS
Section 1. Holidays Recognized and Observed. The following holidays shall be recognized and
observed as paid holidays:
1. New Year's Day
2. Martin Luther King Day
3. Washington's Birthday
4. Memorial Day
5. Independence Day
6. Labor Day
7. Columbus Day
8. Veteran's Day
9. Thanksgiving Day
10. Day After Thanksgiving
11. Christmas Day
In addition to the above listed paid holidays, each employee shall be granted one addition
paid holiday to be known as a "Floating Holiday," which Floating Holiday shall be selected by the
employee with the approval of the foreman.
Employee shall receive one day's pay for each of the holidays listed above on which they
perform no work.
Whenever any of the holidays listed above shall fall on Sunday, the succeeding Monday
shall be observed as the holiday. Whenever any of the holidays listed above shall fall on Saturday,
the preceding Friday shall be observed as the holiday.
For the purposes of computing overtime pay, holidays shall be counted as nine (9) hour
days.
Section 2. Eligibility Requirements. Employees shall be eligible for holiday pay under the
following conditions:
a) The employee would have been scheduled to work on such day if it had not been
observed as a holiday; unless the employee is on a day off, vacation, or sick leave.
Section 3. Holiday Work. If an employee works on any of the holidays listed above, in addition to
his holiday pay, he shall be paid for all hours worked.
ARTICLE 7. CALL BACK/ON CALL
A. Call Back - Employees called back to work shall receive a minimum of three (3) hours pay
for the work for which they are called back. This provision shall apply only when such call
back hours result in hours worked which are not annexed to one end or the other of the working
day.
50
B. On Call – Two (2) employees per week from November 1 through April 15 will be on call
for minor call back requests (requests that do not require the full crew to participate). Each
employee shall receive $100.00 for the week of on call duty.
The Highway Department employees shall establish an on call list of two (2) man teams that shall
be responsible for coverage when it is not necessary to require the full crew. If the employees are
unable to agree or do not provide a list, the Forman will prepare a list. The Team list and rotation
shall be provided to the Highway Department Foreman, the HR Manager and the Ellsworth Police
Department. One phone number for each person on the team shall be provided. Once one person
on the team is contacted, it shall be their responsibility to contact their teammate.
Once this list has been established, it shall be mandatory to participate in the rotation until any new
employee is hired to the Department for replacement to assure continuity.
If for any reason an employee is unable to fulfill the obligation for their week it shall be their
responsibility to find their replacement for the entire week, and they shall forfeit the stipend to their
replacement for that week, unless their absence is due to an unforeseen emergency. In the case of
an unforeseen emergency, the Foreman shall request a volunteer replacement until the situation is
evaluated.
Failure to be available on your rotation without authorization may lead to disciplinary action.
ARTICLE 8. SICK LEAVE
Section 1. Allowance. Any employee contracting or incurring any non-service connected sickness
or disability, which renders such employee unable to perform the duties of his employment, shall
receive sick leave with pay, if they have the accumulated sick leave time on the books.
In the event of sickness or disability in the employee's family, i.e. spouse, domestic partner,
parent, children, the employee shall also be granted leave with pay from their accumulated sick
leave time. Employees shall be limited to five (5) days of sick leave each calendar year for family
illness or disability. At the sole discretion of the City Council, an employee may be permitted to
use more than five days of sick leave per year for family illness or disability. The City Council
shall review a request for extended family illness leave on a case-by-case basis, and the City
Council's decision shall not be subject to the Grievance procedure of Article 16.
For the purpose of this article and the remaining contract, domestic partner shall mean a
partner with which the employee has a spousal-type relationship where partners have co-habited
for a consecutive six (6) month period.
Employees shall be allowed one day of sick leave for each month of service. An employee
in any month in which the employee is compensated for ninety-six (96) or more hours of work
shall earn sick leave.
For the purposes of computing overtime pay, sick leave days shall be counted as nine (9)
hour days.
Section 2. Accumulation: Employees shall start to earn leave from their date of employment and
they shall accumulate sick leave up to one hundred twenty (120) days, (1,080 hours).
51
Section 3. Unused Sick Leave: Employees shall not be compensated in cash for any unused sick
leave when they are separated from employment except in the case of retirement where one half of
unused sick leave will be compensated at the then prevailing rate of pay.
Section 4. Family Medical Leave Act. Twelve (12) Month Period - means a rolling twelve (12)
month period measured backward from the date the leave is taken and continuous with each
additional leave day taken.
ARTICLE 9. VACATIONS
Section 1. Each regular, full time employee shall earn paid vacation time based upon an
employment anniversary year.
Upon successful completion of one (1) year of service, an employee shall be entitled to two (2)
weeks and one day (99 hours) of paid vacation.
After completing six (6) years of service an employee shall be entitled to three (3) weeks and one
day (144 hours) of paid vacation each anniversary year.
After completion of thirteen (13) years of continuous service, an employee shall be entitled to four
(4) weeks and one day (189 hours) of paid vacation each anniversary year.
After completion of nineteen (19) years, an employee shall be entitled to five (5) weeks and one
day (234 hours) of paid vacation each anniversary year.
Section 2. Vacations shall be scheduled by the Foreman in accordance with the needs of the
department. Depending upon the department's needs, the Foreman shall schedule vacations in
accordance with the expressed preferences of the employees. When a conflict exists between the
expressed preferences of two or more employees, the expressed preference of the employee with
the greatest seniority within the job classification shall be given first consideration.
On the employee’s anniversary date, any remaining vacation time shall be paid to the employees
Retirement Health Savings Plan per Article 14.
Section 3. For the purposes of computing overtime pay, vacation days shall be counted as nine (9)
hour days.
ARTICLE 10 OTHER PAID LEAVES
Section 1. Severance Pay. After an employee has served two (2) years of continuous service, the
City will pay severance pay equal to two (2) weeks’ pay in addition to accumulated vacation pay if
the employee is either:
1. Involuntarily terminated from employment;
2. Retires for health reasons; or
3. After twenty years of service; or
4. Upon or after reaching age sixty.
52
Section 2. Family Death. In the event of a death in the family of an employee -- spouse, parents,
children, brother, sister, grandparents, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
or domestic partner, the employee shall be granted three (3) days leave of absence with full pay to
make household adjustments, arrange for medical services, or to attend funeral services. In the
case of a non-relative living in a household, before said family death leave can be granted it must
be reviewed and approved by the City Manager.
Section 3. Jury Duty. Employees shall be granted a leave of absence with difference in pay
between regular pay and jury pay any time required to report for jury duty or jury service.
Employees who are dismissed on or before noon from Jury Duty shall be required to report to
work.
Section 4. Short Term Unpaid Leave. Employees may be granted up to ninety (90) hours per year
of short term unpaid leave with Foreman recommendation and City Manager approval. No short
term unpaid leave will be granted that exceeds forty-five (45) consecutive hours and no short
term unpaid leave will be granted between November 1 and the last day of February.
ARTICLE 11. WORK OUT OF CLASS
Employees assigned to work outside of their classification shall be paid the wage rate established
for that class or their own wage rate, whichever is higher.
During a scheduled absence of the Highway Foreman, one (1) person may be assigned the
classification of “Crew Leader” for the duration of the absence. The “Crew Leader” shall be
reimbursed with a stipend of $1.00 per hour.
ARTICLE 12. WAGES
The employee’s regular hourly rate of pay shall be established as shown in Appendix A attached.
1. Step A to Step B is one (1) year.
2. Two (2) years to move between Steps B and each succeeding step to Step H.
3. Seven (7) years to move from Step H to Step I.
4. Kevin Sawyer shall receive Equipment Operator pay while working as a welder.
5. The City agrees to award each employee who is a non-smoker a $75 bonus to be paid in June
of each year.
6. The City will pay 85% contribution toward a membership to an Ellsworth area Health club for
employees who choose to improve their physical condition up to $250 per year.
ARTICLE 13. INSURANCE AND PENSION
Section 1. Each employee enrolled in one of the health insurance plans offered by the City will
contribute weekly towards the premium at a rate yet to be determined.
Section 2. The employee may elect to participate in the International City Management
Association Retirement program offered by the employer in lieu of the MainePERS program
53
offered by the City. The Employer's contribution shall be 7.25%. The employee shall contribute
no less than 6.5%. The employees may opt to participate in the available MainePERS plan, at a
rate set by MainePERS annually on July 1.
ARTICLE 14. RETIREMENT HEALTH SAVINGS
The City shall establish an ICMA Retirement Health Savings (RHS) Plan that will be funded as
follows:
? Employees shall contribute 1% of their gross wages to the account through a payroll
deduction.
? The City shall contribute :
? 2.5% of the employees yearly gross wages
? If the employee limits use of sick time to four days or less per year, the City will
contribute three days to the RHS account.
? At the end of each employment year, any unused vacation time will be contributed.
? Employees shall be eligible to make withdrawals from the current RHS account upon
separation from the City of Ellsworth. Or at age fifty-five (55), if they were enrolled in
the original RHS plan
ARTICLE 15. DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE
See CHAPTER VIII, Section 1.
ARTICLE 16. SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
See CHAPTER VIII, Section 2.
ARTICLE 17. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1. All references to employees in the Ordinance designate both sexes, and wherever the
male gender is used, it shall be construed to include male and female employees.
Section 2. The City may pay up to $11.50 towards the purchase of a meal by each employee
working at a "mealtime" during a snowstorm or other emergency as this term is defined below.
Instead of paying the meal allowance, the City may allow an employee to go home for the meal, or
the City may provide a meal. The City may develop a voucher or receipt system to document the
purchase of meals. All meals provided under this section shall be bought within the City limits of
Ellsworth. Meals may be bought outside the city limits when the employee is required to be out of
Hancock County on City business at least one hour before or after the regular noon mealtime. The
Highway Foreman shall declare a “mealtime”. It is the intent of the City to provide a meal to
employees who have been working in an emergency and beyond the normal work schedule, and in
particular, snowstorms, when the employee would otherwise be eating supper or breakfast at home.
The Foreman shall declare a "mealtime" when, in his opinion, there is the likelihood employees
will continue to work three hours beyond the "mealtime." The "mealtime" for supper shall be 6:00
PM, and the "mealtime" for breakfast shall be 6:00 AM. In the case of breakfast, a "mealtime"
54
shall be declared only if employees had been continuously at work since 4:00 AM. The Foreman
shall adjust the time when a meal shall be eaten to fit the circumstances. Employees may have up
to 20 minutes "on the clock" to eat a meal declared under this policy.
Section 3. The individual designated as the mechanic shall receive an annual tool allowance of
$250.00. The City will provide theft insurance for the mechanic’s personal tools kept at the city
garage.
The City agrees to provide certain commonly used basic tools for employee use. The City shall
have the sole discretion regarding which tools to provide, but will accept suggestions from
employees. The City shall have the sole discretion whether to replace lost tools. Tools must be
signed out for use from the Department Head or his designee. An employee signing out a tool is
responsible for the return of the tool.
Section 4. Protective Clothing. The Employer shall furnish protective clothing, such as rain suits
or any type of protective device to the employees.
Section 5. Clothing Allowance. The City will provide each employee with four (4) summer
weight shirts and four (4) winter weight shirts, so that an employee will have a total of eight (8)
shirts at all times. If a shirt wears out, an employee may turn it in for a new shirt. The City will
also reimburse each employee up to $150 per fiscal year for the purchase of other protective
clothing, limited to work pants and outerwear such as jackets and headgear. The City logo shall
be displayed on all protective clothing. In addition, the City agrees to reimburse each employee
up to $300 per year for the purchase of appropriate safety-toed footwear.
Section 6. Protective Eyewear. The City will furnish each employee who wears prescription
eyeglasses with 2 pair of Prescription Safety Glasses per three (3) year period. The cost of these
glasses shall not exceed $200 each. The second pair of protective wear shall be reimbursed only
with the approval of the Highway Foreman.
Section 7. Flu Shots. Highway Department employees shall be provided yearly flu shots at the
City’s expense, if an employee chooses to have a flu shot. Flu shots are completely optional.
ARTICLE 18. EQUIPMENT TRAINING PROGRAM
The City will offer twelve (12) training sessions per year to train on equipment. Any interested
employee will be required to sign up no later than the Friday before the scheduled training day
requesting to participate and on what piece of equipment they want to be trained. If more than
one piece of equipment is requested, the Foreman will select one of the requested pieces of
equipment for training that month. If no employees sign up for a session, the City shall not be
required to hold that session. Scheduling of the training session is contingent upon several
variables including but not limited to the availability of the piece of equipment and the weather.
The City will provide notice to the Employees of its intent to purchase capital equipment (cost
over $10,000) for the Department. The Employees may provide written comment within ten (10)
work days to the Department Head or his designee, who will then provide it to the City Council.
ARTICLE 19. WORK RULES
55
Section 1. The employer may establish new rules, regulations, and changes in rules that do not
violate the specific terms of this Ordinance.
Section 2. When existing rules and regulations are changed or new rules promulgated, they shall
be posted for ten (10) consecutive work days before becoming effective.
Section 3. Employees shall comply with all reasonable work rules.
Section 4. Any unresolved complaint as to the reasonableness of any new or existing rule, or any
complaint involving discrimination in the application of new or existing rules shall be resolved
through the grievance procedure.
ARTICLE 20. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1. The Employer retains all rights and authority to manage and direct its employees,
except as otherwise abridged, modified, or delegated by the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 2. Such rights shall include but not be limited to the operation and management of the
department, hiring, directing, transferring, promoting, suspending and discharging for just cause, or
otherwise disciplining employees. Further, management has the right to reduce or expand the
work force, establish work schedules, introduce new and/or improved or changed methods of work
or facilities, and to establish, change or eliminate jobs, work tasks, or positions.
Section 3. The Employer's not exercising any function or right hereby reserved to it, or the
exercising of such functions in a particular way, shall not be deemed a waiver of its rights to
exercise such function or preclude the Employer from exercising the same in some other way not
in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 4. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to deprive the employees of any rights
specifically set forth in this Ordinance, or to deprive them of the right of the grievance procedure
herein.
ARTICLE 21. ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
The following Side Letters of Agreement between the City of Ellsworth and the Ellsworth
Highway Unit Council #93, AFSCME, AFL-CIO, are incorporated herein by reference. To the
extent that there is any conflict between a Side Letter and this Ordinance, the language contained
in a Side Letter shall control.
1. Side Letter regarding the Highway Foreman, attached hereto as “Side Letter 1”;
2. Memorandum from Michelle Beal, City Manager, to Adam Wilson, Unit Chair, dated
December 31, 2013, regarding ICMA RHS Plan, attached hereto as “Side Letter 2”; and
3. Side Letter regarding the Harbor Master/Equipment Operator/Truck Driver, attached hereto as
“Side Letter 3”.
56
57
58
59
60
61
City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 35
Street Design and
Construction Standards
Ordinance
This ordinance was repealed. See Chapter 56, Article 0900.


OVERALL MAXIMUMS A-D October 1st, 2017- October 1st, 2018 Effective
FOOD MAXIMUMS
Number in Household Weekly Maximum Monthly Maximum
1 44.65 192.00
2 81.86 352.00
3 117.21 504.00
4 148.84 640.00
5 176.74 760.00
6 212.33 913.00
For each additional person add $144.00 per month
HOUSING MAXIMUMS
Unheated Heated
Number of Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 124.00 535.00 147.00 633.00
1 139.00 599.00 167.00 720.00
2 183.00 788.00 213.00 915.00
3 227.00 976.00 270.00 1,159.00
4 242.00 1041.00 294.00 1,264.00
ELECTRIC MAXIMUMS
Without Elec. Hot Water With Elec. Hot Water
Number in Household Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
1 14.00 60.00 20.65 89.00
2 15.70 67.50 23.75 102.00
3 17.45 75.00 27.70 119.00
4 19.90 86.00 32.25 139.00
5 23.10 99.00 38.75 167.00
6 25.00 107.00 41.00 176.00
HEATING FUEL
Month Gallons Month Gallons
September 50 January 225
October 100 February 225
November 200 March 125
December 200 April 125
May 50
PERSONAL CARE & HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES
Number in Household Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1-2 10.50 45.00
3-4 11.60 50.00
5-6 12.80 55.00
7-8 14.00 60.00
Note: For each additional person add 1.25 per week or 5.00 per month
SUPPLEMENT FOR HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN UNDER 5
Number of Children Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1 12.80 55.00
2 17.40 75.00
3 23.30 100.00
4 27.90 120.00
County Persons in Household
Hancock 1 2 3 4 5 6
693 787 992 1249 1367 1442
Note: For each additional person add $75.00 per month
GENERAL
ASSISTANCE
ORDINANCE
Prepared by Maine Municipal Association
August 2005
8/2005
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
The Municipality of __________________________ enacts the following General
Assistance Ordinance. This Ordinance is filed with the Department of Health & Human
Services (DHHS) in compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. §4305(4).
Signed the _______ day of ________________, _________, by the municipal officers:
(day) (month) (year)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
__________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
_________________________ ___________________________
(Print Name) (Signature)
8/2005 i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
Article I – Statement of Policy ........................................................................................... 1
Article II – Definitions ........................................................................................................ 3
Section 2.1 – Common Meaning of Words .................................................................... 3
Section 2.2 – Special Definitions ................................................................................... 3
Applicant .................................................................................................................. 3
Application Form ...................................................................................................... 3
Basic Necessities .................................................................................................... 3
Case Record ............................................................................................................ 4
Categorical Assistance ............................................................................................ 4
Claimant .................................................................................................................. 4
Deficit ...................................................................................................................... 4
Disabled Person ...................................................................................................... 4
Dwelling Unit ............................................................................................................ 4
Eligible Person ......................................................................................................... 5
Emergency .............................................................................................................. 5
General Assistance Program ................................................................................... 5
General Assistance Administrator ........................................................................... 5
Household ............................................................................................................... 5
Income ..................................................................................................................... 6
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 7
Just Cause............................................................................................................... 7
Lump Sum Payment ................................................................................................ 7
Material Fact ............................................................................................................ 8
Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................................................................... 8
Misconduct .............................................................................................................. 8
8/2005 ii
Municipality .............................................................................................................. 8
Municipality of Responsibility ................................................................................... 8
Need ........................................................................................................................ 8
Net General Assistance Costs ................................................................................. 9
Period of Eligibility ................................................................................................... 9
Pooling of Income .................................................................................................... 9
Real Estate .............................................................................................................. 9
Recipient ................................................................................................................. 9
Repeat Applicants ................................................................................................... 9
Resident .................................................................................................................. 9
Resources ............................................................................................................. 10
30-Day Need ......................................................................................................... 11
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants .............................................................................. 11
Unmet Need .......................................................................................................... 11
Work Requirements ............................................................................................... 11
Article III – Administrative Rules and Regulations ........................................................... 13
Section 3.1 – Confidentiality of Information ................................................................. 13
Release of Information .......................................................................................... 13
Information from Other Sources; Penalty .............................................................. 13
Misuse of Information ............................................................................................ 14
Section 3.2 – Maintenance of Records ....................................................................... 14
Case Records ........................................................................................................ 14
Retention of Records ............................................................................................. 15
Article IV – Application Procedure .................................................................................. 17
Section 4.1 – Right to Apply ........................................................................................ 17
Who May Apply ..................................................................................................... 17
Application Via Telephone ..................................................................................... 17
Written Application Upon Each Request ................................................................ 17
8/2005 iii
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice ................................................................... 18
Section 4.2 – Application Interview ............................................................................. 18
Section 4.3 – Contents of the Application ................................................................... 18
Section 4.4 – General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time
of the Application ..................................................................................................... 19
Application Requirements ...................................................................................... 19
Eligibility Requirements ......................................................................................... 20
Applicant Rights ..................................................................................................... 20
Reimbursement/Recovery ..................................................................................... 20
Section 4.5 – Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application .................. 21
Section 4.6 – Action on Applications ........................................................................... 22
Written Decision ....................................................................................................... 22
Content ..................................................................................................................... 22
Section 4.7 – Withdrawal of an Application ................................................................. 23
Section 4.8 – Temporary Refusal to Accept Application ............................................. 23
Section 4.9 – Emergencies ......................................................................................... 24
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 24
Assistance Prior to Verification ................................................................................. 25
Telephone Applications ............................................................................................ 25
Limitation on Emergency Assistance ....................................................................... 25
Section 4.10 – Residence .......................................................................................... 27
Moving/Relocating ................................................................................................... 27
Institutions ............................................................................................................... 27
Temporary Housing ................................................................................................. 28
Disputes ................................................................................................................... 28
Article V – Eligibility Factors ............................................................................................ 29
Section 5.1 – Initial Application ................................................................................... 29
Initial Application ...................................................................................................... 29
Subsequent Applicants............................................................................................. 29
8/2005 iv
Section 5.2 – Eligibility for Categorical Assistance ...................................................... 30
Section 5.3 – Personal Property.................................................................................. 30
a) Liquid Assets ........................................................................................................ 30
b) Tangible Assets ................................................................................................... 31
c) Automobile Ownership ......................................................................................... 31
d) Insurance ............................................................................................................. 32
e) Transfer of Property ............................................................................................. 32
Section 5.4 – Ownership of Real Estate ...................................................................... 32
a) Principal Residence ............................................................................................. 32
b) Other Property ..................................................................................................... 34
Section 5.5 – Work Requirement ................................................................................ 34
Employment; Rehabilitation ...................................................................................... 34
Verification ............................................................................................................... 35
Ineligibility ................................................................................................................. 35
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct ......................................... 36
Just Cause ............................................................................................................... 36
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause ........................................................ 37
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 37
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 37
Exemptions .............................................................................................................. 38
Section 5.6 – Municipal Work Program ....................................................................... 38
Consent .................................................................................................................... 39
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt ............................ 39
Limitations ................................................................................................................ 39
“Workfare First” Policy ............................................................................................. 41
Work-Related Expenses ........................................................................................... 43
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 43
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 43
Reports ..................................................................................................................... 44
8/2005 v
Section 5.7 – Use of Resources .................................................................................. 45
Minors ...................................................................................................................... 45
Mental or Physical Disability ..................................................................................... 46
Written Notice; Disqualification ................................................................................. 46
Forfeiture of Benefits ................................................................................................ 47
Section 5.8 – Period of Ineligibility .............................................................................. 47
Work Requirement ................................................................................................... 47
Fraud ........................................................................................................................ 48
Article VI – Determination of Eligibility ............................................................................ 49
Section 6.1 – Recognition of Dignity and Rights ......................................................... 49
Section 6.2 – Determination; Redetermination ............................................................ 49
Section 6.3 – Verification ............................................................................................ 50
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility ............................................................... 50
Applicant’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 50
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 50
Repeat Applicants .................................................................................................... 51
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants ................................................................................. 51
Overseer’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 51
Redetermination of eligibility .................................................................................... 52
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information ............................................................ 53
Section 6.4 – Fraud ..................................................................................................... 53
Period of Ineligibility ................................................................................................. 53
Right to a Fair Hearing ............................................................................................. 54
Reimbursement ........................................................................................................ 54
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 54
Section 6.5 – Period of Eligibility ................................................................................. 55
Section 6.6 – Determination of Need .......................................................................... 55
Income for Basic Necessities ................................................................................... 56
Use-of-Income Requirements .................................................................................. 57
8/2005 vi
Calculation of Income and Expenses ....................................................................... 58
Consolidation of Deficit ............................................................................................. 59
Section 6.7 – Income .................................................................................................. 59
Income Standards .................................................................................................... 59
Calculation of Income ............................................................................................... 60
Types of Income ....................................................................................................... 60
a) Earned income................................................................................................ 60
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs ......................... 61
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments .................................................................. 62
d) Income from Other Sources ............................................................................ 62
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter ....................................................................... 62
f) Income from Household Members ................................................................... 62
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income ........................................................... 63
h) Lump Sum Income .......................................................................................... 63
Section 6.8 – Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................... 65
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance .................................................................... 65
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities ................................ 65
A) Food .............................................................................................................. 66
B) Housing ......................................................................................................... 67
Rental Payments to Relatives ....................................................................... 67
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives ................................................................ 68
Mortgage Payments ...................................................................................... 68
Liens .............................................................................................................. 70
Property Taxes .............................................................................................. 71
Housing Maximums ....................................................................................... 72
C) Utilities .......................................................................................................... 73
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water ................. 73
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated
Hot Water ................................................................................................. 74
Non-Electric Utilities ...................................................................................... 74
8/2005 vii
D) Fuel ............................................................................................................... 74
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies ........................................................ 74
F) Other Basic Necessities ................................................................................ 75
1) Clothing ..................................................................................................... 75
2) Medical ...................................................................................................... 75
3) Hospital Bills .............................................................................................. 76
4) Dental ........................................................................................................ 77
5) Eye Care ................................................................................................... 77
6) Telephone Charge ..................................................................................... 78
7) Work-Related Expenses ............................................................................ 78
8) Travel Expenses ........................................................................................ 78
9) Burials, Cremations ................................................................................... 78
10) Capital Improvements ............................................................................... 79
Section 6.9 – Burials; Cremations ............................................................................... 79
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice ............................................................. 79
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased ........... 80
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members ...................................... 80
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members ......................... 81
Proration of Familial Responsibility ........................................................................ 81
Ten Days to Determine Eligibility ........................................................................... 82
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others
Can Contribute ................................................................................................ 82
Burial Expenses ..................................................................................................... 82
Cremation Expenses ............................................................................................. 83
Section 6.10 – Notice of Decision ............................................................................... 83
Written Decision .................................................................................................... 83
Contents ................................................................................................................ 83
Disbursement of General Assistance .................................................................... 84
8/2005 viii
Article VII – The Fair Hearing ......................................................................................... 85
Section 7.1 – Right to a Fair Hearing .......................................................................... 85
Section 7.2 – Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing ...................................................... 85
Written Request ..................................................................................................... 85
Scheduling the Fair Hearing .................................................................................. 86
Section 7.3 – The Fair Hearing Authority .................................................................... 86
Section 7.4 – Fair Hearing Procedure ......................................................................... 87
Claimant’s Failure to Appear ................................................................................. 88
Section 7.5 – The Fair Hearing Decision ..................................................................... 89
Article VIII – Recovery of Expenses ............................................................................... 91
Recipients ................................................................................................................... 91
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits ........................................... 91
Recipients of SSI ........................................................................................................ 92
Relatives ..................................................................................................................... 92
Article IX – Severability ................................................................................................... 93
Appendixes
Appendix A – GA Overall Maximums
Appendix B – Food Maximums
Appendix C – GA Housing Maximums
Appendix D – Electric Utility Maximums
Appendix E – Heating Fuel
Appendix F – Household & Personal Items
Appendix G –2005-2006 Mileage Rate
Appendix H – Funeral Maximums
Appendix I – Definition of Misconduct (26 MRSA § 1043(23))
8/2005 1
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
The Municipality of _______________________ administers a program of general
assistance (GA) available to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in
accordance with the standards of eligibility as provided within this ordinance,
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301 et seq.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while encouraging
self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible persons achieve self-maintenance
by promoting the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other
than financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the personal rights of the
applicant or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age,
race, nationality, religion, sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed
to including qualified individuals with disabilities, in municipal services, programs, and
activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA program that when viewed in
its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. GA
applicants with physical or mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation
in order to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to provide
the municipality with advance notice regarding the accommodation request.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance
and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants will be provided information regarding
their rights and responsibilities under the GA program. Within 24 hours of receiving an
application, the administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or not
assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the decision. The
administrator will also provide the applicant written notice that the applicant may appeal
to the municipal fair hearing authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an
8/2005 2
applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted except when the
administrator issues non-emergency assistance conditionally on the successful
completion of a workfare assignment (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each
applicant and recipient. These records are confidential as a matter of law (see 22
MRSA §4306).
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be
available. The administrator, or other designated person/entity, will be available to take
applications in the event of an emergency at all other times. A copy of this ordinance
and Maine General Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public
upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
8/2005 3
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 2.1—Common Meaning of Words
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their
common meaning.
Section 2.2—Special Definitions
Applicant. A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized
representative, an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency,
requested assistance without first completing an application. In addition, all persons on
whose behalf an authorized application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits
have been granted shall be considered applicants.
Application Form. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for
the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact
that a person has made application. The application form must be signed by the
applicant to be considered complete.
Basic Necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, non-elective essential
medical services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic telephone
service where it is necessary for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed
on the property threatens the loss of the applicant’s place of residence, and any other
commodity or service determined essential by the municipality.
“Basic necessities” do not include:
? Phone bills
? Cable or satellite dish
television
? Mail orders
? Vehicle payments
? Credit card debt
? Furniture
? Loan re-payments
8/2005 4
? Cigarettes
? Alcohol
? Pet care costs
? Vacation costs
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Key deposits
? Security deposits for rental
property(except for those
situations where no other
permanent lodging is
available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver,
deferral or installment
arrangement cannot be made
between the landlord and
tenant to satisfy the need for
the immediate payment of the
security deposit or payment in
full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)).
Case Record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative
records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written
decisions regarding eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types
and amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an applicant’s request
for fair hearing and those fair hearing decisions.
Categorical Assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant. A person who has requested a fair hearing.
Deficit. An applicant’s deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for
the household as provided in section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as
calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a
positive number. If the household income is greater than the appropriate overall
maximum level of assistance, the household has no deficit.
Disabled Person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to
a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician or qualified mental health
provider.
Dwelling Unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or
more persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)).
8/2005 5
Eligible Person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance from the
municipality according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(3)).
Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the
individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a
threat to the health or safety of a person At the municipality’s option, a situation which is
imminent and which may result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual
or municipality if not resolved immediately. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(4), 4308(2), 4310).
General Assistance Program. A service administered by a municipality for the
immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to
maintain themselves or their families. A general assistance program provides a specific
amount and type of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not
intended to be a continuing “grant-in-aid” or “categorical” welfare program. This
definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide
general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is found to be
otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(5)).
General Assistance Administrator. A municipal official designated to receive
applications, make decisions concerning an applicant’s right to receive assistance, and
prepare records and communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an
elected overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or
caseworker (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)).
Household. “Household” means an individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals,
even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the
dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata
share of the actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according to the
maximum levels of assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The income of
8/2005 6
household members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the applicant
only when there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Income. “Income” means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the
household including:
? Net remuneration for services
performed
? Cash received on either
secured or unsecured credit
? Payments received as an
annuity, retirement or
disability benefits
? Veterans’ pensions and/or
benefits
? Retirement accounts or
benefits
? Workers’ compensation
? Unemployment benefits
? Federal and/or state tax
returns
? Benefits under any state or
federal categorical assistance
program such as, TANF,
Supplemental Security
Income, Social Security and
any other payments from
governmental sources (unless
specifically prohibited by any
law or regulation)
? Court ordered support
payments, e.g., child support
? Income from pension or trust
funds
? Household income from any
other source, including
relatives or unrelated
household members
? Student loans
? Rental income
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that must be liquidated
for the purposes of deriving income:
1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental
entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such
as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and
from work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or
3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students
and who are not working full time.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall
be a 30-day period commencing on the date of the application. This prospective
calculation shall not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to
purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does not exceed the
income standards established by the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
4) Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being counted as
income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
? Food Stamps (7 USCS § 2017(b))
? Li-Heap (42 USCS § 8624)
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Residents Property Tax
Program (AKA “Circuitbreaker” Program) (36 M.R.S.A. § 6216)
? Aspire Support Service Payments (10-144 CMR Chapter 323)
Initial Applicants. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality are considered initial applicants.
Just Cause. A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with
one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending a scheduled fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A(5)).
Lump Sum Payment. A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an
applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or
settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments,
unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or
money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property
damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the amount
of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been
made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include
conversion of a nonliquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been
used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary
expenses. (22 MRSA § 4301 (8-A)).
Material Fact. A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the
determination of an applicant’s general assistance eligibility, and which would, if
disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of
eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or
service as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such
basic necessity, whichever is less.
Misconduct. For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22 MRSA §4316-A)
misconduct shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA §1043
(23). (See Appendix I of this ordinance for the official definition of misconduct.)
Generally, employees are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her
duties or obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer’s interest may also be found
guilty of misconduct.
Municipality. Any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance program.
Municipality of Responsibility. The municipality which is financially liable for the support
of an eligible person at the time of application (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(9), 4307).
Need. The condition whereby a person’s income, money, property, credit, assets or
other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the
individual’s family are less than the maximum levels of assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §
4301(10), 4308).
Net General Assistance Costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in
providing assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the
municipal officers. These do not include the administrative expenses of the general
assistance program (22 M.R.S.A.§§ 4301(11), 4311).
Period of Eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The
period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in
no event shall this period extend beyond one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)).
Pooling of Income. “Pooling of income” means the financial relationship among
household members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs
any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities may by
ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling
unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are requesting that the determination of
eligibility be calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling their
income have the burden of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.
Real Estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to
the land (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)).
Recipient. A person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance.
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. For purposes of this ordinance repeat and subsequent shall have
the same meaning.
Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of
remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no
other residence. A person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a
resident of that municipality or any other municipality is the responsibility of the
municipality where the person first applies. That municipality must take an application
and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new
residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Resources. Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which
are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of
resources: “available” and “potential”. Potential resources are programs, services,
non-liquid assets, or trusts that typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a
period of time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released.
Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance
program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available
trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held
resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF (previously known as
AFDC) program, Food Stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar
programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant
or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on
hand or in bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market,
or support from relatives which is being made available at the time of application and for
which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g.,
relocation beyond the immediate region). At the discretion of the GA administrator a
necessary minimum balance required by a financial institution in order to obtain free
checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be considered an available
resource.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients of services,
commodities or facilities made available by private organizations or charities. Although
GA applicants/recipients may be informed of the existence of a charitable resource
and/or organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a
private charitable resource(s).
30-Day Need. An applicant’s 30-day need is the sum of the household’s prospective
30-day costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the
purpose of this calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household’s
actual 30-day cost for the basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic
necessity as established by this ordinance, whichever is less.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Are repeat applicants who have not applied for
assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or
receiving support from a public benefit or private source and who have unexpectedly
become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an
available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own.
Unmet Need. An applicant’s unmet need is the household’s 30-day need as
established by section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated
pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive
number. If the household income is greater than the household’s 30-day need, the
household does not have an unmet need.
Work Requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal
administrator places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized
by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential
eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated,
and are not merely optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include
registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers,
maintaining employment, performing workfare, and participating in training, educational,
or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment.
8/2005 13
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance.
Section 3.1—Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general
assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the
applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4306).
Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the
right to review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however,
unless the administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly
authorizing the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the
administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in the applicant’s file
stating to whom the record was released and the date. The administrator may charge a
reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records when appropriate.
Information from Other Sources; Penalty. Information furnished to the municipality by
the Department of Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator
will also comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as
those concerning birth, marriage and death. (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
Any representative of a financial institution (except national banks) or any employer of a
general assistance applicant who refuses to provide necessary information to the
administrator in order to verify an applicant’s eligibility must state in writing the reason
for the refusal. Any such person who refuses to provide information, without just cause,
may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100. Any person,
including the applicant, who knowingly and willfully makes a false representation of a
8/2005 14
material fact to the administrator is committing a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314,
4315).
Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is
a punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)).
Section 3.2—Maintenance of Records
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general
assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:
a) provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
b) document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
c) ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or
judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.
Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record,
either in paper format or digital format for each applicant or recipient. Each case record
will include at least:
? household applications
? budget sheets
? information concerning the
types and amounts of
assistance provided
? narrative statements
describing the nature of the
emergency situation
whenever general assistance
is granted in amounts greater
than the applicant’s
mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need,
whichever is less)
? written decisions
? requests for fair hearings and
the fair hearing authority
decisions
? workfare participation records
? repayments to the
municipality
? narrative writings
documenting the need for
general assistance, the
8/2005 15
results of home visits,
collateral information,
referrals, changes in status
? client authorization(s) for the
release of GA information
and/or reason(s) for the
release of confidential
information
? adjustments in aid, and
suspension or termination of
eligibility
? physician’s documentation
? Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) interim
assistance reimbursement
authorization forms
? vendor forms
8/2005 16
Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to either the
applicant’s or recipient’s application or the administrator’s decisions.
Retention of Records. General assistance records shall be retained for a minimum of
three full years. The three year period shall coincide with the State’s fiscal year which
begins July 1 and ends on the following June 30. Records may be destroyed after three
years by one of the two preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/destruction process. In the
event a client’s records contain SSI reimbursement forms, the client’s records should be
maintained so that the municipality may seek reimbursement.
8/2005 17
ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
Section 4.1—Right to Apply
Who May Apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family,
any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in
person, except in special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this
ordinance or except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the
municipality has made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §4304(3)). In such cases,
the administrator may require a representative to present a signed statement
documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf
of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine
eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4308). With notice, all members of the household
receiving general assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the
administrator.
Application Via Telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good
cause, and he/she cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will
accept an application by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the applicant’s home with
his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Written Application Upon Each Request. Each request for assistance will be
administered in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an
independent determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person
applies (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4308, 4309).
8/2005 18
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice. Application forms will be available during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where
people may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take
emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the posted notice shall include
the fact that the municipality must issue a written decision on all applications within 24
hours, and the DHHS toll-free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or
complaints. Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only during
the regular hours established and posted by the administrator. In an emergency,
however, the administrator or his or her designee will be available to accept applications
for assistance whenever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Section 4.2—Application Interview
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each
applicant personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in
private, although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or
family member.
Section 4.3—Contents of the Application
At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory information:
a) applicant’s name, address, date of
birth, Social Security number or
appropriate United States Customs
and Immigration Services (USCIS)
documentation, and phone number;
b) names, date(s) of birth, and Social
Security number(s) or appropriate
USCIS documentation of other
household members for whom the
applicant is seeking assistance;
c) total number of individuals living with
the applicant;
d) employment and employability
information;
8/2005 19
e) all household income, resources,
assets, and property;
f) household expenses;
g) types of assistance being requested;
h) penalty for false representation;
i) applicant’s permission to verify
information;
j) signature of applicant and date.
In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification records (e.g., Social
Security card/number) because the record may have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the
initial applicant may be provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in
order to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant makes a
good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required to cure an immediate
and/or emergency need shall not be withheld. In such cases the municipality may elect
to provide only a prorated amount of GA, e.g., five day’s worth, while the applicant
proceeds to obtain the required information.
Section 4.4—General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time of the
Application
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and
responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying
for and receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility
guidelines, applicant rights, and applicant reimbursement obligations.
Application Requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the
application form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the
applicant of any other information or documentation that the applicant will have to
provide in order for the administrator to evaluate the applicant’s eligibility for assistance.
The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of information form or
reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain the applicant’s signature or written
authorization.
8/2005 20
Eligibility Requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally or in writing, the
applicant of the eligibility requirements of the program, including:
? the income standard of need;
? the applicant’s ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource-related
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately below;
? the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending
household income on non-basic necessities; and
? the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform
work-related assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith
effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain
those resources has been explained to the applicant in writing.
Applicant Rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:
? review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General
Assistance law;
? apply for assistance;
? receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for
assistance;
? confidentiality;
? contact the DHHS;
? challenge the administrator’s decision by requesting a fair hearing.
Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been
granted in the event of a subsequent ability to pay. The municipality may also, as
appropriate, contact the client’s legal representative to inform him or her of the client’s
obligation to repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the amount of assistance
granted to a recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for
8/2005 21
the applicant’s support (spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article
VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”) (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4318, 4319). Whenever applicable, the
administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may place against a recipient’s
real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the
Workers’ Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI “interim assistance
agreement” lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”.
Section 4.5—Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate,
complete and current household information and verifiable documentation concerning:
? Income
? Resources
? Assets
? Employment
? Use of income
? Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant’s
support
? Any change in this information from a previous application that would
affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §4309).
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation
that shows the applicant:
a) has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without
just cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;
b) has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a
part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has
satisfactorily performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to
perform those assignments;
8/2005 22
c) has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in
writing to such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to,
other government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of
sufficient means; and
d) has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative
program when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program
by the administrator, in order to diminish the applicant’s need for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §4316-A, 4317).
Section 4.6—Action on Applications
Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to
the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits
a written application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period
except when the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this
ordinance) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare
assignment (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4316-A, 4321). A written decision will be given
each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced or
terminated.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
a) the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant’s
ineligibility;
b) the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
c) the specific reasons for the decision;
d) the applicant’s right to a fair hearing; and
8/2005 23
e) the applicant’s right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the municipality has
acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
Section 4.7—Withdrawal of an Application
An application is considered withdrawn if:
a) the applicant requests in writing that his or her application be withdrawn; or
b) the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form
needed by the general assistance administrator.
Section 4.8—Temporary Refusal to Accept Application
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily
refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
a) When the applicant’s conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the
applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the
applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police
may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will only
be accepted when his or her conduct is under control.
b) If the administrator believes that an applicant’s behavior presents a threat to the
health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee, or if such behavior is
violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive, disruptive or harassing
behavior and has been required to leave on more than one occasion, then the
applicant may be required to designate a third party to apply for assistance on his
or her behalf and the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal
building;
8/2005 24
c) When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant that person
may be required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly
authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
Section 4.9—Emergencies
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond
the control of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be
expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the
household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(4)). Although they may be considered otherwise
ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an
emergency may be granted assistance, except as provided below, if they do not have
sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need and have not had
sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines
that an emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in
undue hardship and unnecessary costs to either the client or the municipality.
Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General
Assistance due to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8 or 6.4 of this ordinance is
ineligible to receive emergency assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)). However,
dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of
this section, “dependents” are defined as: 1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or
disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child
under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309(3)).
In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that all
household income will be considered available to them.
8/2005 25
Assistance Prior to Verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that
he/she needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification,
the assistance within 24 hours, provided that:
a) after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the
applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information
is completed; and
b) the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his or her need.
The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the
applicant’s statements about needing emergency assistance. No further
assistance will be authorized until the applicant’s eligibility is confirmed (22
M.R.S.A. § 4310).
Telephone Applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and if there
is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the
administrator shall accept an application over the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if
the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting
his or her home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her eligibility
through any other means.
Limitation on Emergency Assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for
emergency assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to
prevent all or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not
basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace the
misspent money (22 MRSA § § 4308(2) & 4315-A).
All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable
documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert
8/2005 26
the emergency situation. According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money
necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income
available to the household during the applicable time period.
a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for
emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created
by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as rent,
mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was created
over a longer period of time. In such cases, the applicable time period shall be
the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in the negative.
b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the
applicant’s ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable
time period, including evidence of all income and resources received over that
period of time.
c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household’s basic necessities
during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum
levels established by this ordinance for the specific basic necessity or the actual
monthly cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with averting the
particular emergency situation for which the applicant is seeking assistance.
d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time
period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments
available to the household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time period.
e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the
difference yielded by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant
will not totally alleviate the emergency situation.
8/2005 27
f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life
threatening situations or for initial applicants; that is, persons who have never
before applied for general assistance.
g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality from
electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner
available, provided such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is
in conformance with general assistance law.
Section 4.10—Residence
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for
assistance who are residents of this municipality. A resident is a person who has no
other residence and is physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain
here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible
persons who apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other
municipality. If a person who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Moving/Relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an
applicant or recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to
relocate to another municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible
and grants financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality
will be responsible for providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she
moves provided the recipient remains eligible.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or
8/2005 28
hospital) and requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the
responsibility of this municipality for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution if
the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307 and §4313 are met. The municipality thereafter
retains responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has
maintained a home in this municipality to which he/she intends to return. The
municipality also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the institution
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are
considered institutions (-above) if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes
arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.
Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the
denial, the applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant for up
to 6 months and may be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another
municipality but that municipality disputes its responsibility the administrator will notify
the DHHS in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded which municipality is responsible for
providing assistance. If another municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover
the amount due from the other municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4307(5), 4307(6)).
8/2005 29
ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is in need and has complied
with the eligibility requirements set forth below.
Section 5.1—Initial Application
Initial Application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by
law, applies to all applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a
defined period for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct (22 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23)) (see section 5.5 of this
ordinance). An initial applicant is a person who has never before applied for general
assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)).
“Need” means that the applicant’s income (including prorated income, where
applicable), property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall
maximum level of assistance contained in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the
applicant’s 30-day need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
Subsequent Applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat applicants.
Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at any time in
the past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general assistance
application was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time the applicant
was not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be eligible for
general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility requirements. The
eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the extent they have not
used their income and resources to secure basic necessities.
8/2005 30
Section 5.2—Eligibility for Categorical Assistance
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general
assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance
programs will be considered as income when determining need, with the exception of
Food Stamps, which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into
consideration when determining need (7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)).
In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be
considered as income; that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs
of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs
associated with his or her fuel needs (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)). The calculation of general
assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under “Types of Income” at
section 6.7 of this ordinance.
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being
advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who,
without just cause, make no good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.3—Personal Property
a) Liquid Assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including
but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, retirement
accounts, life insurance policies and other marketable security, will be eligible for
general assistance unless and until he or she uses these assets to meet his or
her basic needs, and thereby exhausts them.
At the discretion of the GA administrator, liquid assets do not mean a reasonable
minimum balance necessary for obtaining free checking. Although one checking
8/2005 31
account per household may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required
to obtain free checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
b) Tangible Assets. No person owning or possessing personal property, such as
but not limited to: a motor vehicle, or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other
assets that are convertible into cash and are non-essential to the maintenance of
the applicant’s household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may
be made when a person is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable
repeat applicant as defined in Section 2.2 or when reasonable efforts to convert
assets to cash at fair market value are unsuccessful.
Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment and other equipment used for the
production of income are exempt from the above category and are not
considered available assets.
c) Automobile Ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not
make a person ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment, obtaining medical care,
rehabilitation or training facilities, or for any other reason the GA administrator
determines reasonable for the maintenance of the applicant’s household.
Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8000 may be required, with written, 7-day notice, to make a good
faith effort to trade that automobile for an automobile with a market value of less
than $8000. Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade
down must be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade
down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317).
The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car payment or
vehicle maintenance cost including insurance for which the applicant is
responsible. However, provided the vehicle value is $8000 or less and the
applicant is utilizing the vehicle for any of the above mentioned “essential”
8/2005 32
reasons, the municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider reasonable
car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of
maintenance as “misspent” income. General assistance for travel-related needs
shall be computed in accordance with section 6.8(F)(7), (8) “Work Related/Travel
Expenses.”
d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non-contributory basis
or that is required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining
eligibility for general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may,
at the discretion of the GA administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
e) Transfer of Property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market
value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general
assistance will not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated
value of the transferred asset. Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up
to the uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day
disqualification will issue. There will be a presumption that the applicant
transferred his or her assets in order to be eligible for general assistance
whenever property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer
occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general assistance unless the
applicant can demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
Section 5.4—Ownership of Real Estate
a) Principal Residence. For purposes of General Assistance solely, the applicant’s
principal residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment, job training,
education, illness or disaster, provided there is demonstrated an intent to return.
If the applicant owns land in excess of the minimum lot size for the zone or
district in which the home is located, then that land may be considered a potential
resource if:
8/2005 33
1. The applicant has received General Assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
2. The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any mortgagee will
release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to the sale, zoning or other
land use laws do not render the sale illegal or impracticable); and
3. The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a
marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any necessary
surveys); and
4. The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of the
household; and
5. A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land in
question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount which will aid
the applicant’s financial rehabilitation; and
6. No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be unduly
burdensome or inequitable.
If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may condition the receipt
of future assistance on the applicant’s good faith efforts to sell, or render
saleable, land which could be used to provide necessary support for the
applicant (e.g., the applicant owns 100 “excess” acres. Sale of 10 of the acres
would provide for the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be
sold at the present time.) Assistance shall not be denied during the time that the
applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render saleable the land in
question.
Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance the obligations under this
section shall also cease.
8/2005 34
b) Other Property. If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will depend on the
applicant making a reasonable effort to:
1. Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the
property into cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or
2. Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present
need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to a third party in
order to become eligible for general assistance will be ineligible.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital
improvement payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the property.
The lien shall not be enforceable until the time of sale of the property or upon the
death of the recipient (see also section 6.8 of this ordinance) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4320).
Section 5.5—Work Requirement
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to
the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless
the applicant is exempt from such requirements as provided below.
Employment; Rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their
households who are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school diploma will be required
to accept any suitable job offer and/or meet with job counselors, attend employment
workshops and rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see “Exemptions” ).
Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator that they are available for work and
are actively seeking employment.
A “suitable job” means any job, which the applicant is mentally and physically able to
perform. “Available for work” means that applicants must make themselves available for
8/2005 35
work during normal business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying with the work
requirement.
Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis will be
required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the time of
each application. At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the
employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the
employer representative contacted. “Pursuit of employment” means actually submitting
a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or submitting a
written application or letter of inquiry to employers.
For the duration of any repeat applicant’s period of unemployment or partial
employment, the administrator will establish the number of employers per week to
whom each non-exempt applicant shall be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her
work search requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required by the
administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential employers in the
region and the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search
activities after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment
obligations, workfare obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job
training, educational, or rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will
not be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a condition of eligibility
for subsequent assistance.
Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants
will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just
cause:
a) refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
b) refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and
appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places
8/2005 36
repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent worksearch and will
be disqualified;
c) refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d) refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program
that would assist the applicant in securing employment;
e) fail to be available for work; or
f) refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work
program (see section 5.6).
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct. No applicant, whether an
initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time or part-time job without just
cause or who has been discharged from employment for misconduct (see Appendix I,
26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23) for the definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance
of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of separation from employment (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A (1-A)).
Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to
comply with the work requirements of this section without just cause. With respect to
any work requirement, just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable
and verifiable evidence that:
a) the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her
from working;
b) the work assignment pays below minimum wages;
c) the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d) the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to
meet piece work standards;
8/2005 37
e) the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or
rehabilitation program;
f) the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or
disabled family members; or
g) any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any
other verifiable reason the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate
will be accepted as just cause. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)).
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause. If the administrator finds that the
applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to establish the presence of just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
Eligibility Regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or
otherwise satisfy the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by
fulfilling the work requirement or requirements they violated.
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, “employment” shall mean
employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § § 1043 et seq., or the
performance of a service for an employer who withholds from the employee a social
security tax pursuant to federal law.
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a
disqualification for workfare violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under
“Eligiblity Regained”.
Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person’s household
who is not capable of working, including:
a) a dependent minor child;
b) an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
8/2005 38
c) a person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child
under 6 years of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified and
assistance is requested for those remaining members of the household who are
dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be calculated as though the
household is composed of the dependents only, except that all household
income will be considered as available to them.
Exemptions. The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is elderly,
physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose presence is required to care for
any pre-school age child or for any ill or disabled member of the household is also
exempt from these requirements.
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an
applicant’s existing employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer, ability to attend
an interview for possible employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma, classroom or on site
participation in a training program which is either approved by the Department of Labor
or determined by the Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in
securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated
under the control of the Department of Labor.
Section 5.6—Municipal Work Program
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be
required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a non-profit
organization, as a condition of receiving assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)).
As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can require recipients to
participate in training, education, or rehabilitative programs that will assist the recipient
8/2005 39
in securing employment. The work requirement provisions found in section 5.5
regarding just cause, dependents, and exemptions also apply to the municipal workfare
program.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that
they understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to
signing the form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read
it themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants must work
and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the work assignment is
calculated. In addition, the consent form shall describe the consequences of failing to
adequately perform part or all of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt. Pursuant to 22 MRSA
§ 4318 individuals owing the municipality funds for general assistance provided to them
are obligated to repay the municipality when and if they become able (see Article VIII).
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the workfare performed
deducted from any and all GA debt including GA liens (e.g., Workers’ Compensation
Settlement, SSI Retroactive Payment, Capital Improvement, Home Mortgage) that
might exist against their settlements, payments or other such property.
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(3)).
1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work
that exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person receives
under municipal general assistance standards. Any person performing work
under this subsection shall be provided with net general assistance, the value of
which is calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under state
or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if
that work would violate the participant’s basic religious beliefs.
8/2005 40
3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this subsection replace
regular municipal employees.
4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with an eligible
person’s:
a) existing employment;
b) ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
c) attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d) classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program
intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
e) classroom or on site participation in a training program which is approved by
the Department of Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be
reasonably expected to assist the person in securing employment, or
classroom participation in a degree-granting program administered by the
DHHS or the Department of Labor.
5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours per
week. An eligible person who has full or part-time employment shall be exempt
from the work requirement to the extent that the work requirement in combination
with his or her regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his or her
capabilities. However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an eligible person
may be required as a condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor’s
statement detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor’s statement to verify an applicant’s illness or
disability and the applicant is not currently under the care of a provider, the
municipality may pay for the doctor’s evaluation if the applicant has no means to
pay for the exam. However in such a case the administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the municipality may
elect to refer the client to such a resource. The administrator will not require
8/2005 41
verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short
duration that a reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)).
7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an
emergency situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for
committing a program violation) be required to perform work under this
subsection prior to receiving general assistance. The administrator shall meet
immediate needs upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that
he/she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance. When the
recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be required prior to
receiving general assistance in accordance with the following “workfare first”
policy.
“Workfare First” Policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(D), the
administrator may, in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of
general assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the
general assistance benefit conditionally granted.
1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is
eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as
otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for
general assistance and prior to performing any workfare for the municipality
associated with that request for assistance. That written decision must include:
a) a specific description of the amount of general assistance being
conditionally granted to the household, and for which basic needs;
b) the period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being
issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
8/2005 42
c) the rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the prevailing
minimum wage), upon which the duration of the workfare assignment
is calculated;
d) the actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be performed,
in hours, before the general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e) the specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the general
nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s) of work-site,
date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare supervisors’ names
and contact telephone numbers; and
f) any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignment(s)
the recipient will be expected to perform.
3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy
must sign a consent form that informs the participant of his or her workfarerelated
rights and responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to
perform all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there
has been a failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just
cause, the administrator shall issue a grant of general assistance in the amount
of the number of workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate
used to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to any
disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of the conditionally
issued general assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial
termination, and the reasons therefore, will be issued to the workfare participant
in accordance with section 6.10 of this ordinance.
5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the
workfare participant was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just
8/2005 43
cause reasons shall be reassigned or excused at the discretion of the GA
administrator.
Work-Related Expenses. A participant’s expenses related to work performed under this
section will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the
person (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316.2(E)). The municipality will provide any special clothes or
equipment the recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or willfully performs
below average standards the work assigned by the municipality, will be ineligible for
assistance for 120 days (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(1)). As soon as the administrator
knows that a recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify
the recipient in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days starting from the last date
of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden of
demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the
workfare participant.
Eligibility Regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their
eligibility under the following conditions.
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been
given will be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although
dependents in the household may be eligible (see section. 5.5, “Dependents”).
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient requests an opportunity to
perform the work assignment which he or she, without just cause failed to perform, the
disqualified recipient will be given one opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator
will give the recipient a work assignment as soon as possible.
8/2005 44
If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency need and the
administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment in time to alleviate the
emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert
the emergency. However, the provision of such emergency assistance will not bar the
administrator from subsequently enforcing the previously issued 120-day disqualification
if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work assignment.
The amount of emergency assistance granted will be considered in the computation of
the total number of hours the recipient must work.
Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their eligibility during a 120 day
disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously
failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work
assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith. In such a circumstance, the
administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification for the term of its initial duration.
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently
disqualified within the initial 120-day period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the
municipal work program, that participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period
beginning with the new disqualification date, but will be provided no opportunity to
requalify.
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property, harasses or harms other
employees or who otherwise conducts themselves in a disruptive manner and is
discharged by the work supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to
the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise becoming employed and
meeting the definition of need.
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to
persons who work for the municipality in reports to the DHHS (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A(2)).
8/2005 45
Section 5.7—Use of Resources
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize every available
or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for general assistance (see
section 2.2 for definition of “Resources”). People who refuse or fail to make a good faith
effort to secure a potential resource after receiving written notice to do so are
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make an effort to secure the resource.
Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to secure the
resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Minors. A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or
children will be eligible to receive general assistance only if the minor is residing in the
home of his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire
household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will
be made when:
1) the minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult-supervised
supportive living arrangement; or
2) the minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both parents are
unknown; or
3) no parent will permit the minor to live in the parent’s home; or
4) the minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth
of any dependent child; or
5) the DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or safety of the minor
or the minor’s dependent child or children would be jeopardized if the minor and
his or her child or children lived with a parent; or
6) the DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that there is good cause
to waive this limitation on eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)).
8/2005 46
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his or her parents
for general assistance will be informed that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the
applicant’s parents are still legally liable for his or her support and the municipality has
the right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance granted to such
a recipient to the extent his or her parents are financially capable of repaying the
municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
With regard to such application, the municipality may seek verification of the applicant’s
need for general assistance by contacting his or her parents. If the applicant’s parents
declare a willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs directly, and
there is no convincing evidence that the applicant would be jeopardized by relying on
his or her parents for basic needs, the administrator may find the applicant not to be in
need of general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be provided by a
legally liable relative.
Mental or Physical Disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability
must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have
been recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant and would not
constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the individual.
Written Notice; Disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice
whenever the applicant is required to utilize any specific potential resource(s). Any
applicant who refuses to utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving
written 7-day notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made a good
faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General assistance will not be withheld
from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the applicant has made, or is in the
process of making, a good faith effort to obtain the resource.
8/2005 47
Forfeiture of Benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a
knowing or intentional violation of program rules or a refusal to comply with that
program’s rules without just cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be considered
income under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be
considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of income but, rather,
in the form of a specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource,
up to its forfeited value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of
120 days from the date of the forfeiture—unless the municipality is prohibited by federal
or state law from considering the forfeited resource as available with respect to local
public assistance programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.8—Period of Ineligibility
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended prior to being
given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4321-4322).
Each person will be notified in writing of the reasons for his or her ineligibility, and any
person disqualified for not complying with the ordinance will be informed in writing of the
period of ineligibility.
Work Requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a work requirement
are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain
their eligibility) (see sections 5.5, 5.6). If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance
and does not comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the grant of
assistance. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to
render a decision of ineligibility.
8/2005 48
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period
of 120 days (see section 6.4, “Fraud”). The administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are ineligible as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is issued before the
expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered
after the period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of ineligibility
will commence on the day of the written notice of ineligibility.
8/2005 49
ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1—Recognition of Dignity and Rights
Any determination or investigation into an applicant’s eligibility will be conducted in a
manner that will not violate the applicant’s privacy or personal dignity or violate his or
her individual rights.
Section 6.2—Determination; Redetermination
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a
person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a
redetermination of eligibility at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to
administer the program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis, but may elect to disburse that applicant’s assistance
periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
The administrator may redetermine a person’s eligibility at any time during the period he
or she is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the
recipient’s circumstances that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may
receive. Once a recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not
reduce or rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining
the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the
decision to the fair hearing authority (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
8/2005 50
Section 6.3—Verification
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall determine eligibility each
time a person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The period of eligibility will
not exceed one month. At the expiration of this period applicants/recipients may
reapply for assistance and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
Applicant's responsibilities. Applicants and recipients for general assistance are
responsible for providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary to demonstrate eligibility,
the applicant must have the first opportunity to provide the specific information or
documentation required by the overseer. When information required by the overseer is
unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative available information, which is subject
to verification.
Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of application and
continuing thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current information and
documentation concerning his/her:
? Need
? Income
? Employment
? Use of income
? Expenses
? Assets & liabilities
? Use of available resources
? Household composition
Initial Applicants. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality are considered initial applicants and must have their eligibility determined
solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants are not subject to eligibility conditions
placed on repeat applicants (see below). However, such applicants are still responsible
for providing the GA administrator with reasonably obtainable documentation adequate
8/2005 51
to verify that there is a need for assistance. In addition, initial applicants must also
comply with both lump sum and relevant work rules (i.e. job quit).
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be determined on the
basis of need and all other conditions of eligibility established by law and this municipal
ordinance.
The administrator will require documentation of a repeat applicant’s income, use of
income, assets and resources plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel,
telephone, medical services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search results, e.g., provide a list
of the employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name
of the employer representative contacted, as required by the GA administrator.
Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of information
reported on previous applications including changes in his/her household or income that
may affect his/her eligibility.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are applicants who have
not applied for assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly
employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private source who have
unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income
and/or benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through no fault of
their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be considered initial applicants for
purposes of verification requirements and misspent income if the administrator finds that
imposing the general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed on
repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
Overseer's responsibilities. In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and documentation from the
applicant. Once the applicant has presented the necessary information, the overseer is
8/2005 52
responsible for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification necessary to
determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility, the overseer may contact sources
other than the applicant for verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of
the applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records without the
applicant's knowledge and consent.
Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but are not limited to:
? DHHS and any other
department/agency of the
state or non-profit
organizations
? financial institutions
? creditors
? utility companies
? employers
? landlords
? physicians
? persons with whom the
applicant/recipient is a
cohabitant
? legally and non-legally liable
relatives
Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling to supply the
overseer with necessary information, documentation, or permission to make collateral
contacts, or if the overseer cannot determine that eligibility exists based on information
supplied by the applicant or others.
Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's eligibility at any
time during the period that person is receiving assistance if the overseer is informed of
any change in the recipient's circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to
which the recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided that
once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific time period, a reduction
in assistance for that time period may not be made without prior written notice to the
recipient with the reasons for the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a
fair hearing upon the proposed change.
8/2005 53
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information. Any person governed by 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has
been requested must state in writing the reasons for the refusal within 3 days of
receiving the request. Any such person who refuses to provide the information, without
just cause, commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any
person who willfully renders false information to the administrator is guilty of a Class E
crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314(5), 4314(6), 4315).
Section 6.4—Fraud
It is unlawful for a person to make knowingly and willfully a false representation of a
material fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance or cause
someone else to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315). False
representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and willfully:
a) making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either
orally or in writing, in order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or
the applicant’s household is not entitled;
b) concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order
to obtain assistance to which the applicant or applicant’s household is not
entitled; or
c) using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which
they were intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false representation prior to
being given an opportunity for a fair hearing.
Period of Ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person
has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making
8/2005 54
himself or herself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that
applicant in writing that he or she has been disqualified from receiving assistance for
120 days. For the purpose of this section, a material misrepresentation is a false
statement about eligibility factor in the absence of which some or all of the assistance
would not be or would not have been granted.
The notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his
or her right to appeal the administrator’s decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA)
within 5 working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received
or upon the date of notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
Right to a Fair Hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing
authority (FHA) in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. No recipient shall have
his or her assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being
notified and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied
with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to the Superior Court pursuant to
Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing
authority determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will
be required to reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he/she
was not entitled.
Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this section serve to
disqualify any eligible dependent in that household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)). In the
event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
8/2005 55
calculated as though the household is comprised of the dependents only, except that
the entire household income will be considered available to them.
Section 6.5—Period of Eligibility
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a period that is
sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in
excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed
application the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis.
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator shall render
a notice of “ineligibility” and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to reapply as
soon as he or she has the necessary information and/or as soon as is practicable for
the applicant.
Although eligibility is determined on a 30-day basis, for reasons of administrative
efficiency the administrator may elect to disburse an applicant’s assistance for shorter
periods of time, such as weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. When the
administrator elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than 30
days, subsequent grants of assistance during that 30-day period may be issued
pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the applicant’s financial situation
changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of eligibility.
Section 6.6—Determination of Need
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)). The administrator will calculate applicants’
expenses according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels
for the specific necessities allowed in section 6.8, whichever is less. The sum of these
8/2005 56
expenses, as calculated for a prospective 30-day period, is the applicant’s 30-day need.
Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income and other resources exceed
this calculation except in an emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 of this
ordinance).
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income,
property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their
household are greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth
in the beginning of section 6.8 (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4305(3-B)). The difference
between the applicant’s income and the overall maximum levels of assistance
established by this ordinance is the applicant’s deficit.
Once an applicant’s deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of
assistance for each basic necessity (see Appendixes A-H of this ordinance) shall be
used by the administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the applicant
is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity are
intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients maintain a standard of health
and decency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)).
Income for Basic Necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic
necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to
replace income that was spent within the 30-day period prior to an application for
assistance on goods and services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on
goods and services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to the
applicant and combined with the applicant’s prospective 30-day income for the
purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A). Applicants who have
sufficient income to provide their basic necessities but who use that income to purchase
goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be considered eligible for
assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
8/2005 57
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that their income does
not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-Income Requirements. The administrator may require that anyone applying for
general assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income. This
documentation can take the form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which
demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all household income received over the
last 30-day period. Except as is deemed appropriate by the GA administrator for
“unforeseen” repeat applicants (See Section 6.3 of this ordinance) , repeat applicants
may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic necessities. Income
expended that cannot be verified will generally be considered available and in such
case will be added to the 30-day prospective income.
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mortgage); the cost of
heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the
base rate if the household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of
nonelective medical services as recommended by a physician which are not otherwise
covered by medical entitlement, Hospital Free Care or insurance; the reasonable cost of
essential clothing and non-prescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the administrator.
Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be allowed in the budget
computation include:
? Internet services
? Cable or satellite television
? Cellular phones
? Cigarettes/alcohol
? Gifts purchased
? Pet care costs
? Costs of trips or vacations
? Paid court fines
? Repayments of unsecured
loans
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Credit card debt.
8/2005 58
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any
applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his or her income for basic
necessities or fails to reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the following manner:
1) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his or her
income, at the time it becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The
administrator may prioritize such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant’s income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage), energy (i.e.,
heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic necessities;
2) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use-of-income
requirements placed on them;
3) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant’s
income was spent, or it is determined that some or all of the applicant’s income
was not spent as directed and was also not spent on basic necessities, the
applicant will not be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
4) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed, but can show with
verifiable documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to
allowed amounts, the applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant’s
eligibility and need.
Calculation of Income and Expenses. When determining eligibility, the administrator will
subtract the applicant’s net income from the overall maximum level of assistance found
at the beginning of section 6.8. If income is greater than the overall maximum level of
assistance, the applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency (see section 4.9) .
If income is less than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
8/2005 59
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the
applicant also has an unmet need and is in need of basic necessities. The municipality
will not grant assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 6.8 of
this ordinance for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the
administrator elects to consolidate the applicant’s deficit, as provided immediately
below.
Consolidation of Deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants
will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the
maximum amount allowed for that necessity in this ordinance or the actual 30-day cost
of the necessity, whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may consolidate the
applicant’s deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in an amount greater than the
ordinance maximum for that necessity.
1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity
in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the exception rather
than the rule;
2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the
applicant is in an emergency situation; and
3) The need for the application of the recipient’s consolidated deficit toward a basic
necessity was not created by the recipient misspending his or her income or
resources in violation of the use-of-income requirements of this ordinance.
Section 6.7—Income
Income Standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of
assistance provided in section 6.8 shall not be eligible for general assistance except in
an emergency. The administrator will conduct an individual factual inquiry into the
applicant’s income and expenses each time an applicant applies.
8/2005 60
Calculation of Income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on
the date of application, and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their
need. For all applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider
as available income any income that was not spent during the previous 30-day period
on basic necessities, as well as any income that was spent on basic necessities in
unreasonable excess of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household’s income exceeds the amount of the household’s need for basic necessities,
up to the maximum levels contained in section 6.8, applicants will not be considered in
need.
Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may necessitate that the
maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308) (see section 4.9 of this ordinance).
To calculate weekly income and expenses, the administrator will use actual income
received or actual anticipated income.
Types of Income. Income that will be considered in determining an applicant’s need
includes:
a) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through
wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee,
is considered earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be
computed by subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be the
income available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions
required by state, federal, and local law. Rental income and profit from produce
that is sold is considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and
unavailable to the applicant or the applicant’s dependents will not be considered
as earned income.
8/2005 61
Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and
from work, special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will be
deducted from an applicant’s income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs. State/federal
categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments, Social Security payments, VA
benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and payments from other
government sources will be considered as income, unless expressly prohibited
by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits Food Stamps and fuel
assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP
and EPIC) from being considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general assistance the
applicant is eligible to receive. Although applicants may have only a limited or
reduced need for general assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently
received HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or otherwise
prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective 30-day period.
The administrator’s obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an
applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her
total fuel costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for the
household’s heating energy needs according to actual usage, up to the
ordinance maximums, but the administrator may, with written notice to the
applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant’s deficit until
such a time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable
need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance; that is, the applicant’s
fuel tank can accept a minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a
positive credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality is not
obligated to divert any recipient’s heating energy allowance toward non-heating
purposes solely on the basis of the recipient’s receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
8/2005 62
Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes of GA eligibility
include:
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Residents Property Tax
Program (so-called “Circuitbreaker” program) (36 M.R.S.A. § 6216)
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments. Alimony and child support payments will be
considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general
assistance administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually
received to the State Department of Health and Human Services’ Child Support
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants being referred
to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be required to follow-through with
such services. Because child support payments are considered a resource,
applicants must make a good faith effort to secure such payments.
d) Income from Other Sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be
considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered
income as will cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any
other source, including relatives (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters
below the age of 18 who are full-time students and who are not working full-time
will not be considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the household
will be considered available to the household.
f) Income from Household Members. Income from household members will be
considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is
legally obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool
8/2005 63
or share their income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as
to provide support to one another.
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income. When two or more individuals share the
same dwelling unit but not all members of the household are applying for general
assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable
presumption that the entire household is pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-
A)).
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the presumption
that all household income is being pooled by providing the administrator with
verifiable documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for
the duration of the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would
include evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank statements,
cancelled checks, receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly
supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently solely and entirely
responsible for his or her pro-rata share of household costs.
If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality’s presumption that
all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be
determined based on total household income. If the applicant successfully
rebuts the municipality’s presumption that all household income is being pooled,
the applicant’s eligibility will be determined on the basis of his or her income and
his or her pro-rata share of actual household expenses.
h) Lump Sum Income. A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or
recipient prior to the date of application for general assistance will be considered
as income available to the household. However, verified required payments (i.e.,
any third party payment which is required as a condition of receiving the lump
sum payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the purpose for which the
8/2005 64
lump sum payment was made) and any amount of the lump sum payment which
the applicant can document was spent on basic necessities, as described below,
will not be considered available income.
Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time prior to the date of
application for general assistance, the administrator will assess the need for
prorating an applicant’s eligibility for general assistance according to the
following criteria (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A)):
1) identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
2) subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments;
3) subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was
spent on basic necessities, including all basic necessities as defined by the
general assistance program such as: reasonable payment of funeral or
burial expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs related to
the illness or death of a family member; repair or replacement of essentials
lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor
vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other day-to-day
living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit, the proceeds of which
can be verified as having been spent on basic necessities; and payment of
bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A));
4) add to the remainder all income received by the household between
the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and the date of
application for general assistance; and
5) divide the sum created in subsection (4) by the greater of the verified
actual monthly amounts for all of the household's basic necessities or
150% of the applicable federal poverty guidelines. 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4305(3-B)
8/2005 65
This dividend represents the period of proration determined by the
administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the lump sum payment.
The prorated sum for each month must be considered available to the
household for 12 months from the date of application or during the period of
proration, whichever is less.
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible for emergency
assistance may not be denied emergency assistance to meet an immediate
need solely on the basis of the proration of a lump sum payment. (22 MRSA
§ 4308)
Section 6.8—Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of
assistance for specific basic necessities listed in Appendices B-H of this ordinance, an
applicant’s eligibility for general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his or
her income from the overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A for
the applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)). The difference yielded by
this calculation shall be the applicant’s deficit.
Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent
the applicant is unable to otherwise provide the basic necessities essential to maintain
themselves or their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for
general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for
emergency general assistance will be determined according to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities. The municipality will
grant assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum
levels for specific types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in consultation
with the applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant’s deficit toward assistance
8/2005 66
with any one or combination of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These
maximum levels will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator determines that
there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist, in which case
these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet immediate needs. In all cases
either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum
amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in determining need.
In roommate situations, the applicant’s need for common living expenses for rent, fuel,
electricity, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other
household members’ proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which has been or will be paid
by another person. In addition, as a general rule the municipality will not provide a
benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living with the
applicant’s household or that has otherwise been incurred by a person who has not
been found eligible to receive assistance.
Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the administrator in the
following circumstances: (1) a recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent absence of a former household
member in whose name the bill was customarily issued; (2) the applicant and members
of the applicant’s household were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid with general assistance; and (3)
the applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to issue future bills in the
name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the household.
A) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the
allowed maximum amounts designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the
appropriate household size.
For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by reference the U.S.D.A.
Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the Maine Department of Health and Human
8/2005 67
Services on or about October of each year. See Appendix B of this ordinance for
the current year’s food maximums.
In determining need for food the administrator will not consider the value of the food
stamps an applicant receives as income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C.
§2017(b)). The municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved
food products.
The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary for households having
members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor’s
statement verifying there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for food
that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
B) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage payments
that are reasonable and/or within the allowed maximum levels. See Appendix C of
this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will inform the applicant
of the allowed housing maximums to assist the applicant in his or her search for
housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will be the categorical housing
maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to adequately
shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing that
contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members
will be provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
Rental Payments to Relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental
payment to an applicant’s relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at
least three months and the applicant’s relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a “relative” is defined as the applicant’s
8/2005 68
parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, parent’s siblings, or any of
those relative’s children (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319(2).
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives. When applicants are living in private homes
with the owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not pooling income or
who are not legally liable relatives, the amount allowed as the applicant’s shelter
expense will be the applicant’s pro rata share of the actual, total shelter cost, up to
the ordinance maximum (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be issued,
whenever reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property; i.e., to a landlord before a tenant, or to a mortgagee
before a mortgagor.
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600 in rental payments to any
landlord in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental
payments issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation (see section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue
Code).
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the municipality on
behalf of applicants renting rooms from the landlord’s own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a lodging license from the Department
of Health and Human Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to 10-144A
Code of Maine Regulations, Chapter 201, as a condition of that landlord receiving
future general assistance payments on behalf of his or her tenants.
Mortgage Payments. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the general assistance administrator will make an individual factual
determination of whether the applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In
8/2005 69
making this determination, the administrator will consider the extent and liquidity of
the applicant’s proprietary interest in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
(1) the marketability of the shelter’s equity;
(2) the amount of equity;
(3) the availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant
an opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate
needs;
(4) the extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant’s financial
rehabilitation;
(5) a comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the
anticipated rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if he/she
were to be dislocated to rental housing;
(6) the imminence of the applicant’s dislocation from owned housing because
of his or her inability to meet the mortgage payments;
(7) the likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent such
dislocation; and
(8) the applicant’s age, health, and social situation.
These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the
shelter is an available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in response to the applicant’s
request for mortgage assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible for
general assistance if after reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines
that:
8/2005 70
(1) the monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance with the maximum levels
of assistance available for housing appropriate to the applicant’s
household size;
(2) there is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the property, when
considered in the context of the applicant’s borrowing capacity with the
mortgagee or the general lending community, to suspend the mortgage
obligation temporarily or reamortize the mortgage in such a way as to
suspend or reduce the mortgage obligation; and
(3) the failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely manner could
jeopardize the applicant’s continued right of possession of the property.
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount
due, up to the amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed below. After
an initial application, assistance with such payments will be given only after the
applicant has made all reasonable efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her
home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to secure a loan, and if
the monthly mortgage payments are not realistically in line with the rental rates for
similar housing in the area that could meet the applicant’s needs, the administrator
will inform the applicant that he/she is responsible for finding alternative housing
within his or her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to
secure such housing.
Liens. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs
of granting assistance with mortgage payments In addition, a municipality may claim
a lien against the owner of real estate for the amount of money spent by it to make
capital improvements to the real estate. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be
enforced against a recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of the
property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a person who is currently
receiving any form of public assistance, or who would again become eligible for
general assistance if the lien were enforced.
8/2005 71
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a person’s
property to recover its costs of providing general assistance for a mortgage payment
or capital improvement it must file a notice of the lien with the county registry of
deeds where the property is located within 30 days of making the mortgage
payment. That filing shall secure the municipality’s or the state’s interest in an
amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or capital improvement payment and all
subsequent mortgage or capital improvement payments made on behalf of the same
eligible person, plus interest and costs.
Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry, the municipal officers
must send notice to the owner of the real estate, the general assistance recipient,
and any record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that a lien on the property is going to be filed with the registry. This notice must
clearly inform the recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the name, title,
address and telephone number of the person who granted the assistance. The
municipal officers must also give written notice to the recipient each time the amount
secured by the lien is increased because of an additional mortgage payment. This
notice must include the same information that appeared on the original intent-to-file
notice sent to the recipient.
The municipality may charge interest on the amount of money secured by the lien.
The municipal officers will establish the interest rate not to exceed the maximum rate
of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged against delinquent taxes.
The interest will accrue from the date the lien is filed.
Property Taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance with his or her
property taxes, the administrator will inform the applicant that there are two
procedures on the local level to request that relief: the poverty abatement process
(36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)) and General Assistance. If the applicant chooses to seek
8/2005 72
property tax assistance through General Assistance, or if the applicant is denied a
poverty tax abatement, the administrator may consider using general assistance to
meet this need only if:
a) the property tax in question is for the applicant’s place of residence;
b) there is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the
date of application;
c) as a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis of information
obtained from the applicant’s mortgagee, if any, it is reasonably certain that a
tax lien foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
d) the applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the
Maine Resident Property Tax Program, when available.
Housing Maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this
ordinance have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental
survey or the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the maximum levels of housing are
derived from the HUD values made effective as of every October 1, and adjusted to
disregard the current and averaged utility allowances as developed by the Maine
State Housing Authority, those levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See
Appendix C of this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums.
If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in this ordinance are derived
from a locally developed fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the maximum levels of
housing assistance will be incorporated into this ordinance pursuant to the ordinance
adoption and amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
8/2005 73
C) Utilities. Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be budgeted separately if
they are not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making
arrangements with the utility company regarding service, including entering into a
special payment arrangement if necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security deposits.
Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant to section 4.9.
Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an emergency in all cases.
The administrator will make an individual, factual analysis to determine if the
termination of utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will
consider the household composition, the time of year, the age and health of the
household members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or other resources to pay their
utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or part of their income on items
which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to receive general assistance to
replace those funds.
Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their income and use of income
for the applicable time period (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 and 6.3).
The administrator will notify applicants in writing that they must give the
administrator prompt notice if their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel
supply is low. It is the applicant’s responsibility to attempt to make arrangements
with the utility company to maintain their service and to notify the administrator if
assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water. See Appendix D of
this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
8/2005 74
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated Hot Water. See
Appendix D of this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Non-Electric Utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be
budgeted at a 30-day reasonable usage rate.
D) Fuel. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for
fuel during the heating season (September through May) provided such expenses
are reasonable, and at other times during the year when the administrator
determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and appropriate.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent bill.
The municipality is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as provided
in section 4.9. Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply and
requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply. When applicants who have
been informed of this responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show no just
cause for failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for fuel, the
administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the applicants’ control,
and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
See Appendix E of this ordinance for the current year’s fuel maximums.
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and
household supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant’s actual
need for these items, up to the maximums below. Personal and household supplies
include: hand soap, toothpaste, shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish
detergent, laundry supplies and costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper
products such as toilet paper, tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags light bulbs
8/2005 75
and supplies for children under 5 years of age. See Appendix F of this ordinance for
the current year’s personal care and household supplies maximums.
F) Other Basic Necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be granted when
they are deemed essential to an applicant’s or recipient’s health and safety by the
general assistance administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a
physician. Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
1) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of
adequate clothing. Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general
assistance administrator must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all
available resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some circumstances,
clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if
fire, flood or unusually cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate
necessity, special clothing is necessary for the applicant’s employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
2) Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other than
hospital bills (see below), provided that the municipality is notified and approves
the expenses and services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or services that are
determined to be ‘medically necessary’ by a licensed physician. The
municipality will grant assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the applicant would not be able
to receive necessary medical care without the municipality’s assistance. The
applicant is required to utilize any resource, including any federal or state
program, that will diminish his or her need to seek general assistance for
medical expenses. The municipality will grant assistance for non-emergency
medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are essential.
8/2005 76
Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the administrator may require a
second medical opinion from a physician designated by the municipality to
verify the necessity of the services.
Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at the established
Medicaid rates for all medical services, prescriptions, or other medical
commodities. Before authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical service provider of the
municipality’s intention to pay for the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and
ask to be billed accordingly.
Ordinary medical supplies/non-prescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual
amount when the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable
supplies include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic brand, nonprescription
medicines. In addition, the basic monthly rate for telephone
service will be budgeted when a telephone is essential to the health and safety
of the household. In order for telephone service to be considered an allowable
expense the applicant must provide a written statement from a physician
certifying that the telephone is essential.
3) Hospital Bills. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the administrator within 5 business days of the admission.
Notification must be by telephone, confirmed by certified mail, or by certified
mail only. If a hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator, the
municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must apply to the hospital for
consideration under the Hospital’s Free Care Program as provided in Title 22
M.R.S.A. § 396-F(1). Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital’s free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants must apply for
8/2005 77
assistance within 30 days of being discharged from the hospital and provide a
notice from the hospital certifying that they re not eligible for the hospital’s free
care program.
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital bill as a
necessary expense, the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment
arrangement with the hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon
the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant’s eligibility, the municipality will
budget the monthly payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to pay.
The applicant’s need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered each
time he/she applies by including the amount of the bill in the applicant’s monthly
budget, but the recipient will be responsible for making any necessary
payments to the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements found at
section 6.6 of this ordinance.
4) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary dental services only.
As is the case with medical services generally, the municipality will issue
general assistance for dental services at the established Medicaid rates for
those services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit for dental
services, the administrator will inform the dentist or dental surgeon of the
municipality’s intention to pay at the Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are
necessary, the municipality will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no
other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will be referred to a
dental clinic in the area whenever possible. The administrator will expect the
applicant to bear a reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant’s ability to pay.
5) Eye Care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses,
an applicant must have his or her medical need certified by a person licensed
to practice optometry. The general assistance administrator will provide
8/2005 78
assistance for eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at the Medicaid rate.
6) Telephone Charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be allowed if a
telephone is necessary for medical reasons as verified by a physician. At the
discretion of the GA administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job search or job
related reasons exist and/or for any other reasons the administrator deems
necessary.
7) Work-Related Expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual workrelated
expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses
include childcare costs, work clothes, supplies and transportation at the actual
costs not to exceed the ordinance maximum (see Appendix G for this year’s
maximum mileage allotment) . The applicant is required to provide
documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were necessary.
8) Travel Expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not workrelated
will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the
prospective need for travel is necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly
transportation to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
necessary travel. See Appendix G for the current rate at which such necessary
travel will be budgeted. This rate shall be construed to subsidize all costs
associated with automobile ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires,
maintenance, insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
9) Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the
procedures and limitations described below (see section 6.9), the municipality
recognizes its responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H for the current maximums.
8/2005 79
10) Capital Improvements. The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a
basic necessity. Exceptions can be made only when the capital
improvement/repair has been pre-approved by the administrator as a
necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair has
been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for example, by means of the
applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with the
contractor. The administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
1) the failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in emergency
circumstances;
2) there are no other resources available to effect the capital repair; and
3) there is no more cost-effective alternative available to the applicant or
municipality to alleviate an emergency situation.
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital improvement can be
mitigated by the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement
with a contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place a lien on any
property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has been
used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished
in the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described in subsection
(B) “Liens”, above.
Section 6.9—Burials; Cremations
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice. In order for the municipality to be liable for a
burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to
the burial or cremation or within 3 business days following the funeral director’ receipt of
the body, whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. §4313(2)). This contact by the funeral
director shall begin the process of developing an application for burial/cremation
8/2005 80
assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the funeral director’s responsibility to make a
good-faith effort to determine if the family or any other persons are going to pay all or
part of the burial expenses. If family members or others are unable to pay the
expenses, and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all or part of the
expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to the municipal administrator.
In addition, the funeral director may refer legally liable relatives to the administrator so
that a timely determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased. For the
purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance
for burial or cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be completed by the
administrator on behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be
the municipality in which the eligible deceased person was a resident at the time of
death as residency is determined under section 4.10 of this ordinance.
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their
income, assets, and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an
application for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial
assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives, that financial
responsibility only exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible for general
assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to pay for the burial or
cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial
or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the deceased.
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members. Grandparents, parents,
siblings, children and grandchildren of the deceased, who live in Maine or own property
8/2005 81
in Maine, are financially responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the
extent those relatives, individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the
burial or cremation either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement
with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator, all legally liable
relatives must provide the municipal administrator with any reasonably requested
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living expenses.
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members. Generally, when the
administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased’s legally liable
relatives have an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or
cremation, by lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation assistance. When the
administrator is unable to make such a finding, the following proration of familial
responsibility will be implemented.
Proration of Familial Responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be
used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to
pay for the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found
to have a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator
is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or more of said relatives.
Under these circumstances, each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible
for his or her pro rata share of the total municipal contribution that would exist if no
legally liable relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long
as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality will provide as a burial
or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro rata shares less the share of any legally
liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the administrator by providing information
or documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative’s financial capacity,
and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally liable relative who can
8/2005 82
financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent
of that relative’s share.
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility. The administrator may take up to 8 days from the
date of contact by the funeral director to issue a written decision regarding the amount
of the municipal contribution toward the burial or cremation. The 8-day eligibility
determination period from the date of contact by the funeral director shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family
members and determine their respective financial capacities to contribute to the burial
or cremation, contact the personal representative of the deceased’s estate, if any, and
other related administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this 10-day period
allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality’s decision.
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others Can
Contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum benefits provided by
the municipality when no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from
any other source. To the extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a
financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be
deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In addition, any other
benefits or resources that are available, such as Social Security burial benefits,
veterans’ burial benefits, or contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the
maximum amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from the
municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for the purpose of
publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate contribution limit for this purpose of
$75 when a paid receipt demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to
the administrator.
Burial Expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family members with
regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. See
Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
8/2005 83
Cremation Expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family members of the
deceased, or when neither the administrator nor the funeral director can locate any
family members, the administrator may issue general assistance for cremation
services. See Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the
purpose of cremations.
Section 6.10—Notice of Decision
Written Decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after
making a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be
given to the applicant within 24 hours of receiving a completed and signed application
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3)) (see Article IV, section 4.6) .
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator may decide
to render a notice of “ineligibility” and provide the applicant with another application to
submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the responsibility of the
general assistance administrator to explain the applicants’ right to a fair hearing in the
written notice of decision.
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written
notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the
contents of a written decision listed in section 4.6 of this ordinance, the notice will state
that applicants:
a) have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair
hearing and;
8/2005 84
b) have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality has violated
the law. The decision will state the method for notifying the department.
Disbursement of General Assistance. Except when determined impractical by the
administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or
purchase order payable to a vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of
goods or services. General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment
to an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which
case the administrator shall document the circumstances for issuing general assistance
in the form of cash (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)).
8/2005 85
ARTICLE VII
The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1—Right to a Fair Hearing
Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of
assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant
or his or her authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator
is a basic right of the applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a
review of the decision.
Section 7.2—Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all
claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that
are not clear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in
writing by the general assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the
adjustment or explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and
file any correspondence involved.
Written Request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the
administrator’s decision to grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10
working days after any other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available
a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if
necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will give the following information:
a) the decision on which review is sought;
b) the reason(s) for the claimant’s dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes
he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
8/2005 86
c) the relief sought by the claimant.
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been
withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
Scheduling the Fair Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair
hearing authority must meet and hold the hearing within 5 working days. The
administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice
of fair hearing sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant’s rights to:
a) be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal
counsel or other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant’s own expense;
b) confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the
claimant; and
c) present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the
convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant will be given timely
notice to allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information
about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case.
Section 7.3—The Fair Hearing Authority
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that will determine,
based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing, whether the claimant(s) were
eligible to receive assistance at the time they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with
the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with
the state law and local ordinance.
8/2005 87
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons
appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA , or, if designated, the board of
appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the
organization of the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following
criteria. The person(s) serving as FHA must:
a) not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
b) be impartial;
c) be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and
the facts necessary to make a fair determination; and
d) be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the
claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and
interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate
policies, practices or actions.
Section 7.4—Fair Hearing Procedure
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time, and place of the
hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the
hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant
shall be permitted to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the
claimant will be told the following information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair
hearings will:
a) be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal
counsel, or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance
administrator, his or her agents, counsel and witnesses;
b) be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
c) be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the
requirements of due process;
8/2005 88
d) allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for
themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
e) give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or
documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the
hearing; and examine all evidence presented at the hearing;
f) result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the
hearing; and
g) be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and
filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow
the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any
arguments without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or
made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing
authority must be made available to the claimant or his or her representative. The
claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322).
Claimant’s Failure to Appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will
send a written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator’s decision was not
altered due to the claimant’s failure to appear. Furthermore, the notice shall indicate
that the claimant has 5 working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
administrator information demonstrating “just cause,” for failing to appear.
For the purposes of a claimant’s failure to appear at a fair hearing, examples of “just
cause” include:
a) a death or serious illness in the family;
8/2005 89
b) a personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from attending the
hearing;
c) an emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
d) an obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in the conduct of his or
her affairs could reasonably conclude takes precedence over the attendance at
the hearing; or
e) lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect, excusable
inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the request for the hearing will
be reinstated and a hearing rescheduled.
In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to appear at a fair
hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in place of the claimant on matters of ‘fact’ but
may cross examine witnesses and make ‘legal’ arguments on behalf of the claimant.
Section 7.5—The Fair Hearing Decision
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance
administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days
after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
a) a statement of the issue;
b) relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
c) pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the
decision; and
d) the decision and the reasons for it.
A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and
the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
8/2005 90
The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair
hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant
must file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair
hearing decision.
When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the
claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
8/2005 91
ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a
person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his or her
executors or administrators in a civil action. However, prior to recovering assistance
granted, the municipality shall “offset” the value of any workfare performed by a GA
recipient, at a rate not less than minimum wage.
Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the municipality
will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him/her in writing and
discussing it with the recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs
if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits. The municipality shall claim a
lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump
sum payment made to that recipient under the Workers’ Compensation Act or similar
law of any other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any
general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers’
Compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general
assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code
division.
The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be signed by the recipient
of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation. Any
general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving Workers’
Compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be
found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required
8/2005 92
signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient’s
Worker’s Compensation attorney, if known, the applicant’s employer or the employer’s
insurance company, and, at the administrator’s discretion, to the Workers’
Compensation Board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum Workers’
Compensation benefit is issued.
Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which
therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to
sign a statement on an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the DHHS that
authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI
payment to the municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance
granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying
for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and
who refuses to sign the Interim Agreement SSI authorization form will be found ineligible
to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required signature (22
M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age
of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In addition,
grandchildren, children, siblings, parents and grandparents are liable for the burial costs
of each other. The municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and
liable for the support of their relatives in proportion to their respective ability. The
municipality may complain to any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any
expenses made on the behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
8/2005 93
ARTICLE IX
Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.

Appendix G
G-1 Prepared by MMA - 8/2005
2005-2006 Mileage Rate
This municipality adopts the State of Maine travel expense reimbursement rate as set by the
Office of the State Controller. The current rate (until December 2005) for approved employment
and necessary medical travel etc. is 34 cents (34¢) per mile.
Please refer to the Office of State Controller for changes to this rate: Telephone: 626-8420 or
visit: http://www.state.me.us/osc/
Appendix H
H-1 Prepared by MMA - 8/2005
Funeral Maximums
Burial Maximums
The maximum amount of general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,125.
Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator, where there is an actual cost, for:
? the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery by-laws require one;
? the opening and closing of the grave site; and
? a lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able
to provide a cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery or in a cemetery
under municipal control, the cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery
will not be paid by the municipality.
The municipality’s obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a reasonable
calculation of the funeral director’s direct costs, not to exceed the maximum amounts of
assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to:
? removal of the body from a local residence or institution
? a secured death certificate or obituary
? embalming
? a minimum casket
? a reasonable cost for necessary transportation
? other reasonable and necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the
funeral director and approved by the municipal administrator.
Cremation Maximums
The maximum amount of assistance granted for a cremation shall be $785. Additional costs may
be allowed by the GA administrator where there is an actual cost, for:
? a cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery
? a reasonable cost for a burial urn not to exceed $50
? transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile
for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.
Appendix I
I-1 8/2005
26 MRSA §1043 (23)
Misconduct. “Misconduct” means a culpable breach of the employee’s duties or obligations
to the employer or a pattern of irresponsible behavior, which in either case manifests a disregard
for a material interest of the employer. This definition relates only to an employee’s entitlement
to benefits and does not preclude an employer from discharging an employee for actions that are
not included in this definition of misconduct. A finding that an employee has not engaged in
misconduct for purposes of this chapter may not be used as evidence that the employer lacked
justification for discharge. [1999, c. 464, §2 (rpr).]
A. The following acts or omissions are presumed to manifest a disregard for a material
interest of the employer. If a culpable breach or a pattern of irresponsible behavior is shown,
these actions or omissions constitute “misconduct” as defined in this subsection. This does
not preclude other acts or omissions from being considered to manifest a disregard for a
material interest of the employer. The acts or omissions included in the presumption are the
following:
(1) Refusal, knowing failure or recurring neglect to perform reasonable and proper
duties assigned by the employer;
(2) Unreasonable violation of rules that are reasonably imposed and communicated and
equitably enforced;
(3) Unreasonable violation of rules that should be inferred to exist from common
knowledge or from the nature of the employment;
(4) Failure to exercise due care for punctuality or attendance after warnings;
(5) Providing false information on material issues relating to the employee’s eligibility
to do the work or false information or dishonesty that may substantially jeopardize a
material interest of the employer;
(6) Intoxication while on duty or when reporting to work or unauthorized use of alcohol
while on duty;
(7) Using illegal drugs or being under the influence of such drugs while on duty or when
reporting to work;
(8) Unauthorized sleeping while on duty;
(9) Insubordination or refusal without good cause to follow reasonable and proper
instructions from the employer;
(10) Abusive or assaultive behavior while on duty, except as necessary for self-defense;
(11) Destruction or theft of things valuable to the employer or another employee;
(12) Substantially endangering the safety of the employee, coworkers, customers or
members of the public while on duty;
(13) Conviction of a crime in connection with the employment or a crime that reflects
adversely on the employee’s qualifications to perform the work; or
(14) Absence for more than 2 work days due to incarceration for conviction of a crime.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
Appendix I
I-2 8/2005
B. “Misconduct” may not be found solely on:
(1) An isolated error in judgment or a failure to perform satisfactorily when the
employee has made a good faith effort to perform the duties assigned;
(2) Absenteeism caused by illness of the employee or an immediate family member if
the employee made reasonable efforts to give notice of the absence and to comply with
the employer’s notification rules and policies; or
(3) Actions taken by the employee that were necessary to protect the employee or an
immediate family member from domestic violence if the employee made all reasonable
efforts to preserve the employment.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]








1
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 39
Historic Preservation
Ordinance
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted
01/15/1979
Amended 10/15/1984
Repeal/Replace (Section 12 only) 12/20/1993
Amended 08/20/2012
2
1. Intent and Purpose. This ordinance is adopted in accordance with the Charter of the
City of Ellsworth, and pursuant to the legislative authority vested in the City by virtue of
Title 30, Maine Revised Statutes, Sections 1917 and 2151 (2) (G), and acts amendatory
thereto, for the purposes of preserving, protecting, and enhancing buildings and places or
areas within the City which possess particular historic or architectural significance in
order to promote the educational, cultural, and economic welfare of the residents and
visitors to the City. To achieve these purposes, it is intended that this ordinance be used
to prevent inappropriate alterations and/or destruction of designated historic properties
and that any new construction be completed in a manner which is compatible with the
character of those properties.
2. Definitions.
2.1 Historic District. Any area which includes or encompasses such historic sites,
historic landmarks, buildings, signs, appurtenances, structures or objects as may
be designated in accordance with this Ordinance as appropriate for historical
preservation.
2.2 Historic Site. Any parcel of land of special significance in the history of the City
and its inhabitants, or upon which a historic event has occurred, and which has
been designated as such in accordance with this Ordinance. The term “historic
site” shall also include any improved parcel, archeological site, cemetery or part
thereof, on which is situated a historic landmark, and any abutting improved
parcel, or part thereof, used as and constituting part of the premises on which the
historic landmark is situated as may be designated in accordance with this
Ordinance.
2.3 Historic Landmark. Any improvement, building or structure of particular historic
or architectural significance to the City relating to its heritage, cultural, social,
economic or political history, or which exemplify historic personages or
important events in local, state or national history as may be designated in
accordance with this Ordinance.
2.4 Cultural Resources. Any one or group of buildings, sites, landmarks or districts
listed with significance as determined by this ordinance. Cultural resources may
also be referred to as “historic properties.”
2.5 Designation. The identification and registration of properties for protection that
meet criteria established by the State or the locality for significant historic and
prehistoric resources within the jurisdiction of a local government.
2.6 Protection. A local review process under State or local law for proposed
demolition of, changes to, or other action that may affect historic properties
designated pursuant to this subsection.
3. Qualifications for Designation. Cultural resources established in accordance with
this Ordinance shall have one or more of the following criteria. These criteria are
generally based on the standards used for evaluating cultural resources for inclusion
in the National Register of Historic Places.
3.1 Structures or sites at which events occur or have occurred that contribute to and
are identified with or significantly represent or exemplify the broad cultural,
3
political, economic, military, social or sociological history of Ellsworth and the
nation, including sites and buildings at which visitors may gain insight or see
examples either of particular items or of larger patterns in the North American
heritage.
3.2 Structures or sites importantly associated with persons significant to local, state
or national history.
3.3 Structures or sites importantly associated with historic examples of a great idea
or ideal.
3.4 Structures or structural remains and sites embodying examples of architectural
types or specimens valuable for study of a period, style or method of building
construction, of community organization and living, or of landscaping; or a
single notable structure or a single site representing the work of a master builder,
master designer, architect or landscape architect.
3.5 Structures contributing to the visual continuity of the historic district.
3.6 Those sites or areas on or eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places or National Historic Landmark.
4. Establishment of Designated Cultural Resources. Historic districts, historic sites or
historic landmarks shall be established by amendment to Section 5 of this Ordinance, and
no property shall be included within a district without written notification to the property
owner or owners, nor become an historic site or historic landmark without written
consent of the property owner or owners. All such amendments shall be initiated by the
completion of an Application for Historic Preservation Designation directed to the
Chairman of the Historic Preservation Commission.
4.1 Studies, Recommendations. Before making its recommendation concerning the
proposed establishment of a historic district, historic site or historic landmark, the
Commission may conduct studies and research on the proposal. The Commission will
make a report to the Council on every request received. Drafts of the report shall also
be mailed to the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment.
4.2 Public Hearing, Final Report. Before a final report is made to the Council, the
Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing on the request, after due
notice. Written notice of the proposal shall be given to the applicant, owners of all
property abutting or to be included within the proposed designation, and all other
persons found by the Commission to have a special interest in the proposal. After said
public hearing, the Commission shall submit a final report with its recommendations
to the City Council, not later than thirty (30) days after public hearing.
4.3 Action By City Council. After receipt of the Commission’s recommendations, as
provided above, the City Council at its next regular meeting shall consider and take all
appropriate action on said proposed amendment in accordance with the City Charter,
the Council’s rules of procedure adopted pursuant thereto, and the laws of the State of
Maine. Within ten (10) days after the designation of any historic district, historic site
4
or historic landmark, the owner of each property so designated shall be given written
notice of such designation by the City Clerk.
4.4 The Ellsworth Historic Preservation Commission shall maintain records of all
cultural resources established by the City Council.
5. Currently Designated Historic Sites, Districts and Landmarks.
Appendix I - Historic buildings, historic sites and landmarks designated by the
City of Ellsworth.
Appendix II – Historic Districts designated by the City of Ellsworth
6. Historic Preservation Commission.
6.1 Members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council which shall make such appropriations each year as may be necessary to
fund the activities of the Commission and dependent on the availability of funds.
6.2 The Commission shall consist of five (5) members and two (2) alternates, who
shall be residents or property owners of the City of Ellsworth. Appointments shall
be made on the basis of demonstrated interest, ability, experience and desire to
promote historic preservation in the City of Ellsworth within the meaning of
Section 1 of this Ordinance. Where such professionals are available in the
community, qualifications will conform to the Secretary of the Interior’s Historic
Preservation Professional Qualifications Standards. Information on commission
members credentials will be kept on file and available to the public. Each
commission member is encouraged to attend one informational/educational
meeting per year, which will be sponsored by the MHPC or other historic
preservation organization. In addition to the regular members of the Commission,
the City Council may, at the request of the Commission, appoint other persons,
not necessarily residents of Ellsworth, who shall serve on an advisory or
consultant basis to assist the members of the Commission in the performance of
their functions.
6.3 The Commissioners who are first appointed shall be designated to serve terms as
follows; One for one (1) year, two for two (2) years, and two for three (3) years
from the date of their appointment. Thereafter, said commissioners shall be
appointed for terms of three (3) years, except in those instances in which the
appointment is made to fill a vacancy in an unexpired term, in which case the
appointment shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. Alternates will be
appointed by the City Council and will serve a one (1) year term. Alternates may
be reappointed by the City Council. Members of the Commission shall serve
without compensation. Persons appointed to serve in an advisory or consulting
capacity shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council.
6.4 Such Commission shall elect annually a chairman, vice chairman and secretary
from its own membership. A majority of the number of members appointed by the
City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
6.5 Said Commission for its purposes may from time to time propose to the City
Council amendments to its rules and regulations consistent with the intention of
5
this Ordinance and of the Maine Historic Preservation Commission. Duties of
the Commission shall include but not be limited to the following:
6.5.1 Conducting, or causing to be conducted a continuing survey of
cultural resources in the community according to guidelines established
by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission;
6.5.2 Making recommendations for designation of local landmarks and
historic districts to the City Council;
6.5.3 Establishing and using written guidelines for the conservation of
designated local landmarks and historic districts in decisions on requests
for permits for alterations, demolition, or additions to listed landmarks
and buildings within historic districts;
6.5.4 Acting in an advisory role to other officials and departments of
local government regarding the protection of local cultural resources;
6.5.5 Acting as liaison on behalf of the local government to individuals
and organizations concerned with historic preservation; and
6.5.6 Working toward the continuing education of citizens with the
Certified Local Government’s jurisdiction regarding historic
preservation issues and concerns.
6.5.7 An annual report of the activities of the commission must be
submitted to the City Manager, and to the MHPC.
6.5.8 The Commission shall follow the City of Ellsworth Code of
Ethics/Conduct (Chapter 40).
6.6 The Historic Preservation Commission may, subject to appropriations by the City
Council or other income, employ clerical and technical assistants or consultants,
and may accept grants, money gifts, or gifts of service, and may hold or expand
the same for all or any of the purposes of historic preservation in the City of
Ellsworth. The Commission shall advise and assist owners of designated
structures of historic sites with plans and assistance in complying with the
requirement of this Ordinance to the extent possible under the funding available to
the Commission, in an effort to further the accomplishment of this Ordinance. The
Commission may erect a suitable sign or marker indicating the historical fact of
any designated site or building, subject to City ordinances, appropriations or other
income available to the Commission.
7. Uses Permitted. Uses permitted in historic districts, historic sites or historic
landmarks shall be those set forth in the City of Ellsworth Unified Development
Ordinance provisions for the zone in which such district, site or landmark are located.
8. Certificate of Appropriateness. In any designated historic district, and with respect to
any historic site or historic landmark, no building permit shall be issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer for any construction, alteration, or demolition until a corresponding
Certificate of Appropriateness has been approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission.
6
8.1 Certificate of Appropriateness. A Certificate of Appropriateness approved by the
Commission shall be required before a permit is issued for any of the following:
8.1.1 Material change in the exterior appearances of a historic
landmark, site or any building in a historic district by addition,
reconstruction or alteration, including removal of trim, elements, facing
material, or parts of the structure; moving a structure; addition or
removal of a sign; and improvements to walkways, driveways, or
landscape features.
8.1.2 New construction of a principal or accessory building or structure
visible from a public street where such building or structure will be
located in a historic district.
8.1.3 Demolition of a historic landmark or of any building, structure or
appurtenance in a historic district.
8.1.4 Moving of a historic landmark or any building in a historic
district.
8.2 Applications. Application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer when requesting a building application, or
when no building permit is required but when such activity must be approved by
the Historic Preservation Commission. The Commission may request additional
materials including such items as photographs, architectural plans and
construction bids.
9. Application Procedure. Applicants shall submit to the Historic Preservation
Commission a completed application for Certificate of Appropriateness. Inclusion of all
materials will assist the Commission in completing reviews. The Commission shall act on
the application within thirty (30) days of submission. A thirty (30) day extension may be
requested, if necessary. It shall be returned to the Code Enforcement Officer who shall
then issue or deny permits as appropriate. The application shall include:
9.1 The applicant’s name and address and his interest in the subject property.
9.2 The owner’s name and address, if different from the applicant’s.
9.3 The location of the subject property.
9.4 The present use and zoning classification of the subject property.
9.5 A brief description of the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration,
maintenance, demolition or moving requiring the issuance of a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
9.6 A drawing or drawings indicating the design, texture, color and location of any
proposed alteration or new construction for which the Certificate is being applied. As
used herein, drawings shall mean plans and exterior elevations drawn to scale, with
sufficient detail to show as far as they relate to exterior appearances, the architectural
design of the buildings, including materials, textures and colors, including samples of
materials and colors.
9.7 Photographs of the building involved and of adjacent buildings.
7
9.8 A site plan indicating improvements affecting appearance such as walls, walks,
terraces, plantings, accessory buildings, signs, lights, and other elements. The
Commission may waive the requirement for a site plan if the change involved
would not affect the site.
10. Administrative procedures.
10.1 Notice of Owner. Prior to issuance or denial of a Certificate of
Appropriateness, the Commission shall take such action as may be reasonably
required to inform, by U.S. Mail, the applicant, all persons owning abutting property
and/or within 200 feet of the exterior boundaries of the real estate under consideration
in the application and all such other persons as the Commission may deem
appropriate of the pendency of the application, and shall give such persons an
opportunity to be heard. For purposes of the notice required hereunder, the owners of
the property shall be considered to be those against whom municipal taxes for the real
estate are assessed.
10.2 Hearings. At the request of the applicant, or any other person receiving notice
under section 10.1 above, or where the commission deems it necessary, a public
meeting on the application may be conducted by the Commission.
10.3 Approval. If the Commission determines that the proposed construction,
reconstruction, alteration, moving, or demolition is appropriate, it shall approve a
Certificate of Appropriateness and return it to the Code Enforcement Officer for
issuing of necessary permits.
10.4 Disapproval. If the Commission determines that a Certificate of
Appropriateness should not be issued it shall note in the official meeting minutes the
reasons for such determination and furnish the applicant an attested copy of the
reasons, and the recommendations, if any.
10.5 Appeals. An appeal from any final decision of the Commission as to any matter
over which it has final authority may be taken by any party to the Board of Appeals
within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision appealed from. The Board of
Appeals may extend this time period only upon a showing by the person seeking an
appeal that there was good cause for the failure to appeal within thirty (30) days of
the decision.
10.5.1 An appeal shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the
Board, which shall include the completed Certificate of Appropriateness, a
concise statement of the relief requested and why it should be granted.
10.5.2 Upon being notified of an appeal, the Commission shall transmit all papers
comprising the record of the decision appealed from to the Board.
10.5.3 The Board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty (30)
days of its receipt of an appeal request. At least seven (7) days prior to the date
of hearing on such appeal, the Board shall cause to be published in one issue of a
newspaper of general circulation in the City, notice which includes:
a. The name of the person(s) appealing;
b. The location and description of the property involved;
c. A brief description of the decision from which an appeal is taken;
8
d. The time and place of the hearing.
10.5.4 The Board shall, in addition to the notice in subsection 10.5.3 above, give
written notice by regular mail or its equivalent to all abutting property owners
(notice to abutting property owners shall be sent to the owner’s address contained
in the records of the City Tax Assessor), the person making the appeal, the
Historic Preservation Commission and Code Enforcement Officer.
10.6 Appeals to the Superior Court. Any party may appeal, within forty- five (45)
days after the decision is rendered, to the Superior Court from any order, relief or
denial by the Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be made in accordance with the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
11. Standards of Evaluation. The standards and requirements contained in this section,
and the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties,
shall be used for review of applications for Certificates of Appropriateness and
specifically as to procedures before demolition can take place.
11.1 Reconstruction, Alterations and Maintenance. A building or structure classified
as a historic landmark, or any part thereof, or any appurtenance related to such
structures, including but not limited to walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving and
signs shall not be removed, reconstructed, altered or maintained, and no Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be issued for such actions, unless they will preserve or enhance
its historical and architectural character.
11.2 Demolition or Removal. A historic landmark, or any appurtenance thereto, shall
not be demolished or moved and a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be
approved until either (a) such building or structure has been identified by the
Commission as incompatible with the historic district in which it is located, (b) the
property owner can demonstrate that maintenance of the structure creates financial
hardship, or c), that the property was properly offered for sale, after notices as
required have been posted, that there have been no bona fide offers made, and that no
contract for sale has been executed with interested parties. Proper notice shall include
posting on the premises of the building or structure in a location clearly visible from
the street, notice published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least three
(3) times prior to demolition, the final notice of which shall not be less than fifteen
(15) days prior to the date of the permit, and the first notice of which shall be
published no more than fifteen (15) days after the application for permit is filed. The
owner shall for the period of time set forth and at a price reasonably related to its face
market value, make a bona fide offer to sell such building or structure and the land
pertaining thereto to any person, firm, corporation, government or agency thereof, or
political subdivision or agency thereof which gives reasonable assurance that it is
willing to preserve and restore the building or structure and the land pertaining
thereto. Prior to making such offer to sell, an owner shall first file a statement with
the Historic Preservation Commission, identify the property, the offering price and
the date the offer to sell shall begin. The time period set forth in this section shall not
commence until such statement has been filed. The purpose of this section is to
further the purposes of this Ordinance by preserving historic buildings which are
important to the education, culture, traditions, and the economic value of the City and
to afford the City, interested persons, historic societies or organizations the
9
opportunities to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings. The
Commission may at any time during such stay approve a Certificate of
Appropriateness in which event a permit shall be issued without further delay.
11.3 Construction of New Buildings and Structures in Historic Districts. The
construction of a new building or structure within a historic district shall be generally
of such design, form, proportion, mass, configuration, building material and location
on a lot as will be compatible with other buildings in the historic district and with
streets and open spaces to which it is visually related and in keeping with the area.
11.4 Visual Compatibility Factors. Within historic districts, new construction and
existing buildings and structures and appurtenances thereof which are moved,
reconstructed, materially altered, repaired or changed in color shall be visually related
generally in terms of the following factors:
11.4.1 Height The height of proposed buildings shall be compatible with
adjacent buildings.
11.4.2 Proportion of Buildings Front Façade The relationship of the width of
the buildings to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible
with buildings, structures and open spaces where it is visually related.
11.4.3 Proportion of Opening with the Façade The relationship of the width
of the windows to height of windows and doors in a building shall be visually
compatible with those of windows and doors of buildings to which the
building is visually related.
11.4.4 Rhythm of Solids to Voids in Front Facades The relationship of solids
to voids in the front façade of a building shall be visually compatible with that
of the buildings to which it is visually related.
11.4.5 Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings on Streets The relationship of the
building to open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually
compatible to those prevailing in the area to which it is visually related.
11.4.6 Rhythm of Entrance and/or Porch Projection The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to sidewalks shall be visually compatible with
buildings to which it is visually related.
11.4.7 Relationship of Materials, Textures, and Color The relationship of
materials, textures and color of the façade of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of the predominant materials used in the buildings to
which it is visually related.
11.4.8 Roof Shapes The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with that of buildings to which it is visually related.
11.4.9 Scale of Buildings The size of the building, the building mass of a
building in relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and
balconies shall be visually compatible with those characteristics of buildings
and spaces to which it is visually related.
11.4.10 Directional Expression of Front Elevation A building shall visually
compatible with the building, squares, and places to which it is visually
10
related in its directional character, whether this be vertical character,
horizontal character or non-directional character.
12. Maintenance
Ordinary Maintenance. No ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior feature in a
historic district or of any historic building shall occur unless a Certificate of
Appropriateness is first issued for that maintenance and repair. A Certificate of
Appropriateness shall be issued if either:
12.1 The maintenance or repair does not involve a change in the design,
material or outer appearance of the feature; or
12.2 The Building Inspector certifies in writing that the repair is required in the
interest of public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition on the
premises. Any modification under this subsection shall be permitted only upon a
finding of the Commission that the proposed modification is the least disruptive
manner of addressing the public safety concerns.
13. Penalties.
13.1 Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance
shall be guilty of a civil violation and shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $100 and not less than $25. Each day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense.
13.2 Additional Remedies. In addition to the remedies provided herein, the
Commission and/or the Code Enforcement Officer are specifically authorized
to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or in-equity, as they
may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the
requirements of this Ordinance or to prevent a threatened violation thereof.
Revisions adopted by the City Council on August 20, 2012
Appendix I Designated Historic Sites and Landmarks
(*asterisk indicates listing on the National Register of Historic Places)
Property Address Map/Lot Date Accepted
*1. Ellsworth City Hall 1 City Hall Plaza Map 136, Lot 189 9/17/79
*2. First Congregational Church 2 Church Street Map 136, Lot 183 4/11/88
3. Old City Burying Ground State Street Map 136, Lot 182 9/17/79
*4. Ellsworth Public Library 20 State Street Map 136, Lot 59 9/17/79
5. Ellsworth Soldier’s Monument (Civil War) and Town Common
Bridge Hill intersect. Map 133, Lot 33-1 4/28/80
*6. Old Hancock County Courthouse
Old County Registry of Deeds 6 Court Street Map 133, Lot 33 10/15/79
7. Judge John A. Peters, Jr. House 12 Maple Street Map 134, Lot 213 4/28/80
8. Mary A. Lord House 1 Maple Street Map 133, Lot 34 8/20/79
*9. Charles Jarvis Homestead 10 Surry Road Map 134, Lot 226 12/17/79
10. Alexander B. Black House 6 Main Street Map 134, Lot 10 9/17/79
11. The White Pillars (Geo. Herbert, Jr.) 88 Bucksport Road Map 133, Lot 13 9/17/79
*12. Woodlawn (Col. John Black House) 19 Black House Dr. Map 26, Lot 57
*13. Whiting/Whitcomb House 214 Main Street Map 136, Lot 213 12/17/79
14. Austin/Wiswell House 210 Main Street Map 136, Lot 212 12/17/79
15. Joshua R. Jordan House 24 High Street Map 134, Lot 89 4/28/80
*16. Birdsacre (Cordelia Stanwood
Homestead) 289 High Street Map 21, Lot 14 10/15/79
17. George Herbert House 6 Laurel Street Map 133, Lot 38 7/21/80
18. Andrew Peters House 70 State Street Map 136, Lot 62 7/21/80
19. Odd Fellows Hall 29 Main Street Map 134, Lot 191 12/15/80
20. Albert Hopkins House 61 Pine Street Map 134, Lot 108 8/18/80
21. George Smith House 29 Surry Road Map 133, Lot 2 12/15/80
22. Copp/Dorr House 65 Pine Street Map 134, Lot 107 6/16/80
23. John Black, Jr. House 70 Surry Road Map 133, Lot 52 6/16/80
24. Little Red Farm, Levi Foster 95 Bayside Road Map 21, Lot 2 2/3/81
25. Erastus Redman Building 14 Water Street Map 134, Lot 17 5/21/84
26. Dr. Harding House 194 Main Street Map 136, Lot 209 6/16/86
27. Dr. Walter Haynes House 62 Pine Street Map 134, Lot 103 6/16/86
28. Nathaniel Treworgy Homestead 479 Surry Road Map 9, Lot 9 10/19/87
29. James Hopkins House 140 State Street Map 138. Lot 2
30. Commercial Building, Dutton Block 63 Main Street Map 134 Lot 44
31. Commercial Building, Dutton Block 61 Main Street Map 134, Lot 45
32. Henry A. Dutton House 198 Main Street Map 136, Lot 210 11/18/96
33. Jeremiah Giles House 18 South Street Map 134, Lot 193 12/15/86
*34. Old Hancock County Jail 40 State Street Map 136, Lot 61-1 11/21/05
*35. The Grand Theater (Samuel Kurson) 167 Main Street Map 136, Lot 258 9/21/09
36. Chamberlain House (Whitney House) 357 State Street Map 042, Lot 10 6/20/16
37. Firlands (Paul & Theresa Ouellette) 70 Park Street Map 136, Lot 131 6/20/16
38. General Bryant E. Moore Community Center 5 General Moore Way Map 136, Lot 99 6/20/16
Appendix II Historic Districts
1. Union River Historic District Adopted 07/19/1982, revised 10/12
Description: This district is located on State Street and includes the following
Historic properties:
1. Ellsworth City Hall
2. First Congregational Church
3. Old City Burying Ground
4. Ellsworth Public Library
18. Andrew Peters House
34. Old Hancock County Jail
ELLSWORTH HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: ELLSWORTH HISTORIC LANDMARKS
APPLICANT: ___________________________________________ DATE: _______________________
ADDRESS: ___________________________________________ PHONE: ______________________
LOCATION OF LANDMARK:
STREET ADDRESS: ___________________________________ MAP/LOT: ___________________
Relationship of applicant to property or site: ____________________________________________________
1. Please describe the proposed changes requiring a Certificate of Appropriateness by using
the following as guidelines. Attach extra description, plans and photographs as needed.
____ a. Addition to existing structure.
____ b. Reconstruction of original structure or part of it.
____ c. Alteration to existing structure or site.
____ d. Removal of trim, elements, facing material, or part of the structure.
____ e. Addition or removal of a sign.
____ f. New construction.
____ g. Moving or demolition of a structure.
____ h. Changes to walkways, driveways, or landscape features.
2. Describe the nature and purpose of the proposed work:
3. Indicate which parts of the structure will be affected by the project: (Circle all that apply)
roof : exterior woodwork : siding : windows : exterior doors : other (describe)
4. How will the work be done?
____ a. Removal of existing material and replacement with new material.
____ b. Repair in kind, matching original feature.
____ c. Repair in kind, approximating original feature.
5. Describe the materials to be used:
6. In the case of additions to existing buildings, the applicant must submit architectural plans drawn to scale,
and a site plan showing the structure in relation to existing structures. Please include a photograph of the
structure.
7. In the case of improvements and changes to the exterior features of a structure, applicant must submit a site
plan that includes the buildings and exterior features as they now exist, as well as the proposed alterations.
Please provide a photograph of the structure.
8. In the case of a sign, the applicant must submit a photograph of the whole building indicating where the sign
will be placed, and a scale drawing of the sign, including lettering.
Application to be returned to the Ellsworth Historic Preservation Commission, Ellsworth City Hall,
1 City Hall Plaza, Ellsworth, ME 04605. The Commission will meet to discuss the application within 60 (sixty)
days, and may request a meeting with the applicant.
Signature of Applicant: ______________________________________________
Date received: _________________ Action taken by Commission: __________________________________
ELLSWORTH HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
Ellsworth City Hall, 1 City Hall Plaza, Ellsworth, ME 04605
APPLICATION FOR HISTORIC PRESERVATION DESIGNATION
DATE: _______________
NAME OF BUILDING/SITE:_________________________________________________
ADDRESS __________________________________ MAP/LOT __________
ZONE ___________
TYPE OF DESIGNATION DESIRED, IF KNOWN (circle one)
HISTORIC LANDMARK HISTORIC DISTRICT HISTORIC SITE
APPLICANT(S):
(print)________________________________(sign)____________________________
__________________________________ ____________________________
ADDRESS AND PHONE NUMBER OF APPLICANT(S):
_______________________________________ Phone: ______________________
_______________________________________
APPLICATION SUPPORTING DATA:
Using the guidelines below, please provide information about the property. The
Commission needs to know what is historically or architecturally significant and/or
unique about the property, district or site.
1. Exact or approximate date of construction of structure or structures.
2. Brief description of the structure, including type of architecture, number of rooms,
number of floors, adjacent or connecting structures. Include a listing of significant or
unique features of the structure. Photographs are useful.
3. List earlier owners, earlier uses of the building if applicable, any historic significance.
4. Please include a copy of the deed.
ELLSWORTH HISTORIC PRESERVATION DESIGNATION APPLICATION – page 2
Include the signed Consent Form if the applicant is not the owner of the property being
considered for historic designation. Include consent of the Mortgagee if the property has a lien
holder.
CONSENT
I (We) , of ,
owner(s) of buildings and land, located at ,
Ellsworth, Maine, hereby consent to this property being recommended by the Ellsworth
Historic Preservation Commission for designation by the Ellsworth City Council as either a
Historic Site or Historic Landmark in accordance with the Ellsworth Historic Preservation
Ordinance, Chapter 39, as amended.
Date: Signature(s)
______________________________
______________________________
I, (We) , Mortgagee(s) also consent.
Date: Signature(s)
______________________________
______________________________
CHAPTER 40
CODE OF ETHICS/CONDUCT
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Repealed/Replaced 02/14/2011
Section 1. DECLARATION OF POLICY
A Code of Ethics is hereby established for all City Officials in order to ensure that the proper
operation of City government includes:
• That City Officials be fair, impartial and responsive to the needs of the people and each
other in the performance of their respective functions and duties.
• That decisions and policy be made within the proper channels of the City’s governmental
structure.
• That public office not be used for personal gain.
• That City Officials maintain a standard of conduct that will inspire public confidence and
the integrity of the City’s government.
Section 2. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT
The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct of all City business. To that
end, City Officials shall strive to perform their duties with professionalism, endeavor to avoid
even the appearance of impropriety wherever practicable, and conduct themselves with utmost
civility and respect for members of the public, City staff, and other City Officials.
Section 3. PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES
• City Officials shall perform their duties in accordance with the processes and rules of
order established by the City Council, boards, commissions, and committees, governing
the deliberation of public policy issues, meaningful involvement of the public, and
implementation of policy decisions of the City Council by City staff.
• Stewardship of the public interest shall be the City Official’s primary concern, working
for the common good of the citizens of Ellsworth, and avoiding actions that are
inconsistent with the best interests of the City. All persons, claims, and transactions
coming before the City Council or any City board, commission, or committee, shall be
assured of fair and equal treatment.
• City Officials are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public.
They are bound to uphold the laws of the nation, state, and municipality, and to carry out
impartially these laws in the performance of their public duties to foster respect for all
government. These laws include, but are not limited to, the United States, the State of
Maine, and City of Ellsworth ordinances.
• City Officials shall prepare themselves for the public issues, listen courteously and
attentively to all public discussion before the body, and focus on the business at hand.
Officials shall refrain from interrupting other speakers, making personal comments not
germane to the business of the body or otherwise interfere with the orderly conduct of
meetings.
• City Officials shall give due consideration to the objectives expressed by the electorate
and the programs developed to attain those objectives.
• City Officials shall base their decisions on the merits and substance of the matter at hand.
Section 4. ATTENDANCE POLICY
The purpose of this attendance policy is to ensure the highest standard in the performance of City
Official functions. In recognition of these goals, the following attendance policy is established:
a) Attendance is expected at all Council, Board or Commission meetings including
special meetings, emergency meetings, workshops, and budget workshops. When a
City official cannot attend a meeting, the member must contact the
Council/Board/Commission Chair or its designee in advance.
b) Committee Meetings – It is expected that City Officials not miss more than 50% of
overall assigned meetings. City Officials shall have the option to be replaced as a
committee member if the Official is unable to meet the demands of committee
attendance.
Section 5. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
• City Officials shall not participate directly by means of deliberation, approval or
disapproval, or recommendation, in the purchase of goods and services for the City, and
the award of any contracts with the City, where there is knowledge of financial interest or
special interest other than that possessed by the general public or if the purchase or award
is held by:
a) The City Official or a relative of the Official.
b) A Business in which the City Official or a relative serves as an officer, director,
trustee, partner or employee in a supervisory or management position.
c) Any other person or business with whom the City Official or a relative are in business
or are negotiating or have an arrangement concerning future employment.
• City Officials shall not participate by means of deliberation, approval or disapproval, or
recommendation, in the decision to hire, promote, discipline, lay off or to take any other
personnel action in respect to any employee or applicant for employment where the
applicant is:
a) A relative of the City Official.
b) A person with whom the City Official or a relative is in business.
• City Councilors shall not appear on behalf of any third party before the City Council or
any City department, board, commission, or other such agency of the City. Other City
Officials shall not appear on behalf of any third party before the board, commission, or
other such agency of which that Official is a member. No City Official, including City
Councilor shall represent a third party in any action, proceeding, or litigation in which the
City is a party. Nothing herein shall prohibit any City Official from representing
themselves in a personal capacity before the City Council or any City department, board,
commission, or other such agency of the City.
• City Officials shall not participate in any political activity which would be in conflict or
incompatible with the performance of their official functions and duties of the City.
• City Officials shall not use official authority or position for the purposes of influencing or
interfering with or affecting the results of any election.
• City Officials shall not solicit any assessments, contributions, or services for any political
party from any employee in the municipal service if the person soliciting holds a
compensated appointive City position
• City Officials shall not distribute pamphlets or handbills while performing their official
functions and duties with the City.
Section 6. DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST IN AGENDA ITEMS
Any City Official, who believes there is a conflict of interest as defined in Section 5 above, shall
disclose the nature and extent of such interest and have it recorded on the record of the meeting
at which it arises. Once such disclosure has been made, the City Official shall refrain from
deliberation or voting on the item concerned.
Section 7. DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
• City Officials shall not, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential
information concerning the property, government or affairs of the City nor shall any
Official use such information to advance the financial or private interest of the Official or
others.
• Information received and discussed during an executive session shall be considered
within the constraints of this, and shall not be disclosed to any third person unless
permitted by affirmative vote of the body.
Section 8. GIFTS AND FAVORS
City Officials shall not accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or
promise:
a) from any person and/or business which to the City Officials knowledge is interested
directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the City;
b) that tends to influence the Official in the discharge of official duties.
c) City Officials shall not grant in the discharge of official duties any favor, service, or
thing of value.
Section 9. USE OF CITY PROPERTY / PUBLIC RESOURCES
• City Officials shall not use or permit the use of any City owned property for private
purposes including but not limited to:
a) City Vehicles
b) City Equipment
c) City Buildings
• A City Official may only use the City’s name, letterhead, logo, or seal when it would be
perceived as representing the City of Ellsworth or the body as a whole and only with
prior consent of the Council or designee.
• City Officials shall not utilize the City’s name, letterhead, logo, or seal for the purpose of
endorsing any political candidate, business, commercial product, or service. Nothing
herein shall prohibit a City Official from endorsing any of the above in their personal
capacity. A City Official may disclose the fact of their position provided it is made clear
that they are acting in a personal capacity and not as a representative of the City.
Section 10. PROHIBITIONS
• Except where required by law, or pursuant to an agreement under the Interlocal
Cooperation Act or other similar statutory provision, a Council member may not hold any
other City position or City employment during the term for which the Council member
was elected, and a former Council member is not eligible to be employed by the City for
one year after the expiration of the term for which they are elected.
• No Council member may dictate or interfere in the appointment or removal of any City
employee whom the City Manager is empowered to appoint or hire. The Council may
express its views and discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to appointment
and removal of such employees.
• No Council member may publicly or privately give orders to any City employee who is
subject to the direction and supervision of the City Manager, but the Council may express
its views and discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to any City employee.
• No City Official may in such capacity:
a) Unlawfully discriminate against any person with respect to any position or
appointive City administrative office because of race or color, sex, sexual orientation,
physical or mental disability, religion, political opinions or affiliations, or ancestry or
national origin.
b) Willfully make any false statement or attempt to commit any fraud that would prevent
the impartial execution of the laws of the state of Maine, the City of Ellsworth
Charter, or any ordinance adopted by the Council.
c) Knowingly and willfully violate any provision of this Ordinance or any rules of ethics
adopted by the City Council.
Section 11. DISCLOSURE STATEMENT BY CITY OFFICIALS
• City Officials shall annually and/or within 14 days of change provide to the City Clerk a
physical address, mailing address, e-mail address, and contact telephone numbers.
• City Officials shall file with the City Clerk annually during the month of April a written
statement under oath containing the following information, to the best of the Official’s
knowledge and belief:
a) The name of each person or business doing business with the City in an amount in
excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) during the preceding calendar year from
which such Official or a relative has received money or other thing of value in an
amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) during the preceding calendar
year, including campaign contributions.
b) The City Treasurer shall provide a list of the persons or businesses doing business
with the City in an amount in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000) during the
preceding year.
c) Income, financial investments, and deposits and account with commercial or savings
banks, savings and loan associations, or credit unions shall not be considered to be a
financial interest within the meaning of this section.
Section 12. REGULATION OF COUNCILOR CONDUCT
The purpose of this section is to establish procedures for the City Council to address the conduct
of members of the City Council in accordance with Ellsworth City Charter, § 2.07(b) and
determinations of vacancy under § 2.10(b).
• In the event that a member of the City Council reasonably believes that another member has
violated or is violating any provision of the Code of Ethics or any policy or rule established
by the Council, the member of the City Council should attempt to informally address and
resolve the matter with the other member if doing so is appropriate under the circumstances.
If the matter is not resolved informally, the complaining member of the Council may ask for
an executive session under the Maine Freedom of Access law to discuss a complaint against a
City Official.
• The member of the Council against whom the complaint is being made shall be given
reasonable advance notice of the meeting at which the matter will be discussed and the right
to be heard. The member of the Council against whom the complaint is being made shall
also have the option of having the discussion conducted in open session.
1. Action or nonaction on complaints.
A. Following the Council discussion, a Council member in open session may, but is not required
to, move to sanction the member against whom the complaint is being made.
B. If the motion is seconded, the motion may be adopted by a Majority Vote (as defined in the
City Charter).
C. If the motion passes, the Council shall issue a brief public statement explaining the reason for
the sanction.
D. The Council may issue the following forms of sanctions (from least severe to most severe):
a. Oral Reprimand
b. Written Reprimand
c. Formal Sanction
2. Expulsion and determinations of vacancy.
A. In the event that (1) a member of the Council has engaged in malfeasance, misfeasance, or
nonfeasance in office of such severity that a Formal Sanction is insufficient to address the
conduct and that justice leave no other alternative, or (2) the Council seeks a determination of
vacancy based on abandonment of office, the Council may schedule a public hearing to
determine whether to expel the member from the City Council and declare the position
vacant.
B. The public hearing shall be scheduled so as to give the member of the Council against whom
the complaint is being made at least one week’s advance notice. The member of the Council
may be represented by counsel and shall have the right to offer testimony, present witnesses,
and cross examine and rebut all witnesses and public comments.
C. The Council may by Super-Majority Vote (as defined in the City Charter) expel a member
from the City Council based on the record created at the public hearing under a clear and
convincing standard of proof.
D. The Council’s decision to expel a member may be appealed to Superior Court in accordance
with M.R.Civ.P. 80B.
E. For the purpose of this section, the term “malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office”
shall mean conviction of a felony criminal offense, a serious and significant violation of the
Code of Ethics or other City Ordinance, or other conduct (or lack thereof) of such a nature as
to cast serious and significant doubt regarding one’s ability to carry out the functions of the
office of City Councilor.
Section 13. SEPARABILITY
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid
or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or
constitutionality of the remaining portions of this code.
Section 14. DEFINITIONS
A. BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole partnership, sole proprietorship,
joint venture, or any other legally recognized entity organized for the purpose of making a
profit.
B. CITY OFFICIALS: Any and all persons appointed by the City Council or City Manager
and/or elected by the voters of the City of Ellsworth, including but not limited to:
a) City Councilors
b) Library Trustees
c) Planning Board Members
d) Appeals Board Members
e) Members of Boards and Commissions
f) Any person whose office or position is deemed a municipal office by the laws
of the State of Maine.
C. CITY EMPLOYEE: Any individual working for, on a permanent or temporary basis, and
drawing a salary, wages or stipend from the City of Ellsworth. The term “City Employee”
shall not include consultants or special personnel providing services on a short-term
contractual basis.
D. FINANCIAL INTEREST: A direct or indirect interest having monetary or pecuniary value
including, but not limited to, the ownership of shares of stock.
E. MALFEASANCE: The performance by a City Official of an act that is legally
unjustified, harmful, or contrary to law.
F. MISFEASANCE: The misuse of power; misbehavior in office; the wrongful exercise of
lawful authority.
G. NONFEASANCE: The intentional failure to perform an official duty or a legal
requirement.
H. PERSONAL INTEREST: Any interest of the City Official or City Employee concerned
as a resident, landowner, or taxpayer affected by the matter under consideration.
I. PHYSICAL ADDRESS: A person’s street, street number, and municipality.
J. RELATIVE: Any person who is related by blood or marriage, or whose relationship is
similar to that of persons who are related by blood or marriage such as domestic partners,
adopted children, and foster children.
K. SPECIAL INTEREST: A person or group having an interest in a particular part of the
economy and receiving or seeking special advantages thereinafter to the detriment of the
general public.
CHAPTER 41
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION AND INSPECTION ORDINANCE
Section I. ENACTMENT AUTHORITY AND SCOPE
This Electrical Installation and Inspection Ordinance is enacted pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. ss4151 et seq. This Ordinance expressly applies to original installations of
equipment and alterations to addition to existing equipment.
Section II. ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
The provisions of the Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Electrical
Inspector or Deputy Electrical Inspector. The Electrical Inspector and the Deputy
Electrical Inspector shall be appointed by the City Council. Whenever the term Electrical
Inspector is used hereafter in the Ordinance, the term shall include the Deputy Electrical
Inspector.
Section III. ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION PERMIT REQUIRED
A. No electrical equipment shall be installed in, altered, or added to any building,
structure, or premises within the territorial limits of the City of Ellsworth unless
an Electrical Installation Permit had been issued in conformity with this
Ordinance.
B. No permit shall be required to do minor repair work such as, but not limited to,
the following
:i. The replacement of fuses;
ii. The installation of additional outlets;
iii. The replacement of existing switches, sockets, outlets, and lamps;
iv. Repairs to entrance service equipment; and
v. Repairs or installation of radio and low voltage equipment.
C. Emergency work may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit. A permit
must then be obtained as soon as is reasonably possible.
D. No major deviation may be made from the installation described in the permit
without the prior written approval of the Electrical Inspector.
Section IV. APPLICATION FOR ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION PERMIT
An application for an Electrical Installation Permit shall be made in writing to the
Electrical Inspector, in duplicated, and shall be signed by the applicant. Application shall
be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Electrical Inspector. The application
shall be accompanied by a general description of the electrical work to be done. The
applicant must also file any additional plans, schedules, or specifications deemed by the
Electrical Inspector to be necessary to insure that the proposed work complies with this
Ordinance.
A. In the event that the propose work is to be performed in a single-family
structure by the owner of that structure.
B. In all other cases the applicant shall be the licensed master electrician
employed to do the proposed work; a holder of a limited license who may obtain a
permit within such limited licensee’s are of expertise; or the general contractor for
the construction project of which the proposed work is a part, providing that the
contractor shall provide as part of the application the name, address, and license
number of the licensed electrician employed to do the proposed work.
Section V. INVALIDATION OF ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION PERMIT
Any permit issued under this section shall become invalid if:
A. The authorized work is not commenced within six (6) months after issuance of
the permit;
B. The authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months
after the time of commencing the work.
C. The authorized work is not completed within twenty-four (24) months after the
issuance of the permit, or
D. The permit holder fails to correct a violation of any provision of the Ordinance
with the time prescribed in the Notice of Violation.
Section VI. PERMIT FEES
Before an Electrical Installation Permit may be issued, the applicant shall pay a fee in
accordance with the following schedule:
Proposed Work Fee
Signs $25.00
Change in size of entrance $25.00
Installation, addition or alteration to single
& two-family residence
$35.00
Commercial structures $50.00 or ½ of 1% of the cost of the job,
but in no case less than $50.00
There will be a separate charge for each item listed above, even if the work performed is
located on same job site.2
2 Amended by the City Council 06/10/02
Section VII. CONFORMITY TO NFPA CODE
The minimum standards for electrical equipment and installations within the territorial
limits of the City of Ellsworth shall be the standards contained in the most recent edition
of the National Electric Code, designated as NFPA 70, as adopted by the State of Maine
Electricians’ Examining Board.
Section VIII. CERTIFICATE OF ACCEPTANCE
A. The applicant, by obtaining a permit, consents to the inspection by the
Electrical Inspector of work and equipment described in the permit at such
reasonable times and as often as the Electrical Inspector deems reasonably
necessary throughout the course of the authorized work so as to insure compliance
with this Ordinance. A failure to permit such reasonable inspection is expressly
made a violation of this Ordinance.
B. Prior to the sale, lease, use, or occupancy of any building, structure, portion of
a structure, or premises for which an Electrical Installation Permit has been
issued, the permit holder must secure a Certificated of Acceptance from the
Electrical Inspector stating that the electrical equipment is in conformity with the
standards set forth for electrical equipment in Section VII of this Ordinance. Prior
to the issuance of the Certificate of Acceptance, the Electrical Inspector will
inspect the property to see that all requirements under this Ordinance have been
met. A Certificate of Acceptance must be issued or denied within two (2) working
days of application for inspection by the permit holder. A failure to issue a
Certificate within two (2) working days shall be deemed a denial of the request
for certificate.
C. There shall be no charge for any such inspection, except in the case of
inspection of commercial property. In the case of inspections of commercial
property the permit holder may pay any difference between the ½ of 1% of the
total actual cost of the installation is less than or equal to the feel originally paid
for the permit, there shall be no charge for the inspection. In no case shall any
portion of the permit fee originally paid be refunded.
Section IX. ENFORCEMENT
A. Upon the discovery of any electrical equipment, which does not comply with
this ordinance, any person having the power and duty to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance may make a written complaint to the State Electrical Inspector in
accordance with 32 M.R.S.A. ss1104.
B. Whenever any person having the power and duty to enforce the provisions of
this Ordinance determines that there is a violation of any provision of this
Ordinance, that a person shall give written notice of such violation to the property
owner and the person making the installation, if known. Such written notice shall
contain:
i. A description of the building, structure, or premises in question in
sufficient detail to identify it;
ii. A description of the violation found and a citation to the provisions of
this Ordinance or the NFPA Code violated;
iii. The remedial action required for correction of such violation; and
iv. A date by which such violation must be corrected.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer and/or his authorized agent(s), including but
not limited to the Electrical Inspector, shall have the power and duty to prosecute
violations of the provisions of the Ordinance to the extent permitted by law.
D. Prosecution of violations of this Ordinance shall be made pursuant to 30-A
M.R.S.A. ss4452. The penalties for violating this Ordinance are those set forth at
ss4452 (3). These penalties include, but are not limited to, fines, injunctive relief
and the reimbursement of the City’s attorney’s fees and costs.
Section X. EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of Section I, II, and X of this Ordinance is the date that the resolution
adopting this Ordinance is adopted by the City Council, which is June 19, 1989. The
effective date of Sections III through IX of this Ordinance is September 1, 1989. This
date may be amended by the City Council if the City Council determines that a later or
earlier date is necessary to effectively implement this Ordinance, or if public health,
welfare and safety require a different effective date.
Adopted by the City Council July 17, 1989
With amendments through 1/14/02
1
CHAPTER 42
CITY OF ELLSWORTH
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted 4/15/1991
Repealed/Replaced 7/31/1995
Effective 8/14/1995
Adopted 5/20/1996
Effective 6/1/1996
Amended 10/21/2002
Amended 11/10/2003
Amended 4/21/2008
Repealed and replaced 10/17/2011
Amended May 20, 2013 effective 7/1/2013
2
SECTION 1: AUTHORITY
This Ordinance is created under the authority to granted the City of Ellsworth by
Title 38 M.R.S.A., 1301 et seq. (the Maine Hazardous Waste, Septage and Solid
Waste Management Act) and Title 30-A M.R.S.A., 3001 et seq. (Ordinance of
Municipalities and Counties).
SECTION 2: PURPOSE
2.01 To control the costs of solid waste management to the taxpayers of the City
of Ellsworth
2.02 To protect the health, safety and general well being of the citizens of
Ellsworth
2.03 To enhance and maintain the quality of the environment, conserve natural
resources and prevent water and air pollution by providing a comprehensive,
rational and effective means of regulating the disposal of solid waste in the
City in accordance with the provisions of title 38 M.R.S.A., Section 1304-B
as amended
2.04 To control solid waste material in the City by establishing limitations,
prohibiting certain acts causing solid waste disposal problems and to
provide for fines for violations of the provisions of this Ordinance
2.05 To encourage and expand solid waste recycling and waste reduction.
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
The definitions set forth in 38 M.R.S.A. §1303-C apply to this ordinance and are
incorporated herein. Any word not otherwise defined shall have its dictionary meaning.
Refuse – a broad term and is synonymous with “Solid Waste” and shall be defined
as any of a wide variety of solid materials as well as some liquids in containers,
which are discarded or rejected as being spent, useless, worthless, or in excess. In
order to be more specific, solid wastes will be classified in one of the following
sub-classifications of refuse:
Agricultural Solid Wastes - wastes produced from the raising of plants and
animals for food, including manure, plant stalks, hulls and leaves
Ashes - residue, including cinders and fly ash, from the burning of solid
fuels for cooking and heating, and from on-site incineration of refuse
materials
3
Bulky Objects - abandoned vehicles, stoves and refrigerators, large
furniture, tree trunks, stumps and brush
Commercial Solid Wastes - wastes that originate in wholesale, retail, or
service establishments, such as office buildings, stores, markets, theaters,
hotels and warehouses
Construction and Demolition Debris (CDD)-solid waste resulting from
construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition of structures. It includes
but is not limited to: lumber, bricks, masonry, shingles, building materials,
discarded furniture, asphalt, insulation, wall board, pipes, metal structures,
and metal conduits and other similar materials. It excludes: partially filled
containers of glues, tars, solvents, resins, paints, or caulking compounds;
friable asbestos; and other special wastes
Garbage - every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable, and/or other
matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing
in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or
decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or
vegetable matter (including but not by way of limitation, used tin cans and
the food containers and all putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal
or vegetable matter that is likely to attract flies or rodents), except (in all
cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction and
demolition debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish or stable matter
Green Wood - land clearing debris that is reasonably free of soil material
and rock and bark, shavings, slash, and plant and vegetable matter from
gardens and landscapes.
Hazardous Waste - waste which by reason of its composition,
characteristics or other inherent properties is dangerous to handle by
ordinary means, or which may present a substantial endangerment to health
or safety, "Hazardous Waste" shall also mean oil and petroleum products as
well as waste which is defined as harmful, toxic, dangerous or hazardous at
any time pursuant to (i) the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. Section
6901 et seq., as amended; (ii) the Maine Hazardous Waste, Septage and
Solid Waste Act, 38 M.R.S.A. Section 1301 et seq., as amended; (iii) any
other federal, state, county or local codes, statutes, regulations or
ordinances; and (iv) regulations, orders or other actions promulgated or
taken with respect to the items listed in (i) through (iv) above; provided
however, that any such materials which are later determined not to be
harmful, toxic, dangerous, or hazardous by any governmental agency or unit
having appropriate jurisdiction shall not be considered "Hazardous Waste"
unless a contrary determination has been or is made by any other
4
governmental agency or unit having appropriate jurisdiction
Industrial Waste - wastes generally discarded from industrial operations or
derived from manufacturing processes but not including a) hazardous waste
or b) special waste which by reason of its composition, characteristics or
other properties is not ordinarily acceptable for disposal at sites licensed for
disposal of municipal solid waste. Excluded special waste shall include, but
not be limited to friable asbestos and oil-contaminated soil.
Municipal Wastes - the combined residential and commercial wastes
generated in a given municipal area
Non-Resident – a person who does not reside in or pay taxes to the City of
Ellsworth
Resident – a person who resides in or pays taxes to the City of Ellsworth
Residential Wastes - wastes generated in houses and apartments, including
paper, cardboard, beverage and food cans, plastics, food wastes, glass
containers, and garden wastes
Sewerage Treatment Wastes - screenings, grease, scum and grit
Special Wastes waste designated by the Maine Board of Environmental
Protection as Special Wastes as defined 38 MRSA 1303-C
Tipping Fee - is that fee charged to the City of Ellsworth by a disposal
facility such as PERC (or some other disposal facility).
Wood Waste - means brush, lumber, bark, wood chips, shavings, slabs,
edgings, slash, sawdust, and wood from production rejects that are not
mixed with other solid or liquid waste. For the purpose of this definition,
“lumber” is entirely made of wood and is free from metal, plastics, and
coatings. Wood Waste does not include painted wood or pressure treated
wood. These would be included with Construction and Demolition Debris,
as defined. Wood Waste also does not include Green Wood, as defined.
SECTION 4: RULES AND REGULATIONS
4.0.0 General Requirements
4.0.1 All refuse shall be disposed in accordance with this Ordinance.
4.0.2 The City Manager shall have the authority to restrict the disposal of all types and
volumes of refuse, if deemed in the best interests of the City.
5
4.0.3 Use of Ellsworth Transfer Station during non-operating hours without prior
approval of the City Manager is prohibited.
4.0.4 No person, partnership or corporation, shall dispose of any refuse on any public
property or roads except as allowed by this ordinance.
4.0.5 All loads coming into the Ellsworth Transfer Station shall be properly secured. This
includes commercial and residential vehicles.
4.1.0 Materials Disposal Restrictions
4.1.1 All Materials or containers of materials classified as hazardous by the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) are prohibited.
4.1.2 Ashes at a combustible temperature or other hot loads are prohibited.
4.1.3 Trees, limbs of trees, or tree trunks greater than 6 inches diameter and 3 foot
lengths are prohibited.
4.1.4 All Commercial Demolition Debris as defined are prohibited.
4.1.5 All Special Waste as defined are prohibited.
4.1.6 All Green Wood and Wood Waste as defined are prohibited.
SECTION 5: DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE
5.1 Occupants of residential property shall dispose of regular municipal solid waste in one
of the following methods:
A. City-provided collection service
Eligibility to the City-provided collection service shall be limited to seasonal and
year-round dwellings and apartments or mobile home parks.
Residents who participate in the City provided collection service will be required to
purchase and affix a solid waste disposal sticker to each bag. The cost of the
disposal sticker shall be determined by the City Council. Bags of trash to which a
sticker is affixed shall be limited to no more than fifty (50) pounds per bag. Bags
exceeding fifty pounds will not be collected and may only be disposed of at the
Ellsworth Transfer Station by paying to use dispose of the bag based on its exact
weight.
Materials to be disposed of in bags shall be limited to solid waste acceptable to
the regional waste incinerator. Residents will be responsible for trash from their
bags that is that is strewn because of faulty bags, overweight bags or animals.
6
Trash will be collected on a weekly basis. Bags are to be placed at curbside no
sooner than 6:30 a.m. of the morning of the collection day. Stickered bags may be
placed within garbage cans or containers.
Residents along private ways or public easements shall place their bags of trash at
designated locations proximate to the private way or public easement.
B. Use of Ellsworth Transfer Station
All residents and non-residents may take their trash to the Ellsworth Transfer
Station for disposal. All trash to be disposed of shall be contained within bags. Bag
weight limitation shall be fifty (50) pounds if a disposal sticker is attached, or the
exact weight of the bag(s) shall be determined by the Transfer Station operator
through the use of the scale and charged to the disposer. Disposal shall be limited to
those hours the transfer station is open.
There is no charge for the disposal of recyclable material at the Ellsworth Recycling
Center.
C. Hire a Private Hauler
Residents of any dwelling may contract with a private hauler for disposal of
residential solid waste. Residents shall be responsible for all costs associated with
disposal.
SECTION 6: FEES
6.0 Authority The City Council shall establish by order schedules of solid waste
disposal charges to be charged for the use of the Ellsworth Transfer Station, which
schedules may include different waste disposal charges for residents of the City, businesses
located within the City, non-residents of the City, and commercial refuse collectors
collecting solid waste within the City and may include different schedules for disposal of
different kinds of solid waste.
6.1 Charge Accounts All users of the Transfer Station will be required to establish
a charge account for any items disposed of at the facility, excluding recyclable material and
trash bags with a solid waste disposal sticker affixed to it.
6.2 Late Fees Interest on late payments will be assessed at an interest rate of one
and one-half percent (1½%), or $1.00 minimum, per month for all such fees that are still
unpaid after a period of thirty days from the date of billing.
SECTION 7: VIOLATIONS & PENALTIES
7
7.1 Violations of this ordinance shall be enforced under the provision of 30-A M.R.S.A.
§4452 as amended (Enforcement of land use laws and ordinances) as land use violations.
The penalties set forth in the aforementioned statute shall apply to violations of this
ordinance. (Currently these penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than
$2,500 for each day of a violation.)
7.2 Municipal Costs of Enforcement In addition to the foregoing penalty provisions,
any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be liable to reimburse the City
for costs of enforcement including reasonable attorney fees and court costs. This provision
shall not preclude the City for seeking and obtaining equitable relief.
SECTION 8: SEVERABILTY
Each of these sections shall be construed as separate. If any section, sentence, clause, or
phrase shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder of that section and all other
sections shall continue in force.
Adopted by the Ellsworth City Council on _______________________
Attest: _____________________________City Clerk

CHAPTER 44
MAINTENANCE OF CERTAIN PUBLIC EASEMENTS
1. Owners of property abutting the following private roads for which the City has in the past
provided limited winter and/or summer maintenance have one (1) year from the date of the
adoption to provide the City with a deeded public easement with a minimum width of 33 feet.
FR# COMMON ROAD NAME LENGTH SERVICE
502 Graham Way 2,400’ Winter
420 Northeast Cove Road 6,300’ Summer
331 Scott’s Neck Road 12,000’ Summer
304 Green Lake Road 7,400’ Summer
307 Cove Road 4,224’ Summer
3,000’ Winter
303 Dan Force Road 1,500’ Summer/Winter
303B Phillips Road 8,000’ Summer
3,500’ Winter
303C Orchard Road 4,480’ Summer
2,640’ Winter
219B Branchview Dr/Right 8,450’ Summer/Winter
219C Branchview Dr/Left 4,200’ Summer/Winter
312 Walls Road 2,650’ Summer
311 Sargent Drive 7,000’ Summer/Winter
303D Hogan Road 2,650’ Summer
303DD Whitcomb Road 1,300’ Summer
2. All City maintenance will cease on those roads for which a deeded public easement is not
given to the City within one year of the date of the adoption of this ordinance. Should a deeded
public easement be provided within five (5) years of the date of the adoption of this ordinance,
the City Council will reinstate city road maintenance services.
3. For those roads for which a deeded public easement is provided, the City shall continue to
provide the following maintenance:
Summer: Provide labor and equipment for grading and ditching to allow for positive drainage.
Winter: Plow snow. Sanding may be provided on request of the road owners association
representative at a cost to be set annually by the City Council.
4. The road owners association for each road for which a deeded public easement is provided is
to maintain the road with gravel, culverts and brush cutting.
5 In the event that abutting owners grant a deeded public easement allowing public access to land
or waters in conjunction with, and located at or near the far end of any public easement granted
in accordance with Section 1 above, the City shall also provide, at the City’s expense, gravel for
maintenance purposes, replacement culverts, and brush cutting within the public easement.
6 No later than April 1 of each year, the City shall be notified in writing of the person
responsible for road maintenance of each public easement for which limited road maintenance
has been approved pursuant to this ordinance. It shall be the responsibility of this person to serve
as a liaison with the City.
The person responsible for road maintenance shall be the clerk or other designee of a road
owners association duly formed pursuant to title 23 M. R. S. A.. Sections 3101-3104.
7. The City Road Commissioner and road owners association representatives shall annually
inspect each road for which the City provides maintenance. The Road Commissioner shall send a
report by June 1 to the clerk or designee of the respective road owners association, detailing any
deficiencies in the road that need correction. City road maintenance shall be discontinued for all
roads on which the identified deficiencies have not been corrected by September 1 of that year.
Maintenance will be reinstated upon correction of the deficiencies to the satisfaction of the Road
Commissioner. A written appeal to the City Council of a Road Commissioner’s decision under
Section 7 of this ordinance may be made by the road owners association representative within
thirty (30) calendar days of that decision.
8. Acceptance of public easements and providing limited maintenance pursuant to this ordinance
shall not constitute acceptance of any road as a public way or City street. The provisions of this
ordinance shall not modify any City road or street ordinance.
Adopted September 19, 1994
CHAPTER 45
REGULATIONS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF STREET LIGHTS
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to establish a policy and process for street lights installed
and removed by the City of Ellsworth. This ordinance also establishes a policy and
process for acceptance of a streetlight installed by an entity other than the City of
Ellsworth
SECTION 2. STREET LIGHT POLICY
The purpose of street lights owned and/or rented by the City of Ellsworth is to provide for
traffic and pedestrian safety along public ways. The major objective is to reduce motor
vehicle and pedestrian accidents by illuminating hazards. Street lights shall also be used
to illuminate city-owned property for security and safety purposes.
SECTION 3. STREET LIGHT COMMITTEE
The City of Ellsworth shall have a Street Light Committee to provide a method of
determination for the installation or removal of streetlights and to assume responsibility
of an existing streetlight.
a. The Committee shall consist of the City Manager, two City Council members as
appointed by the Council Chairman, two citizens of Ellsworth who represent the
general public, and the Chief of Police.
b. The Committee shall have the authority to consider and recommend action by the
City Council on the need for removal and/or installation of street lights on the public
ways of the City of Ellsworth. The Committee shall also have the authority to
consider and recommend action on a request for the City to assume responsibility of
an existing street light.
c. The Committee shall make its decisions upon findings of fact by a majority of the
Committee.
d. Upon decision of the Committee, a recommendation shall be forwarded to the City
Council for its action.
SECTION 4. PROCEDURE FOR STREETLIGHT CHANGES
a. Any citizen of the City of Ellsworth may request the installation or removal of a street
light. Additionally, a citizen may request the City assume financial responsibility of an
existing street light.
. 1. The request for a street light change shall include the following information:
?? an application provided by the City and completed by the
petitioner;
?? an identification of the public way and the pole on which the
requested street light would be installed;
?? a description of the situation demonstrating the need for a street
light;
?? proof of notification of immediate abutters and property owners
within a 500 foot radius of the streetlight.
b. Upon receipt of the application, the Street Light Committee shall review the
information to evaluate conformance to the purpose and criteria of this ordinance.
c. The Committee shall make its decision and a recommendation shall be forwarded to
the City Council for action.
d. Upon notification of the Committee, the City Council shall hold a public hearing and
by Council Order, act on the request.
SECTION 5. INSTALLATION, ASSUMPTION OF FINANCIAL
RESPONSIBILITY AND REMOVAL
a. The City of Ellsworth may install, pay for, or assume financial responsibility for street
lights in the following instances:
1) lighting the intersection of a public way;
2) bad curves or other serious road hazards where increased illuminations would
ease the traffic hazard;
3) lighting of areas with heavy evening pedestrian traffic.
b. The City of Ellsworth shall not install, pay for, or assume financial responsibility for
street lights in the following instances:
1) Security of Private Property:
Illuminating private property (commercial, industrial, and residential) for
security purposes is at variance with City policy.
2) Entrance to Private Drives:
Illuminating private driveways, business entrances, and entrances to private
ways is not in accordance with City policy.
3) Private Ways:
City-installed street lights shall not be located on private ways, camp roads, or
private driveways.
c. The City of Ellsworth shall only install or pay for a street light on an existing pole
owned by the municipality or a public utility and which is located within a public rightof-
way.
Adopted April 21, 2008
June 19, 1995 edition repealed/replaced with 4/21/2008 edition
A True Copy
Attest:___________________________________City Clerk



City of Ellsworth
Chapter 48
ROTATIONAL TOWING
ORDINANCE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted 1/27/1997
Amended 2/23/1998
Amended 2/22/1999
Amended 8/12/2002
Amended 8/11/2003
Amended 9/19/2005
Amended 12/17/2012
2
1. Purpose.
The City of Ellsworth is one of the largest customers for towing services in Hancock
County. The City seeks to ensure that towing services used for police related
towing meet minimum qualifications to ensure the safety and security of the public
and their property while allowing for efficient and orderly towing. The City also
seeks to ensure that qualified towers have equal access to business generated as a
result of police tows.
2. Towing Rotation List Established.
2.1. A towing rotation list is hereby established. Any towing service holding a
Statement of Qualification from the Chief of Police or his designee shall be
eligible for inclusion on that list.
2.2. Any eligible towing service shall be included in the towing rotation list at the
written request of that towing service submitted to the Chief of Police. That
written request shall state that the towing service, and its owners its officers
and employees, are familiar with the terms of this Ordinance and agree to be
bound thereby.
2.3. The towing rotation list shall be used for all non-preference tows.
2.4. The Ellsworth Police Department shall call the towing service at the top of the
towing rotation list for any non-preference tow. After being given or refusing
a tow offer, the towing service will be placed at the bottom of the list.
2.5. The Ellsworth Police Department shall have the authority to call a towing
service that outside of the towing rotation list in the following circumstances:
2.5.1. It is necessary to impound the vehicle for law enforcement purposes.
2.5.2. Public safety requires the immediate removal of the vehicle. Any towing
service called under this section of the Ordinance shall be moved to the
bottom of the towing rotation list.
2.5.3. An error is made by the Ellsworth Police Department in calling rotation.
Any towing service erroneously called under this section of the
Ordinance shall be moved to the bottom of the towing rotation list.
2.5.4. The vehicle to be towed is owned, leased or operated by the City of
Ellsworth.
3. Application for Statement of Qualification.
A towing service seeking a Statement of Qualification for inclusion in the towing
3
rotation list shall submit an application therefore to the Chief of Police.
3.1. The following materials shall constitute a complete application.
3.1.1. Completed and signed application form.
3.1.2. The name, address and date of birth of each person employed as a driver
or who otherwise has access to any secure storage area, or who is an
owner, officer, partner or principal of the applicant.
3.1.3. A description of the location, size and security features of the secure
storage area at which towed vehicles shall be stored and released. This
description shall be sufficiently complete that the Chief of Police can
determine whether the facility meets the requirements of this Ordinance.
3.1.4. A list of the towing equipment available to the operator that will be used
for rotational towing.
3.1.5. The location of the release facility to which the public must come to
claim towed vehicles.
3.1.6. A copy of the driver's license for each individual who will drive the
applicant's vehicles. In the event a new driver is hired subsequent to an
applicant's inclusion in the towing rotation list, that driver may not drive
on towing rotation list tows until a copy of that license is submitted to
the Chief of Police.
3.1.7. Proof of insurance in not less than the following amounts:
3.1.7.1. Garage keepers insurance insuring against loss to vehicles stored at
the yard due to fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion, in an
amount no less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) with
each vehicle suffering loss or damage being deemed a separate loss.
This policy shall also insure against loss due to hoisting, lifting or
towing of vehicles in the same amount.
3.1.7.2. Commercial liability insurance insuring the operation of the
applicant's business for bodily injury or property damage in the
amount of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined
single limit.
3.1.7.3. Vehicle liability insurance insuring each tow vehicle covering
personal injury loss in the amount of three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00), combined single limit, or such greater amount as shall
be required by Maine law. Such policy shall also provide for property
damage insurance in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars.
4
($25,000.00).
3.1.8. Each proof of insurance required by section 3.1.7 shall be accompanied
by:
3.1.8.1. An endorsement by the carrier providing thirty (30) days prior written
notice to the City of Ellsworth of any changes in coverage or
cancellation of the policy.
3.1.8.2. An endorsement holding the City of Ellsworth, its officers, agents and
employees, harmless from all claims whether direct, for contribution,
or subrogation.
3.1.9. The lapse or cancellation of any insurance coverage required by section
3.1.7 shall be grounds for immediate suspension from the towing rotation
list until proof of adequate coverage is provided to the Chief of Police in
the manner specified in Section 3.1.6 and 7, above.
3.2. Upon receipt of a complete application the Chief of Police shall conduct an
investigation of the applicant to determine that the applicant, its facilities,
employees and agents comply with the terms of this Ordinance. This
investigation shall be conducted within thirty days (30) of the receipt of a
complete application.
3.3. The Chief of Police shall deny a Certificate of Qualification to any applicant
where:
3.3.1. The applicant fails to file a full and complete application.
3.3.2. The applicant furnishes false information in its application;
3.3.3. The applicant lacks the facilities or equipment required by this
Ordinance;
3.3.4. Any person employed as a driver or who otherwise has access to any
secure storage area, or who is an owner, officer, partner or principal of
the applicant who has been convicted in any state or federal court of a
felony or a crime of dishonesty or moral turpitude.
3.3.5. The applicant, or any person who is an owner, officer, partner or
principal of the applicant, is or was an owner, officer, partner or
principal of a towing service that is currently suspended or removed
from the towing rotation list.
5
4. Service Standards for Towers Participating in the Towing Rotation List.
4.1. Towing services shall maintain and operate a secure storage area and release
facility located within the City of Ellsworth or within a radius of five miles (5)
of the Ellsworth City Hall.
4.2. There shall be no public access to any secure storage area. Any secure storage
area shall be separated from any motor vehicle repair area by a wall and locked
door or fence and locked gate.
4.3. Towing services shall permit the Chief of Police to inspect the premises at
random during normal business hours to determine whether the towing service
complies with the requirements of this Ordinance. Such inspections shall be
only for this purpose and shall not be conducted for any other purpose without
proper warrant or lawful reason therefore.
4.4. Towing services shall maintain records relating to towing rotation list tows as
required by the Chief of Police. These records shall be available for inspection
by the Chief of Police during normal business hours.
4.5. Towing services shall submit copies of all towing rotation list tow receipts to
the Chief of Police within fifteen days (15) of the end of each calendar quarter
(March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31). Any failure to comply
with this requirement shall result in the immediate suspension of the towing
service from the towing rotation list without prior notice. The suspension shall
continue until the first business day following the submission of the required
receipts to the Chief of Police.
4.6. No vehicle that has been towed in a towing rotation list tow, or any part thereof
or item contained therein, shall be removed from the secure storage area or the
possession of the towing service until the vehicle is reclaimed by the
owner/operator. Any person who seeks to remove any vehicle or part thereof
or item therein, prior to reclaiming the vehicle, shall first obtain the written
permission of the Chief of Police.
4.7. Towing services shall not make any repairs to a towed vehicle without the
written consent of the owner.
4.8. Towing services shall maintain a 24-hour business telephone.
5. Towing Vehicle Standards.
5.1. All towing services shall have a two-way radio or cellular telephone in each
wrecker.
6
5.2. All wreckers shall be properly registered and inspected, and shall at all times
meet Maine State inspection standards.
5.3. All wreckers shall be equipped with fire extinguishers, emergency lights and
equipment for the removal of debris from an accident scene.
5.4. All wreckers shall have the towing service name and telephone number
stenciled on each door in letters at least three inches in height.
5.5. Towing services shall permit the Chief of Police to inspect any wreckers at
random during normal business hours or at any time the wrecker is operating to
determine whether the towing service complies with the requirements of this
Ordinance. Such inspections shall be only for this purpose and shall not be
conducted for any other purpose without proper warrant or lawful reason
therefore.
5.6. All wreckers shall be equipped with some means of removing a vehicle
without wheels.
6. Tow Scene Activities.
6.1. Towing services participating in the towing rotation list are expected to accept
all kinds of work. Three refusals to provide towing services within any ninety
day (90) calendar period without good cause therefore shall constitute a
violation of this Ordinance.
6.2. Wreckers called on a towing rotation list tow shall respond on the scene within
thirty minutes (30) of receipt of a request from the police department for
service. Any tower that is not able to respond within this period shall notify
the police dispatch within fifteen minutes (15) of the request from the police
department.
6.3. Vehicles must be towed, not driven, to the storage lot or other destination.
Upon the request of the owner/operator of the vehicle and the approval of the
police department, the towing service shall tow the vehicle to the owner's
preferred location.
6.4. Towing services shall, at the time of payment, give a towing rotation list tow
receipt to the owner/operator or each vehicle towed in a towing rotation list
tow. The receipt shall be printed with the towing service's name, address and
telephone number, and shall itemize the cost of towing, mileage fees, storage
fees and any other additional fees or costs. A copy of each receipt shall be
provided to the Chief of Police as required by section 4.5, above.
6.5. The wrecker operator or other employee of the towing service shall clean the
scene of all non-hazardous vehicular debris resulting from the accident. All
7
debris shall be removed to the satisfaction of the police officer in charge of the
scene prior to the wrecker leaving the scene.
6.6. No towing service owner, officer, employee or agent shall, while engaged in
any towing activity, engage in any loud argument, fight or other disturbance;
harass, threaten or assault another person; intentionally, knowingly or
recklessly damage, destroy or threaten to damage or destroy the property of
another; or in any other manner engage in conduct detrimental to the orderly
and efficient towing of vehicles.
6.7. The solicitation of towing business at the scene of any accident or emergency
is prohibited unless the police or the owner/operator of the vehicle to be towed
called or summoned the towing service to the scene. This prohibition applies
regardless of whether the police department has arrived or been called. This
section is not meant to prohibit tow services from stopping to render assistance
in their normal course of travel when coming upon a disabled motorist.
7. Release of Vehicles.
7.1. Any vehicle impounded by the police department shall not be released to the
owner/operator without the prior approval of the Chief of Police. Such
vehicles shall be labeled "Police Hold" on the tow receipt.
All other vehicles may be released to the owner/operator or his agent provided
that proof of ownership is show and the appropriate fees due the towing service
have been paid. Towing services shall release a vehicle within two hours (2)
of the satisfaction of these conditions and the owner/operator's request.
7.2. The towing service shall advise vehicle owner/operators prior to the release of
a vehicle, if there is an additional charge for releases after 6:00 pm, that a daily
storage fee will be charged for vehicles left for more than twelve hours (12),
and if cash is the only accepted means of payment.
7.3. The police department shall be notified of any vehicles that remain unclaimed
for a period of more than thirty days (30) by forwarding a copy of the towing
receipt to the Chief of Police. The towing service shall handle unclaimed
vehicles only in accordance with state statute.
8. Administrative Provisions.
8.1. The service rates and fee charges are established in the attached Appendix “A”.
Any dispute about charges shall be submitted to the City Manager for
resolution. The decision of the City Manager is final. The owner/operator of a
towed vehicle shall not be obligated to pay any charge unless they have been
given a copy of the towing rotation list tow receipt as required by Section 6.4,
above.
8
8.2. Service charges:
8.2.1. Upon recommendation of the Chief of Police, the City Council shall
review and approve all fees pertaining to the towing ordinance. See
Appendix “A”
8.3. The following shall be grounds for suspension or removal from the towing
rotation list:
8.3.1. The occurrence of any condition that would require the Chief of Police to
deny an application for a Certificate of Qualification pursuant to Section
3.3;
8.3.2. Violation of any provision of this Ordinance during any towing rotation
list tow;
8.3.3. Violation of Sections 6.6 or 6.7 at any time;
8.3.4. A failure to comply with any provision of this Ordinance that expressly
contains a penalty of suspension for non-compliance.
8.4. Suspension and removal shall be imposed in accordance with the following
provisions:
8.4.1. Any suspension imposed pursuant to Section 8.3.1 shall continue until
the towing services re-apples for and receives a new Certificate of
Qualification.
8.4.2. Any suspension imposed pursuant to Section 8.3.4 shall continue as set
forth in the provision imposing a suspension.
8.4.3. Any suspension imposed pursuant to Section 8.3.3 shall be for:
8.4.3.1. Thirty days (30) for a first violation within any 18-month period.
8.4.3.2. Sixty days (60) for a second violation within any 18-month period.
8.4.3.3. One hundred and twenty days (120) for a third violation within any
18-month period.
8.4.3.4. Removal for at least one year for a fourth violation occurring within
any 18-month period, or for a sixth violation occurring in any threeyear
period.
9
8.5. The City Manager shall serve as the hearing officer for the purposes of Section
8.3.
8.6. Any towing service participating in the towing rotation list may appeal a
suspension or removal from the towing rotation list to the Ellsworth Board of
Appeals within fifteen days of the suspension. There shall be a fee of one
hundred dollars for this appeal.
8.7. Any suspension or removal imposed pursuant to Sections 8.3.2 or 8.3.3 shall
be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. Any suspension imposed
pursuant to Sections 8.3.1 or 8.3.4 shall not be stayed.
9. Severability.
In the event any provision or portion of this Ordinance is held to be unlawful or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions or
portions of the Ordinance re declared to be severable and shall not be thereby
invalidated.
10. Definitions
Accident: Any situation wherein a vehicle is damaged or disabled, regardless of amount,
such that towing services are desirable or required.
Emergency: Any situation wherein a police officer or any other law enforcement officer
or emergency official determines that public safety or welfare requires the towing of a
vehicle. An emergency includes an arrest scene where the police determine that a vehicle
must be towed.
Chief of Police: The Chief of the Ellsworth Police Department or his designee.
Police Department or Officer: The Ellsworth Police Department and its officers.
Non-preference tows. Tows where the owner/operator of the vehicle expresses no
preference for the services of a particular towing company that is reasonably available, or
the owner/operator is unable or unwilling to express such a preference.
Secure storage area: An internal secure storage area contained within a fully enclosed
building. An external secure storage area that is fully fenced and gated.
Service call: A call for services that do not involve towing, such as gas, locked vehicle
or flat tire calls.
Towing rotation list tow receipts: Receipts for tows required by Sections 4.5 and 6.4 of
this Ordinance.
10
APPENDIX “A”
Towing Fees
Approved at the December 19, 2012 Council Meeting.
A True Copy
Attest:_________________________________
Heidi-Noël Grindle
Light duty tows (GVW less than
12,000 lbs)1
Standard Accident
Day rate (8:00 am to 6:00 pm) $60 $125
Night rate (6:00 pm to 8:00 am) $70 $125
Outside storage 2 $40
Inside storage 2 $60
Mileage $3.00 per loaded
mile
$3.00 per loaded
mile
Time > ½ hour in fifteen minute
increments 3
$80
$20/ 15 min.
$120/hr roll over
$30/ 15 min
Day service call $40
Night service call $60
1A dual rear wheel vehicle built on a full-sized chassis is not considered a
"light duty tow" regardless of GVW.
2Note: The first day of storage may be charged if the vehicle is held in excess
of 12 hours. Subsequent storage may be charged after the initial 24-hour
period for any part of each subsequent 24-hour period.
3Time charges may be assessed for time at the scene, only. Time will not be
assessed for time spent going to or returning from a tow, nor shall time be
assessed in addition to mileage.
10
APPENDIX “A”
Towing Fees
Approved at the December 19, 2012 Council Meeting.
A True Copy
Attest:_________________________________
Heidi-Noël Grindle
Light duty tows (GVW less than
12,000 lbs)1
Standard Accident
Day rate (8:00 am to 6:00 pm) $60 $125
Night rate (6:00 pm to 8:00 am) $70 $125
Outside storage 2 $40
Inside storage 2 $60
Mileage $3.00 per loaded
mile
$3.00 per loaded
mile
Time > ½ hour in fifteen minute
increments 3
$80
$20/ 15 min.
$120/hr roll over
$30/ 15 min
Day service call $40
Night service call $60
1A dual rear wheel vehicle built on a full-sized chassis is not considered a
"light duty tow" regardless of GVW.
2Note: The first day of storage may be charged if the vehicle is held in excess
of 12 hours. Subsequent storage may be charged after the initial 24-hour
period for any part of each subsequent 24-hour period.
3Time charges may be assessed for time at the scene, only. Time will not be
assessed for time spent going to or returning from a tow, nor shall time be
assessed in addition to mileage.

























































































































City of Ellsworth Ordinances
Chapter 53
Water Ordinance
Expired
Page 1 of 5
City of Ellsworth
Chapter [ 54] DEVELOPMENT FEE ORDINANCE
Section 1. TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Development Fee Ordinance” of the City of
Ellsworth, Maine.
Section 2. AUTHORITY
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Title 30A M.R.S.A. §4354, and its statutory and
constitutional home rule provisions.
Section 3. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Development Fee Ordinance is to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the City of Ellsworth by:
A. Requiring development to pay for its proportionate share of costs associated with
new, expanded, or modified infrastructure necessary to service the development, as
described in the specific Infrastructure Financing Plan; and
B. Setting forth standards and procedures for assessing development fees and
administering the Development Fee Program.
Section 4. EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance, enacted on the 20th day of June 2005 by the Ellsworth City Council, shall take
effect immediately.
Section 5. RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Whenever a provision of this ordinance is inconsistent with another provision of the ordinance or
any other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the more restrictive provision shall control.
Section 6. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance.
Section 7. AMENDMENTS
Before consideration of adoption or amendment of the ordinance and of any Infrastructure
Financing Plan, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. Said public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days before
the hearing.
Page 2 of 5
Section 8. DEFINITIONS
Capital Facilities: Necessary public services that are permanent additions to the City's assets
and are primarily financed by long-term debt instruments or a capital improvement plan but not
primarily from the City's annual municipal operating budget. Capital facilities and infrastructure
are terms that may be used interchangeably.
Construction Permit: Includes a building permit, plumbing permit, electrical permit, or any
other land use permit or license issued by the Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer.
Developer: A person, corporation, organization, or other legal entity constructing or creating
development.
Development Fee: The charge imposed upon development by the City of Ellsworth to fund all
or a portion of the public facilities capital improvements required by the development from
which it is collected.
District: A designated area identified in an Infrastructure Financing Plan for which public
facility needs have been determined upon assumptions made in accordance with generally
accepted planning practices and engineering standards.
Infrastructure Financing Plan: The plan that sets out the need for public facility capital
improvements, and proposed funding sources. The time period covered by the plan shall not be
less than five (5) years or exceed ten (10) years.
Development: The construction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or
enlargement of any structure; extension or change of any existing use; or any of which increases
the need for services.
Section 9. APPLICABILITY
This ordinance shall apply to all development within the City of Ellsworth at such time as a
specific Infrastructure Financing Plan has been adopted pursuant to Section 10 of this ordinance.
Section 10. INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCING PLANS
Prior to assessment of a development fee, the City of Ellsworth shall adopt a specific
Infrastructure Financing Plan. Each Infrastructure Financing Plan shall comply with the
following requirements:
A. The plan shall estimate the total cost of capital facilities needed to serve the anticipated
future development of the identified district.
Page 3 of 5
B. The plan shall specify needs for one or more of the following categories of capital
facilities:
i. Water facilities
ii. Solid waste facilities;
iii. Police and fire protection facilities and equipment;
iv. Roads and traffic control devices;
v. Public parks and other open space or recreation areas; and
vi. Public Schools.
C. The following costs may be included in the capital cost of the infrastructure
improvements: land or easement acquisition; studies leading to design; engineering,
surveying, and environmental assessment services directly related to the design,
construction, and oversight of the construction of the improvement; the actual
construction of the improvement including, without limitation, demolition costs, clearing
and grading of the land, and necessary capital equipment; mitigation costs; legal and
administrative costs associated with construction of the improvement including any
borrowing necessary to finance the project; debt service costs including interest if the
City borrows for the construction of the improvement; relocation costs; and similar costs
that are directly related to the project.
D. No portion of the development fee shall be used for routine maintenance or operation
activities.
Section 11. ADMINISTRATION OF DEVELOPMENT FEES
A. This ordinance shall be administered by the Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The development fees shall be assesed by the Code Enforcement Officer, as determined
from the applicable Infrastructure Financing Plan.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer may charge the developer a review fee, not to exceed
$500 per development per Infrastructure Financing Plan, to contract professional
services to assist with development fee assessments.
D. All development which increases the need for services shall pay a development fee. If the
development consists of an expansion of an existing use or a change of use type, the fee
shall be assessed only for the additional impact of the expansion or change.
Page 4 of 5
E. The development fee shall be paid by the developer as follows:
1. If a construction permit is required, fifty (50) percent of the applicable
development fees shall be paid at the time of the issuance of the permit and fifty
(50) percent at the time of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or final
inspection.
2. In the event no construction permit is needed for a development that increases the
need for services, the developer is responsible to notify the Code Enforcement
Officer of the development and to pay the development fee in whole.
3. The City of Ellsworth retains the right to collect unpaid development fees up to
five (5) years after the substantial or total completion of the development. The
unpaid development fees shall be paid together with interest, compounded
annually, and calculated as simple interest at three (3) percent per year.
4. The City Council may approve the payment of a development fee over time in
accordance with an approved payment schedule provided that the Council finds,
by formal vote, that the payment of the development fee per sections 11.E.1 and
11.E.2 will create a financial hardship for the developer and appropriate
arrangements are in place to guarantee the collection of the fee in a timely
manner.
F. The City Council shall periodically review each specific Infrastructure Financing Plan
established under this ordinance. If the City Council finds that the anticipated cost of the
improvement has changed or that the identification of developments subject to the fee is
no longer appropriate, the City Council may adopt changes in the Plan. Any changes
adopted as a result of such review shall apply to all future development but shall not be
applied retroactively to projects that have already paid a development fee.
Section 12. DEVELOPMENT FEE ACCOUNTS
All development fees collected under the provisions of this ordinance shall be segregated and
accounted for in separate development fee accounts designated for each specific Infrastructure
Financing Plan.
Section 13. REFUND OF DEVELOPMENT FEES
Development fees shall be refunded in the following cases:
A. Any fees collected that are not spent or obligated by contract for the specified
improvements by the end of the calendar quarter immediately following ten (10) years
from the date the fee was paid shall be returned to the payer of the fee together with
interest compounded annually calculated as simple interest at three (3) percent per year
from the date of the payment of the fee.
Page 5 of 5
B. Any development fees actually paid that exceed the City’s actual costs shall be returned
to the current owner of the property for which the fee was paid together with interest
calculated at three (3) percent per year from the date of the payment of the fee.
Section 14. MODIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT FEES
A. The City Council may, by formal vote following a public hearing, waive the payment of a
required development fee, in whole or in part, if it finds that:
1. The developer or property owner who would otherwise be responsible for the
payment of the development fee voluntarily agrees to construct the improvement
for which the development fee would be collected or an equivalent improvement
approved by the City Council. The pre-funding of a capital projects shall be
allowed; or
2. The project subject to the development fee involves the construction of affordable
housing as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,
U.S. Department of Agriculture Rural Development Agency, or the Maine State
Housing Authority. If only part of the project is affordable housing, the Council
may waive only the portion of the fee attributable to the affordable units; or
3. The project subject to the development fee involves a non-retail use that will
create a significant number of new jobs or investment that is consistent with the
City’s economic development objectives and will not result in an unfair
competitive advantage for the project vis-à-vis other local businesses; or
4. The project subject to the development fee will create significant public
recreational amenities or create quality of life components that the City Council
deems to be essential to the fulfillment of the City’s adopted vision, as described
in the 2004 Comprehensive Plan.
B. A waiver decision by the City Council cannot be appealed.
Section 15. APPEAL
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer may appeal said
decision to the Ellsworth City Council in writing within seven (7) days after said decision and
provide the grounds for such appeal. The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the terms of this ordinance.
Section 16. PENALTY
Any person violating the provisions shall be liable to a civil penalty in accordance with 30A
M.R.S.A. §4452.



1
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 55
Water Supply Protection
Ordinance
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted July 18, 2005
Effective August 11, 2005
Amended Through March 15, 2010
Amended August 16, 2010
Amended January 14, 2013
2
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1. Title
This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Public Water Supply Protection Ordinance” of the
City of Ellsworth, Maine.
Section 2. Authority
This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Title 22 M.R.S.A. §2642.
Section 3. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the water quality of Branch Lake, the Ellsworth drinking
water supply and its sources, as well as the health, safety, and welfare of persons dependent upon
such supplies. These supply sources include all perennial and intermittent streams, as well as the
wetlands of ten (10) acres or more located within the Branch Lake Watershed Boundaries. The
ordinance is intended to protect the drinking water supply and its sources from pollution and
development; chemical contamination; increased recreational and boating pressures; and invasive
aquatic species.
The provisions of this ordinance pertaining to surface water use and water-related activities include
any activity in, on, or from the surface water or the frozen water of Branch Lake and its sources.
Section 4. Effective Date
This ordinance enacted on the 18th day of July 2005 by the Ellsworth City Council shall take effect
August 15, 2005.
Section 5. Applicability and Map
This ordinance shall apply to all surface water use on Branch Lake or it sources, as delineated on the
attached Public Water Supply Protection Area map. This area is considered to be essential to the
protection of the existing water from the effect of possible contamination activities.
Section 6. Relationship with other Ordinances
Whenever a provision of this ordinance is inconsistent with another provision of the ordinance or any
other ordinance, regulation, or statute, the more restrictive provision shall control.
Section 7. Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this ordinance.
Section 8. Amendments
A. Initiation of Amendments
A proposal for an amendment to this ordinance may be initiated by one of the following:
1. Planning Board;
2. City Council;
3. City Manager;
4. Water Department Superintendent;
5. Ellsworth Water Supply Commission; or
3
6. An individual, through the petition process described in the Charter of the City of Ellsworth,
Article IX, as amended on November 4, 1997.
B. Procedure for Amendments
1. Upon receipt of a proposed amendment, the City Planner shall take all action necessary to schedule
a public hearing to be conducted by the Planning Board on the request;
2. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a proposed
amendment or repeal by the City Planner. At least thirteen (13) days before the hearing, the City shall
advertise the date, time, place, and purpose of the Planning Board hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation;
3. The Planning Board shall make its official report at the next meeting of the Ellsworth City
Council, which is held at least ten (10) days after the public hearing; and
4. Before consideration of the proposed amendment or repeal by the Ellsworth City Council, it shall
hold a public hearing. Said public hearing shall be published at least two (2) times in a newspaper
having general circulation in the municipality, the date of the first publication must be at least seven
(7) days before the hearing, and shall be posted in the municipal office at least fourteen (14) days
before the public hearing.
Section 9. Enforcement
Any duly designated Ellsworth Police Officer, the Water Department Superintendent, their
designees, and the Branch Lake Steward are authorized and shall have the authority to enforce all
provisions of this ordinance, including the authority to deny or revoke, with cause, a Branch Lake
Boating Permit and/or an Ellsworth Boat Tag.
Only the Branch Lake Steward, the Water Department Superintendent or designees are authorized to
waive the inspection of a resident boat.
Ellsworth Boat Inspectors are authorized to issue, or deny, with cause, a Branch Lake Boating Permit
and/or an Ellsworth Boat Tag to any boater.
Section 10. Appeal
Any person aggrieved by a decision of an Ellsworth Police Officer, the Branch Lake Steward, the
Water Superintendent or designees, or an Ellsworth Boat Inspector may appeal said decision to the
Ellsworth Board of Appeals within seven (7) days after said decision. The Board of Appeals may
affirm, modify, or reverse the decision in accordance with the terms of this ordinance.
Section 11. Civil Penalty
Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be liable to a civil penalty in accordance
with 30-A M.R.S.A. §4452 as summarized below:
A) Monetary penalties may be assessed on a per-day basis.
1. The minimum penalty for a specific violation is $100;
2. The maximum penalty outside a resource protection zone is $2,500;
4
3. The maximum penalty is $5,000 for any violation within a resource protection zone;
4. The maximum penalty is increased to $25,000 when it is shown that there has been a previous
conviction of the same party within the past 2 years for a similar violation.
5. The maximum penalty may be increased if the economic benefit resulting from the violation
exceeds the applicable penalties
B) In addition to penalties, legal fees may also be awarded as provided by court rule.
C) The violator may be ordered to correct, abate or mitigate the violations.
D) In setting a penalty, the following shall be considered:
1. Prior violations by the same party;
2. The degree of environmental damage that cannot be abated or corrected;
3. The extent to which the violation continued following an order to stop.
Section 12. Revenues
All revenues generated from this ordinance, including assessed penalties, shall only be used to
support the administration of this ordinance and related programs to protect Ellsworth’s public
water supply, Branch Lake.
Section 13. Definitions
AEROPLANE: An airplane that can land on or take off from water or ice.
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV: Any recreation vehicle with three (3) or more wheels
and weighing under Fifteen hundred (1500) pounds.
AMPHIBIOUS AEROPLANE: An airplane that can take off and land using conventional
runways and water.
AMPHIBIOUS VEHICLE: Any vehicle that can be used over land and water.
ARSENIC-TREATED WOOD PRODUCTS: Lumber, timber, poles, posts, plywood, shakes,
shingles, or other wood or forest products intended for outdoor use that have been pressure
treated to reduce decay with a wood preservative containing inorganic arsenic or inorganic
arsenic compounds.
AQUATIC PLANTS: As defined by Title 12 MRSA sec. 13001, a plant species that requires a
permanently flooded freshwater habitat.
DOCK: Floating or fixed structure located in, on, or over the waters of Branch Lake.
5
BOAT INSPECTION: The inspection of boat, motor vehicle, trailer, marine engine, live well,
bilge, bait bucket and all other related equipment to ensure that no aquatic invasive plants are
introduced in Branch Lake and in its sources.
BOAT: Any device capable of carrying one or more person in, on, or over the waters of Branch
Lake. It does not include air mattresses, inner tubes, and beach and water toys.
BOAT LAUNCH: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft.
CREOSOTE-TREATED WOOD : Lumber, timber, poles, posts, plywood, shakes, shingles, or
other wood or forest products intended for outdoor use that have been treated with creosote.
FLOAT PLANE BASE: On-water location designed for docking, mooring, or servicing three or
more aeroplanes simultaneously.
FUEL DEPOT: Waterside fueling facility containing fuel storage in excess of 50 gallons.
INFESTED WATER BODIES: Lakes, Ponds, Rivers, or Streams known or suspected to
contain invasive aquatic plants. For the purposes of this ordinance, all water bodies beyond the
borders of the state of Maine will be suspected to contain invasive aquatic plants. Known Maine
infested water bodies are those listed in the most recent annual Maine Department of
Environmental Protection (ME DEP) update.
INVASIVE AQUATIC PLANTS: As defined by Title 38 MRSA Chapter 3, Subchapter 1,
Section 410-N, a species identified by the ME DEP as an invasive aquatic plant, or one of the
following species:
(1) Eurasian water milfoil, Myriophyllum spicatum;
(2) Variable-leaf water milfoil, Myriophyllum heterophyllum;
(3) Parrot feather, Myriophyllum aquaticum;
(4) Water chestnut, Trapa natans;
(5) Hydrilla, Hydrilla verticillata;
(6) Fanwort, Cabomba caroliniana;
(7) Curly pondweed, Potamogeton crispus;
(8) European naiad, Najas minor;
(9) Brazilian elodea, Egeria densa;
(10) Frogbit, Hydrocharis morsus-ranae; and
(11) Yellow floating heart, Nymphoides peltata.
MOORING: Appliance used by a boat for anchoring purposes that is not carried aboard such
boat when underway as regular equipment.
MOTORBIKE: Any self-propelled two (2) wheeled motorcycle or motor-driven cycle designed
for or capable of traveling off developed roadways and highways.
6
MOTOR VEHICLES: A self-propelled wheeled conveyance, such as a car or truck.
NORMAL HIGH-WATER LINE: The line which is apparent from visible markings, changes
in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which
distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. In the case of
wetlands adjacent to rivers and great ponds, the normal high-water line is the upland edge of the
wetland.
NO WAKE SPEED: Operation of a boat at the slowest possible speed to maintain steerage.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT (PWC): A small, lightweight water jet propelled craft designed
to be either sat-on or stood-on with motorcycle-like handlebars and squeeze throttle.
RESIDENT BOAT: Boat(s)/watercraft(s) belonging to a household owning property or rightof-
way abutting Branch Lake.
SNOWMOBILE: Any self-propelled vehicle under one thousand (1,000) pounds unladened
gross weight, that is steered by tracks, skis, or runners.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation or other improvement
of a launch, dock, or other structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed.
WATERCRAFT: Any boat or other floating device of rigid or inflatable construction which is
designated to carry people or cargo on the water, and which is propelled by machinery, oars,
paddles or wind action on a sail; except: inner tubes, other floatable material not propelled by
machinery, personal floating devices worn or held in hand, and other objects such as floating or
swimming aids, including float tubes.
ARTICLE II. SURFACE WATER USE REGULATIONS
Section 1. Establishment of Zones
The Water Supply Protection Ordinance applies to three (3) zones depicted on the official City of
Ellsworth Water Supply Protection Area map.
A. Intake Zone
This 280,000 square feet rectangular zone encompasses the area of water around the
Ellsworth public water supply point of intake in Branch Lake commencing at the
northwest corner of the Ellsworth tax map 55 lot 14 at the normal high-water line of
Branch Lake and extending one hundred and twenty-four (124) feet in a generally
northwesterly direction along the shoreline; thence at a right angle in a northeasterly
direction seven hundred (700) feet to a point; thence at a right angle in a southeasterly
direction four hundred (400) feet to a point; thence at a right angle in a southwesterly
direction seven hundred (700) feet to a point; thence at a right angle in a northwesterly
7
direction two hundred and seventy-six (276) feet along the shoreline to the point of
beginning.
B. Recreation Zone
This zone encompasses all of the water surface of Branch Lake and its sources excluding the
Intake Zone area (as depicted on the Ellsworth Public Water Supply Protection map -
Attachment A).
C. Aeroplane Landing & Takeoff Zone
This zone, located within the recreation zone listed in B above, encompasses waters in the
“Upper Lake” section of Branch Lake north of a line running between the Branch View Drive
peninsula and the 401 Phillips Way peninsula 200 feet North of so-called “Little John Island” as
depicted on the Ellsworth Public Water Supply Protection map - Attachment A.
Section 2. Restrictions
A. Intake Zone
1. All water-related activities in this area are prohibited; no trespassing is allowed.
2. The Ellsworth Water Department shall have authority to place, at its discretion, signs
and/or buoys in the lake delineating the zone and indicating the penalties to be
imposed for trespassing.
B. Recreational Zone
Protection measures for the Recreation Zone are:
1. No Wake. It shall be unlawful to operate any boat at speeds faster than no
wake speed within 200 feet of the shoreline.
2. Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles are prohibited unless used for the express
purpose of launching a boat.
3. ATVs. ATVs are prohibited unless used on the ice or used to launch a boat.
4. Motorbikes. Motorbikes are prohibited unless used on the ice or used to
launch a boat.
5. Snowmobiles. Snowmobiles are allowed on the ice of Branch Lake.
6. Amphibious Vehicles. Amphibious vehicles are prohibited, including
amphibious aeroplanes.
7. Aeroplanes. No person shall cause or permit any aeroplanes to land,
operate, or take off except under conditions outlined in Section 6 below.
8. Diesel Engines. All vessels with diesel engines are prohibited.
9. House Boats. No vessel fitted for use as a dwelling or residence or
occupied as such shall be permitted.
10. Engine Repairs. Servicing or repair of engines is prohibited.
11. Dumping of Wastes. No person shall dump, cause to dump, or discard
8
feces, ashes, food wastes, offal, or any waste or refuse.
12. Ice Shacks and On-ice Activities: See Section 5 below.
13. Overnight stay. Overnight stays on the ice are prohibited.
14. Moorings. All mooring gear must be free of aquatic plants before being
placed in Branch Lake or its sources.
15. Fishing Equipment. All fishing equipment must be free of aquatic plants
before being placed in Branch Lake or its sources.
C. Aeroplane Landing and Takeoff Zone
Protection measures for the Aeroplane Landing & Takeoff Zone are:
1. Aeroplanes. No person shall cause or permit any aeroplanes to land,
operate, or take off except under conditions outlined in Section 6 below.
2. No Wake. It shall be unlawful to operate any aeroplane at speeds faster
than no wake speed within 200 feet of the mainland or island shoreline.
Section 3. Protection of Water Supply Generally
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute, threaten, jeopardize or render impure,
turbid or offensive the waters of Branch Lake or its sources.
B. No person shall put filth, sewage, ashes, animal or vegetable matter, wood chips,
compost, construction debris, herbicide, wood shavings or any other substance or
pollutant, whether solid or liquid in the waters of Branch Lake or its sources.
C. The owner or operator of a motorized vehicle or aeroplane that sinks beneath the
water or ice of Branch Lake or it’s sources must contact the Ellsworth Water or Police
Department(s) as soon as safety permits.
Section 4. Boat Launches and Docks
A. All new boat launches, docks, and other structures in, on, or over the waters of Branch
Lake are prohibited with the exception of docks used for residential purposes and those
structures listed under Section 4-E.
B. Boat launches, docks, and other structures in place before the effective date of this
ordinance may continue unless the use is discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months.
C. All new docks and other structures in, on, or over the waters of Branch Lake must
meet the following specifications and restrictions:
1. The structure shall be built no larger in dimension than necessary to carry
on the activity and be consistent with existing conditions, use, and character of
the area;
2. Habitable or enclosed structures are prohibited;
3. The use of metal drums is prohibited;
4. The use of any flotation devices that will sink when punctured are
9
prohibited;
5. The use of creosote- and arsenic-treated wood products are prohibited;
6. The use of drums, barrels or containers of any type that have been
previously used to store oil, petroleum products or hazardous materials of any
type are prohibited;
7. Toilet facilities on boat docks are prohibited; and
8. Boat docks shall be free of any invasive aquatic plant before being placed
in Branch Lake or its sources.
D. A dock or other structure in place in, on, or over the waters of Branch Lake before the
effective date of this ordinance must meet the specifications and restrictions set forth in
Section 4.C of this ordinance if substantial improvements take place.
E. Boat launches, docks, and other structures in, on, or over the waters of Branch Lake
erected on City-owned or State owned property are allowed.
F. No structures in, on, or over the waters of Branch Lake shall be used for building,
constructing or repairing of any boat or aeroplane.
Section 5. Ice Shacks and On-ice Activities
A. Ice shacks and other similar structures providing temporary protection are allowed.
Ellsworth Water Department or other applicable City Enforcement staff may inspect
temporary structures on Branch Lake at any time for conformance with this
ordinance.
B. Disposal or abandonment of bottles, cans, ash, trash, human waste, pet waste,
building materials or equipment on the ice or in the water is prohibited. Anything
brought on the ice must be packed out.
C. Defecating and/or urinating on the ice or in the water is prohibited. Please make
provision for these basic needs beforehand.
D. Burning of trash on the ice is prohibited.
Section 6. Aeroplane Use
A. Before a pilot operates an aeroplane on Branch Lake, the pilot must be certified as an
“Aeroplane Self-inspector” by the City of Ellsworth as outlined in Article IV-B,
Aeroplane Inspection.
B. The authorized aeroplane landing and take-off zone on Branch Lake is in the basin
depicted as the Upper Lake north of a line running between the Branch View Drive
peninsula and the 401 Phillips Way peninsula 200 feet north of so-called “Little John
Island” as depicted on the Ellsworth Public Water Supply Protection map -
Attachment A. Because of the drinking water intake in the Lower Lake, only the
taxiing of aeroplanes in the Lower Lake (southeast of the peninsulas) is allowed.
C. Aeroplane fly-in events are prohibited.
D. A 500 feet minimum altitude shall be maintained when not landing or taking off.
E. Self-inspection of an aeroplane, and therefore direct landing in Branch Lake, is
prohibited if in the last twelve (12) months the aeroplane has been in an infested water
10
body as defined in Art. 1, Sec. 13. I f the pilot of an aeroplane that has been in an
infested water body within the last 12 months wishes to use Branch Lake, the pilot must
contact the City of Ellsworth Water Department, and schedule an inspection conducted
by the Water Department Superintendent, Branch Lake Steward or any duly designated
Ellsworth Police Officer for a City performed Inspection.
F. No aeroplanes shall operate on Branch Lake in conjunction with any business
enterprise, including but not limited to flight training schools, guiding operations, tour
operations, resorts or housing developments, whether or not such enterprises are located
in the Branch Lake watershed. No fuel depots or floatplane bases shall be operated on
Branch Lake.
G. The owner or operator of an aeroplane that sinks beneath the water or ice or crashes
onto the water or ice of Branch Lake or its sources must contact the Ellsworth Water or
Police Department as soon as safety permits.
ARTICLE III. BOAT INSPECTION
Section 1. Tag, Inspection, Permit (TIP)
Launching of any watercraft in Branch Lake is prohibited unless: 1) the boat has a valid TAG
(sticker), 2) an INSPECTION was conducted, and 3) a PERMIT has been issued.
A. TAG
1. A Boat Tag consists of a City-supplied sticker applied to the left bow of the
boat in plain view above the waterline.
2. Boat Tags are available at City Hall, at the City operated Branch Lake Launch
located off the Happytown Road, and may be available from the City Manager
appointed sub-station agents.
3. By the end of December of each year, the City Council shall establish the Boat
Tag Fee Schedule for the next calendar year.
4. Boat Tags are mandatory for all boats, with or without inspection waivers.
5. Should a Boat Tag become mutilated so that it cannot be read easily, it must be
removed and be replaced with a new Boat Tag.
B. BOAT INSPECTION
No person shall be extended the privilege of boating, including canoeing and kayaking,
on the waters of Branch Lake without a boat inspection conducted for the presence of
aquatic plants, unless otherwise specified. If an aquatic plant fragment is discovered
during a boat inspection, the aquatic plant fragment shall be handled as described in the
Ellsworth Boat Inspection Guidelines and shall be provided to the City of Ellsworth
Police Department within 24 hours of discovery. The boat must be re-inspected and
found to be free of aquatic plants before it will be permitted to enter Branch Lake.
1. City Inspector
Boat inspections are to be conducted by City Boat Inspectors at the City
11
operated Branch Lake Boat Launch off the Happytown Road. The City
Manager may establish inspection substations in convenient locations and/or
appoint inspection agents.
2. Certified Self-Inspector
i. Self-inspector Certification can be obtained by anyone 16 years of age or
older after successful completion of the Ellsworth Boat Inspection Training
course.
ii. Certified Boat Self-inspectors can inspect boats under the following
conditions:
1. The subject boat has a valid Tag.
2. The boat is inspected per the Ellsworth Boat Inspection
Guidelines.
After these conditions have been met, the boater can be issued a valid permit
by the Certified Boat Self-inspector.
iii. Self-inspection of boats is prohibited if in the last twelve (12) months the
boat has been in an infested water body as defined in Art. 1, Sec. 13.
iv. Self-inspection of personal watercraft (PWC) is prohibited.
3. Waiver
i. The requirements for inspections and permits are waived for boats
belonging to a household owning property or right-of-way abutting Branch
Lake - herein referred to as a “resident boat,” if all the following conditions
are met:
1. The resident boat has not been used in any other water body
since it was last hauled out of Branch Lake;
2. The resident boat has not been in any other water body
within the last twelve (12) months; and
3. The resident boat will not be used in any other water body
during the year’s boating season.
4. The owner of property on, or abutting a right-of-way to,
Branch Lake attests in writing on a City waiver application
form that the above stipulations apply and will be followed.
C. PERMIT
i. Boating on Branch Lake is only allowed by permit. Boaters shall have
their permits with them at all times, with the exception of “resident boats.”
ii. Once a boat passes inspection and is found clear of any aquatic plants a
City Boat Inspector or a Certified Self-Inspector may issue a Branch Lake
Boating Permit.
12
ARTICLE IV. AEROPLANE INSPECTION
Tag, Inspection, & Permit (TIP)
Landing of any aeroplane in Branch Lake is prohibited unless: 1) the craft has a valid TAG
(sticker), 2) an INSPECTION has been conducted, and 3) a Self-inspection PERMIT LOG has
been filled out.
A. TAG
1. An Aeroplane Tag consists of a City-supplied sticker applied to the left float of the
aeroplane in plain view above the waterline.
2. Aeroplane tags are available at City Hall for certified aeroplane self-inspectors, and
are available from the Branch Lake Steward.
3. By the end of December of each year, the City Council shall establish the Tag Fee
Schedule for the next calendar year.
4. Should a Tag become mutilated so that it cannot be read easily, it must be removed and
be replaced by a new Aeroplane Tag.
B. INSPECTION & PERMIT
No person shall be extended the privilege of operating an aeroplane on the waters of
Branch Lake without an inspection conducted for the presence of aquatic plants. If an
aquatic plant fragment is discovered during an inspection, the aquatic plant fragment
shall be handled as described in the Ellsworth Aeroplane Inspection Guidelines and shall
be provided to the City of Ellsworth Police Department within 24 hours of discovery.
The aeroplane must be re-inspected before it will be permitted to land on Branch Lake.
Certified Self-Inspector
i. Self-inspector Certification can be obtained by anyone 16 years of age or older
after successful completion of the Ellsworth Aeroplane Inspection Training
course.
ii. Certified Aeroplane Self-inspectors can inspect aeroplanes under the following
conditions:
1. The subject aeroplane has a valid Tag.
2. The aeroplane is inspected per the Ellsworth Aeroplane Inspection
Guidelines.
When these conditions have been met, the Aeroplane Self-inspector
completes a permit (log) and keeps it with the aircraft.
iii. Self-inspection of an aeroplane is prohibited if in the last twelve (12) months the
aeroplane has been in an infested water body as defined in Art. 1, Sec. 13. If the pilot of
an aeroplane that has been in an infested water body within the last 12 months wishes to
use Branch Lake, the pilot must contact the City of Ellsworth Water Department, and
13
schedule an inspection to be conducted by the Water Department Superintendent, Branch
Lake Steward or any duly designated Ellsworth Police Officer.
Ellsworth 0rd55 approved 01-14-13
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
1. Adopted June 18, 2012
2. Amended August 20, 2012 - Articles 3 Zoning Districts, 6 Development Review, 11 Parking Standards, and 14 Definitions.
3. Amended November 19, 2012 – Articles 2 Plan Approval and Permitting Procedures, 4 Shoreland Zoning, 8 Performance Standards,
and 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards.
4. Amended January 14, 2013 – Articles 3 Zoning Districts and 14 Definitions, as well as the Zoning Map.
5. Amended July 15, 2013 – Article 6 Development Review.
6. Amended March 17, 2014 – Articles 1 Purpose and Authority, 8 Performance Standards, 12 Sign Standards (when the Unified
Development Ordinance was adopted on June 18, 2012 Article 12 was reversed as place holder – left blank. On March 17, 2014
Chapter 9 Sign Ordinance of the Ellsworth Code of Ordinances was repealed and replaced with this Chapter), and 14 Definitions.
7. Amended April 21, 2014 – Articles 3 Zoning Districts and 12 Sign Standards.
8. Amended April 19, 2016 – Article 8 Performance Standards.
Attest:
___________________________
City Clerk
Heidi-Noel Grindle

City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development ordinance
14
Table of Contents
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 1 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
101 TITLE
102 AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
102.1 Authority
102.2 Administration
103 GENERAL PURPOSES
103.1 General Purposes
103.2 Specific Purposes
104 APPLICABILITY
105 CONSISTENCY WITH PLANS
106 COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
107 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
108 DEFINITIONS, UN-TITLES AND UN-NUMBERED AIDS, CROSS-REFERENCES
108.1 Definitions
108.2 Un-titled and Un-numbered Aids
108.3 Cross-References
109 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
110 EFFECTIVE DATE
111 AVAILABILITY
112 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
113 REMEDIES
114 APPEALS
114.1 Generally
114.2 Subdivisions
114.3 Sign Standards
115 AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE
115.1 Authority
115.2 Planning Board Reports to City Council
115.3 Procedure of Amendments by the City Council
ARTICLE 2 PLAN APPROVAL AND PERMITTING PROCEDURES
201 PURPOSE
202 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED
203 GENERAL PROCEDURES
204 LEVELS OF REVIEW BY PROJECT TYPE
204.1 Limited Scope Project
204.2 Site Plans
204.3 Subdivision Plans
205 REVIEWERS
205.1 Code Enforcement Officer
205.2 Fire Chief
205.3 Planning Board
205.4 City Council
205.5 Board of Appeals
206 PROCEDURES FOR BUILDING PERMIT AND MINOR USE PLAN REVIEW
206.1 Building Permit Application
206.2. Minor Use Site Development Plan Notice to Abutters
206.3 Processing of Building Permit Applications
206.4 Posting of Building Permits
206.5 Expiration of Building Permits
206.6 Expiration of Minor Use Site Development Plan Approval
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
3 | P a g e
206.7 Certificates of Occupancy and Site Compliance
207 PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND SUBDIVISION REVIEW
207.1 Applications in Writing
207.2 Application Deadline
207.3 Supplemental Application Materials
207.4 Application Completeness
207.5 Planning Board Agenda
207.6 Technical Review Team Regular Meeting
207.7 Public Hearing
207.8 Notice to Abutters
207.9 Conditions
207.10 Planning Board Approval
208 PLAN REVIEW AND BUILDING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
208.1 Building Permit Fees
208.2 Major Use Site Development Plan and Subdivision Plan Review Fees
209 PEER REVIEW
210 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
ARTICLE 3 ZONING DISTRICTS
301 GENERAL
301.1 District Classification
301.2 Establishment of Zoning District
302 OFFICIAL LAND USE MAP
303 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
304 ZONING AFFECTS ALL STRUCTURES AND LAND
305 USE REGULATIONS
305.1 Generally
305.2 Interpretation – Materially Similar Uses.
305.3 Dimensional Regulations
305. 4 More Than One Principal Building on a Lot
306. ZONE PURPOSE
307. TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS
308. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
309. WELL OVERLAY ZONE
309.1 Description and Purpose
309.2 Well Area A: Bedrock Well Restricted Area
309.3 Area B: Bedrock Well Treatment Area
ARTICLE 4 SHORELAND ZONING
401 SHORELAND ZONING PURPOSES AND APPLICABILITY
401.1 Purposes
401.2 Authority
401.3 Applicability
402 AUTHORITY, ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL PROVISIONS
402.1 Effective Date
402.2 Availability
402.3 Severability
402.4 Conflicts with Other Ordinances
402.5 Amendments
403 SHORELAND ZONING ADMINISTRATION
403.1 Administration
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
4 | P a g e
403.2 Permits Required
403.3 Permit Application Requirements
403.4 Procedure for Administering Permits
403.5 Special Resource Protection Zoning Districts (RP) Exceptions
403.6 Expiration of Permit
403.7 Installation of Public Utility Service
404 SHORELAND ZONING APPEALS
404.1 The Board of Appeals (BOA)
404.2 Variance Appeals
404.3 Administrative Appeals
404.4 Appeal Procedure
404.5 Appeal to Superior Court
404.6 Reconsideration of Appeals
405 SHORELAND ZONING ENFORCEMENT
405.1 Nuisances
405.2 Code Enforcement Officer (CEO)
405.3 Legal Actions
405.4 Fines
406 NON-CONFORMANCE IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
406.1 Purpose
406.2 Non-conformance, General
406.3 Non-conforming Structures
406.4 Non-conforming Uses
406.5 Non-conforming Lots
407 SHORELAND ZONING DISTRICTS AND THE LAND USE MAP
407.1 Official Land Use Map
407.2 Scale of Map
407.3 Certification of Official Land Use Map
407.4 Changes to the Official Land Use Map
407.5 Interpretation of Shoreland Zoning District Boundaries
407.6 Verification of IF&W Determination of Waterfowl and Wading Bird Habitat Value
408 ESTABLISHMENT OF SHORELAND ZONING DISTRICTS
408.1 The Resource Protection District (RP)
408.2 The Drinkingwater Protection District (DP)
408.3 The Stream Protection District (SP)
408.4 The Limited Residential District (LR)
408.5 The Limited Commercial District (LC)
408.6 The General Development District (GD)
408.7 The Shoreland Zoning Table of Land Uses
409 LAND USE STANDARDS IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
409.1 General Land Use Requirements
409.2 Minimum Lot Standards
409.3 Structure Standards
410 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
410.1 Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Below the Normal
High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland
410.2 Campgrounds
410.3 Campsites, Individual Private
410.4 Commercial and Industrial Uses
410.5 Parking Lots
410.6 Accessways
410.7 Signs
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
5 | P a g e
410.8 Storm Water Runoff
410.9 Septic Waste Disposal
410.10 Essential Services
410.11 Mineral Exploration and Extraction
410.12 Agricultural, Activities
410.13 Timber Harvesting
410.14 Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
410.15 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
410.16 Soils
410.17 Water Quality
410.18 Archaeological Site
410.19 Phosphorus Control
411 SHORELAND ZONING DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 5 NON-CONFORMING USES
501 PURPOSE
502 GENERALLY
502.1 Applicability
502.2 Continuation
502.3 Abandonment
502.4 Restoration of Unsafe Property
502.5 Construction Underway
503 NONCONFORMING USES
503.1 Applicability
503.2 Continuance
503.3 Changes to Conforming Uses
503.4 Changes to other Nonconforming Uses
503.5 Expansion of Nonconforming Uses
503.6 Limitations
504 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
504.1 Applicability
504.2 Enlargement
504.3 Termination of Nonconforming Structures
505 NONCONFORMING LOTS
505.1 Applicability
505.2 Generally
505.3 Contiguous Lots
505.4 Lots with Contiguous Frontage
ARTICLE 6 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW
601 PURPOSE
602 GENERALLY
602.1 Application
602.2 Processing
602.3 Submittal to Administrator
602.4 Certifications
602.5 Approved Plan Requirements
602.6 Administrator Site Visit
602.7 Number of Copies Needed for Plan Review
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
6 | P a g e
602.8 Scale
602.9 Waivers
602.10 Subsequent Applications
602.11 Rights Not Vested/Rights Vested
603 CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS
604 APPLICABILITY
604.1 Minor Use Site Development Plan
604.2 Major Use Site Development Plan
604.3 Site Development Plan Review - Not Applicable
605 ADMINISTRATION OF SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW
605.1 Plan Approval and Permitting Procedures
605.2 Submissions and Standards
605.3 Advisory Application Review – Sketch Plan Meeting
605.4 Decisive Application Reviews - Preliminary and Final Plan Meetings
606 SUBMISSION MATERIALS – PRELIMINARY PLAN MEETING
606.1 Application Form
606.2 Right, Title or Interest
606.3 Schedule of Construction
606.4 Cost
606.5 Base Plan
606.6 Existing and Proposed Site Conditions Plan(s)
606.7 Existing Site Conditions
606.8 Proposed Site Conditions
607 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA GOVERNING SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW – FINAL PLAN MEETING
607.1 State and Federal Permits
607.2 Criteria and Standards
ARTICLE 8 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
801 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
801.1 Applicability
801.2 Site Conditions
801.3 Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, Odors, Glare, and Explosive Materials
801.4 Oil and Chemical Storage
801.5 Buffers and Screening Standards
801.6. Stormwater Runoff
802 BACKYARD LIVESTOCK
802.1 Purpose
802.2 Applicability
802.3 General
802.4 Standards for Chickens and Other Poultry
802.5 Standards for Pigs, Horses, Cows, and Others
803 SHOPPING CENTER - BIG BOX
803. 1 Applicability
803.2 Facade
803.3 Roof
803.4 Pedestrian flows
804 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES (NON-RESIDENTIAL)
804.1 Purpose
804.2 Applicability
804.3 Standards and Requirements
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
7 | P a g e
805 ACCESSORY DWELLING
805.1 Purpose
805.2 Applicability
805.3 Number Permitted
805.4 Size
806 CAMPGROUNDS
806.1 Purpose and Applicability
806.2 Administration
806.3 Date
806.4 Application
806.5 Management
806.6 Occupancy
806.7 General Design Standards
806.8 Location and Size
806.9 Recreation Area
806.10 Accessways
806.11 Landscaping
806.12 Buffer Strips
806.13 Screening
806.14 Utilities
806.15 Water Supply
806.16 Fire Protection
806.17 Toilet Facilities
806.18 Wastewater Disposal
806.19 Stormwater
806.20 Campfires
806.21 Rubbish Disposal
807 RESTRICTIONS FOR THE PLACEMENT AND SALES OF FUEL
808 SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS
808.1 Sewer
808.2 Water
809 ESSENTIAL SERVICES FACILITIES
809.1 Setbacks: Minimum building setback is 50 feet
809.2 Outdoor storage
809.3 Landscaping Buffer
810 OPIOID TREATMENT PROGRAM (Methadone Clinics)
810.1 Applicability
811 HEIGHT LIMITS
812 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
812.1 Purpose
812.2 Applicability
812.3 Lighting Plan Submittal Contents
812.4 Required Number of Submittal Copies
812.5 Lighting Standards
812.6 Height Limits
812.7 Exempt Lighting
812.8 Special Lighting
812.9 Prohibited Lighting
813 BUFFERS, SCREENING, AND LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
813.1 Purpose
813.2 Applicability
813.3 Expansion
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
8 | P a g e
813.4 Exemptions
813.5 Acceptable Landscape Material
813.6 Minimum Planting Specifications Unless Otherwise Specified
813.7 Design
813.8 Fire Suppression
813.9 Permitted Uses Within the Buffers
813.10 Maintenance
813.11 Waivers
813.12 Line of Sight
813.13 Lot Landscaping Standard - DT And U Zoning Districts
813.14 Parking Area Buffer – Road, Residential Use and Loading Areas
813.15 Interior Parking Lot
813.16 Rear and Side Buffer – Between Residential and Non-Residential Uses
813.17 Road Buffer – Manufacturing, Industrial, and Heavy Commercial
813.18 Screening of Trash Receptacles
814 PUBLIC AND QUASI-GOVERNMENTAL TRAILER-ABLE BOAT LAUNCHING FACILITIES FOR THE DRINKING WATER
ZONING DISTRICT
815 STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING
815.1 Purpose
816 WASTE MATERIAL ACCUMULATIONS REGULATED
817 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
817.1 Purpose and Applicability
817.2 Authority
817.3 Administration
817.4 Limit on Number of Dispensaries
817.5 Not-for-profit Corporation
817.6 Location
817.7 Zone
817.8 Cultivation
817.9 Parking
818 MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRIMARY CAREGIVER OPERATIONS
818.1 Applicability
818.2 Authority
819 HOME OCCUPATIONS
819.1 Purpose and Findings
819.2 Applicability
819.3 Exempt Home Occupations
819.4 Permitted Home Occupations in the Downtown, Industrial, Urban Neighborhood, and Commercial
Zoning Districts
819.5 Permitted Home Occupations in the Drinking Water and Rural Zoning Districts
819.6 Permitted Home-Occupations in All Zoning Districts
819.7 Performance Standards
819.8 Outdoor Storage
819.9 Accessory Buildings
819.10 Employees
819.11 Unsafe Home Occupations
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
9 | P a g e
820 MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS
820.1 Purpose
820.2 Applicability
820.3 Zoning Districts
820.4 Authority
820.5 Supplementary Document
820.6 Administration
820.7 Planning Board Review
820.8 Submittal
820.9 Fee
820.10 The Final Plan
820.11 Building Permits
820.12 Occupancy Permit
820.13 Conversion
820.14 Mobile Home Park Management
820.15 Mobile Home Park General Design Standards
820.16 Mobile Home Site Standards
820.17 Mobile Home and Accessory Structure Standards
820.18 Mobile Home Park Infrastructure Standards
820.19 Emergency Mobile Home Parks
821 YARD SALES
822 VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
822.1 Visibility Triangle
822.2 Measuring the Visibility Triangle
822.3 Exception
ARTICLE 9 STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
901 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
901.1 Purpose
901.2 Applicability
901.3 Interpretation
902 PLAN SUBMISSIONS
902.1 Submittal Contents
903 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
903.1 Permit and Notification
903.2 Additional Permits
903.3 Fee
903.4 Inspection
903.5 Inspector
903.6 Sign-off
903.7 Modification during Construction.
903.8 Noncompliance
904 WAIVERS AND ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS
904.1 The Code Enforcement Officer
904.2 The Planning Board
904.3 Public Safety
904.4 Final Plan Record
905 MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION OF STREETS
905.1 Private Ways
905.2 Street Work by the City
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
10 | P a g e
905.3 Repair Work by a Developer
905.4 Reconstruction of a City-owned Street by a Developer
906 STREET TYPES AND GENERAL DESIGN PURPOSES
907 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
907.1 General Provisions
907.2 Construction Materials/Paving
908 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS
909 STREET SYSTEM DESIGN STANDARDS
909.1 Connectivity
909.2 Dead-end/Turnaround
909.3 Traffic Control Devices
910 ACCESS MANAGEMENT
910.1 Safety Sight Distance
910.2 Functional Area of Intersection
910.3 Alignment/Offset/Spacing
910.4 Cross and Shared Access
911 LANDSCAPING AND STREETSCAPE
912 SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS
913 STREET LIGHTING FOR ROADWAYS AND SIDEWALKS
914 STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING
915 ACCESSWAYS IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
916 ACCESSWAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
916.1 General Construction Standards for Streets
916.2 General Construction Standards for Residential and Commercial Driveways
916.3 Minimum Thickness of Material after Compaction
916.4 Preparation and Construction
916.5 Bases and Pavement
916.6 Curbs and Gutters
917 STREET ACCEPTANCE AS PUBLIC WAYS
917.1 Intent
917.2 Application
917.3 Decision Criteria
ARTICLE 10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
1001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
1001.1 Purpose.
1001.2 Applicability
1001.3 Interpretation
1002 PLAN SUBMITTALS
1002.1 Documents
1002.2 Required Submittal Copies
1003 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS
1003.1 Stormwater Management
1003.2 Professional Design
1003.3 Design Criteria and Applicability Thresholds
1003.4 Drainage Easements
1003.5 Upstream Drainage
1003.6 Downstream Capacity
1003.7 Catch Basins
1003.8 Subsurface Drainage
1003.9 Outlets
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
11 | P a g e
1003.10 Landscaped Buffer
1003.11 Level Spreader
1003.12 Erosion Control
1003.13 Safety Standards
1003.14 State Permitting
1003.15 Inspection
1004 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND STANDARDS
1004.1 General
1004.2 Stormwater Management Best Management Practices
1004.3 Drain Inlet Alignment
1004.4 Changes in Alignment
1004.5 Manholes
1004.6 Precast Concrete Catch Basins
1004.7 Joint Sealants
1004.8 Grade Rings
1004.9 Maximum Trench Width
1004.10 Pipe Connectors
1004.11 Pipe Sizing
1004.12 Pipe (culvert) Bedding and Backfill
1004.13 Reinforced Concrete Pipe
1004.14 Corrugated Metal Pipe
1004.15 Corrugated Plastic Pipe
1004.16 Cast Iron Catch Basin Frames and Covers
1004.17 System Cleaning
1004.18 Alternative Catch Basins and Manholes
ARTICLE 11 PARKING STANDARDS
1100 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
1100.1 Purpose
1100.2 Applicability
1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1101.1 Prohibited Use of Parking
1101.2 Ingress and Egress
1101.3 Backing Out of Vehicles into Road
1101.4 Off-site Parking Lots
1101.5 Parking Lot Location
1101.6 Lease Records
1101.7 Structured Parking
1101.8 Layout and Design
1101.9 Recreational Vehicle and Oversize Parking
1101.10 Handicapped Parking
1101.11 Snow Storage
1101.12 Parking Lot Setback
1102 DOWNTOWN PROVISIONS
1102.1 Downtown A
1102.2 Downtown B
1102.3 Downtown C
1103 ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
1103.1 Interconnection
1103.2 Access
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Table of Contents
12 | P a g e
1103.3 Walkways
1103.4 Separation of Street from Parking Spaces
1104 PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
1105 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
1105.1 Minimum Amount
1105.2 Uses Not Cited
1105.3 Unit of Measurement
1105.4 Adjustment and Reduction
1106 LOADING SPACE
ARTICLE 12 RESERVED
ARTICLE 13 BOARD OF APPEALS
1300 ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
1301 JURISDICTION
1302 POWER AND DUTIES
1303 GENERAL PROCEDURES
1304 PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
1305 VARIANCE PROCEDURES
1306 PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
1307 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD
1308 APPEALS TO THE SUPERIOR COURT
1309 STAYS OF PROCEEDINGS
ARTICLE 14 DEFINITIONS
APPENDICES
Appendix A Land use Map (small version of the official map)
Appendix B City of Ellsworth Urban Core.
Appendix C City of Ellsworth urban Core in the Direct Watershed of the Union River Estuary.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 1
Purpose and Authority
Amended March 17, 2014
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 1 Purpose and Authority
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 1 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
101 TITLE
The Ordinance and the accompanying Official Land Use Map(s) shall be known as the Unified
Development Ordinance of the City of Ellsworth, Maine (UDO) and shall be referred to herein as
this “Ordinance” or “UDO.”
102 AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
102.1 Authority. The Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of
Title 30-A Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.), Title 38 M.R.S.A.
Sections 435-449, as amended, and other sections as cited in support of specific
articles.
102.2 Administration. This Article shall be administered in general by the Planning
Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, referred herein as the Administrator, and
as described below:
A. By the Planning Board for projects requiring Planning Board Approval as
specifically authorized in this Ordinance.
B. The City Planner and its designee serve in advisory capacity to the Planning
Board and are responsible to provide guidance to the applicant whose project
requires Planning Board Review.
C. By the Code Enforcement Officer for all projects not requiring Planning
Board and for projects in the Commerce Park zoning district. All enforcement
of construction activities shall be the responsibility of the Code Enforcement
Officer.
103 GENERAL PURPOSES
103.1 General Purposes. The general purposes of the Ordinance are to:
A. Implement the provisions of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
B. Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents.
C. Encourage the most appropriate use of land.
D. Promote traffic safety.
E. Preserve access to adequate light, air, water and land.
F. Conserve natural resources and open space.
G. Protect archaeological, historic and scenic resources.
H. Allow for the strengthening of the economic base and the enhancement of the
appearance of business and commercial zoning districts throughout the City.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 1 Purpose and Authority
3 | P a g e
103.2 Specific Purposes. The specific purposes for individual articles of the Ordinance
are stated within those articles, as applicable.
104 APPLICABILITY
The provisions of the Ordinance shall govern all buildings, structures, lands, and uses regardless
of ownership. All government entities including the State of Maine, the
County of Hancock, and the City of Ellsworth are subject to the
Ordinance unless otherwise exempt.
105 CONSISTENCY WITH PLANS
The Ordinance is consistent with the general intent of the
Comprehensive Plan and other neighborhood, area, or specific plans, as
referred herein, and adopted by the Ellsworth City Council.
106 COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
The use of building and land within the City of Ellsworth is subject to all other regulations as
well as the Ordinance, whether or not such other provisions are specifically referenced in the
Ordinance. References to other regulations or provisions of the Ordinance are for the
convenience of the reader. The lack of a cross-reference does not exempt a land, building,
structure or use from regulations.
107 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER REGULATIONS. Whenever the requirements of the
Ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rule, regulation, or
ordinance, the more restrictive requirements shall govern.
108 DEFINITIONS, UN-TITLES AND UN-NUMBERED AIDS, CROSSREFERENCES
108.1 Definitions. The Ordinance shall be liberally interpreted in order to further its
underlying purposes. The meaning of any and all words, terms, or phrases in the
Ordinance shall be construed in accordance with Article 14 Definitions, or
otherwise as found in the dictionary.
108.2 Un-titled and Un-numbered Aids. the Ordinance contains un-titled/unnumbered
graphics, pictures, illustrations, and drawing in order to assist the
reader in understanding and complying with the Ordinance. However, to the
extent that there is any inconsistency between the text of the Ordinance and such
graphic, picture, illustration, or drawing, the text controls unless otherwise
provided in the specific section.
108.3 Cross-References. Articles, sections, and tables in this ordinance are cross
referenced for the convenience of the reader. Any omissions or mis-references
shall not preclude projects from having to meet the requirements of applicable
articles, sections, and tables in the ordinance.
“Liberally Interpreted” means that
if there is ambiguity or conflict the
Ordinance shall be broadly applied
to affect its purposes rather than
restrictively or technically applied
according to its strict terms.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 1 Purpose and Authority
4 | P a g e
109 VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, clause or phrase of the Ordinance shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining provisions of the Ordinance and to
that end the provisions of the Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable.
110 EFFECTIVE DATE
The Ordinance and portions thereof shall become effective on the date specified by the enabling
City Council action.
111 AVAILABILITY
A certified copy of the Ordinance shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accessible to any
member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the
expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be posted
in the Ellsworth City Hall.
112 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
In accordance with Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4452, any person, including but not limited to a
landowner, a landowner's agent or a contractor, violating any provision of this ordinance shall,
upon conviction, be fined not less than $100.00 or more than $2,500.00 for each such offense.
Each offense shall constitute a separate offense for each day the violation occurs. Any violation
of this Article shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
113 REMEDIES
If any project or system is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or
maintained in violation of this Ordinance, the Administrator or any other person who would be
damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may seek injunctive or any other
appropriate relief in a civil proceeding.
114 APPEALS
114.1 Generally. An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
person from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or of the Planning Board with
the exception of subdivision matters within 30 days of the date of the decision appealed
from. The Board of Appeals may extend this time period only upon a showing by the
person seeking an appeal that there was good cause for the failure to appeal within thirty
(30) days of the decision.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 1 Purpose and Authority
5 | P a g e
114.2 Subdivisions. An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Planning Board
on subdivision matters under this Ordinance to the Hancock County Superior
Court, within 30 days.
114.3 Sign Standards. The Board of Appeals is only authorized to grant variances for
sign set back and location, not variances relating to sign dimension, height or the
number of signs. An appealed sign permit decision shall include reasons for the
request. An exception from compliance with Article 12 Sign Standards shall only
be granted by the Board of Appeals if there are exceptional or unusual
circumstances applying to the property involved which do not apply generally to
properties in the vicinity with the same zoning. One of the following three
conditions shall be met: 1) visual obstructions; 2) unusual building location onsite;
and 3) unusual building design, architectural style, or historic significance.
The Board of Appeals shall determine that the granting of the exception will not
result in the project being inconsistent with the intent and purpose of Article 12
Sign Standards and will not constitute a grant of special privilege or entitlement
inconsistent with limitations applied to other properties in the vicinity with the
same zoning. And, that the granting of the exception is for superior design and
will not result in visual clutter.
115 AMENDMENTS TO THE ORDINANCE
115.1 Authority.
The provisions of the Ordinance including the boundaries of the Zoning Districts
shown on the Official Land Use Map(s) may from time to time be amended, or
repealed in accordance with the provision of Title 30-A M.R.S.A. as amended.
115.2 Planning Board Reports to City Council.
A. Proposed amendments or repeal must first be submitted to the Planning Board
for their consideration.
B. Within 20 days of receiving a proposal for an amendment or repeal, the
Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed amendment.
C. The notice must be published at least 2 times in a newspaper that has a general
circulation in the City of Ellsworth. The date of the first publication must be at
least 13 days before the hearing and the date of the second publication must be
at least 6 days before the hearing.
D. The Planning Board shall make its official report at the next meeting of the
Ellsworth City Council, which is held at least 10 days after the public hearing
held by the Planning Board.
115.3 Procedure of Amendments by the City Council.
A. Public Hearing Notice. Before adopting a new Official Land Use Map or
amending the Ordinance or Official Land Use Map, including amendments to
Shoreland Zoning, the Ellsworth City Council will post and publish notice of
the public hearing to provide the public adequate time to comment, in
accordance with the following provisions.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 1 Purpose and Authority
6 | P a g e
i. Contents. The notice must be written in plain English, understandable
by the average citizen and contain a copy of the Official Land Use
Map indicating the portion of the City affected by the proposed
amendment.
ii. Posted. The notice must be posted in the Ellsworth City Hall at least
13 days before the public hearing.
iii. Published. The notice must be published at least 2 times in a
newspaper that has a general circulation in the City of Ellsworth. The
date of the first publication must be at least 13 days before the hearing
and the date of the second publication must be at least 6 days before
the hearing.
iv. Mailed. For each parcel within the City that is in or abutting the
portion of the City affected by the proposed amendment, the notice
must be mailed by first class mail at least 13 days before the public
hearing to the last known address of the person to whom property tax
on each parcel is assessed. The City Planner shall prepare for the City
Council and file with the City Clerk a written certificate indicating
those persons to whom the notice was mailed and at what address,
when it was mailed, by whom it was mailed and from what location it
was mailed. This certificate constitutes prima facie evidence that
notice was sent to those persons named in the certificate.
v. Additional Notice for Particular Circumstances.
Notice must be given to additional recipients in accordance with this
subsection when the following described conditions occur.
a. Changes to Allowed Uses. Notice must be sent to affected
landowners when the City of Ellsworth proposes an amendment to
the Ordinance or Official Land Use Map that has the effect of
either prohibiting all industrial, commercial or retail uses where
any of these uses are permitted or permitting any industrial,
commercial or retail uses where any of these uses are prohibited.
Notice must also be sent to a Public Drinking Water supplier if the
area to be rezoned contains its Source Water Protection Area -
refer to Title 30-A §4352.
b. Shoreland Zoning Resource Protection. Notification to
Landowners whose property is being considered for placement in a
Resource Protection Zone shall comply with Title 38, §438-A
public notice shall be given according to State Law
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2
Plan Approval and Permitting Procedures
Amended November 19, 2012
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 2 PLAN APPROVAL AND PERMITTING PROCEDURES
201. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Article is to consolidate the procedures for filing and processing applications
for development. The format is designed to allow users to ascertain the various steps needed to
be able to build in Ellsworth.
202 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED
It shall be unlawful to start any work for the purpose of construction, alteration, or removal of
any building or engage in any other activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the
zoning districts in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an
existing use or structure; or renew a discontinued non-conforming use, unless a building permit
has been issued in conformity with this Ordinance. No building permit may be issued for an
activity which requires review by the Planning Board until approval is granted by the Planning
Board.
203 GENERAL PROCEDURES
A building permit is required for all development, unless otherwise excepted, to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance. For some projects, Planning Board approval is needed before a
Building Permit can be issued. General procedural elements common to all development include,
but are not limited to: a) the submittal of a complete application, including required fee payments
and appropriate back-up information and studies; b) the review of the submittal by the
Administrator; and c) the decision to approve or deny.
204 LEVELS OF REVIEW BY PROJECT TYPE
There are different levels of review associated with the implementation of this Ordinance based
on the complexity, location, and/or impact of the project. In some cases more than one level of
review may be required.
204.1 Limited Scope Project. This is a basic level of review conducted by the Code
Enforcement Officer for uses such as, but not limited to: one- and two-family
residential units; home-occupation; demolition; and many activities within the
Shoreland Zone; and for uses having received prior Planning Board approval.
204.2 Site Plans. There are two levels of Site Plan review: 1) Minor Use Site
Development Plan; and 2) Major Use Site Development Plan. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall classify Site Development Plan review levels. The
Code Enforcement Officer may classify a Minor Use Site Development Plan
project as a Major Use Site Development Plan project after determination that it
may have significant impact to the physical, social, or economic environment
because of stormwater, traffic, erosion, dust, lighting, or other factors.
A. Minor Use Site Development Plan Review. This level of review shall
include those projects that require a higher level of scrutiny than a Limited
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
3 | P a g e
Scope Project but do not require a public hearing. Minor Use Site
Development Plan reviews are conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Major Use Site Development Plan Review. This level of review is for uses
that are relatively large and have a potentially greater impact than Minor Use
Site Development Plan, and where public comments are warranted. Major Use
Site Development Plan reviews are conducted by the Planning Board.
204.3 Subdivision Plans. All subdivision plans shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board.
205. REVIEWERS
205.1 Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer issues Limited
Scope Project permits, reviews and permits Minor Use Site Development Plans
and is responsible for the enforcement of this Ordinance and the enforcement of
Planning Board Approvals.
205.2 Fire Chief. The Fire Chief or his designee reviews the site and construction plans
for fire and life safety details including but not limited to occupancy type, fire
department access, fire hydrant location, construction type, and general fire and
life safety. The reviews ensure that the plans meet the intent of applicable codes
and standards for fire and life safety.
205.3 Planning Board. The Planning Board is responsible for reviewing and acting
upon applications for Major Use Site Development Plan, Subdivision Plans, and
some Shoreland Zoning proposals in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance. The Planning Board also makes recommendations to the City Council
on amendments to this ordinance and rezoning matters. Following Planning Board
approval, the applicant shall apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a
Building Permit.
A. Public Hearings. Plan review by the Planning Board requires at least two
public hearings with the exception of plan revisions and amendments, which
require only one public hearing. The City Planner coordinates review
processes on behalf of the Planning Board, recommends actions for project
approvals, and maintains records.
B. TRT. All Planning Board projects are subject to review by the Technical
Review Team (TRT). The TRT, made up of City Department heads, provides
the Planning Board with an opinion on the completeness of the project
proposal and on the quality of the information provided.
205.4 City Council. The City Council, the legislative body of the City of Ellsworth,
decides on proposals to amend this Ordinance, including rezoning, to accept private
roads as public roads, and has the authority to modify road standards and other
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
4 | P a g e
decision as specified in this Ordinance. A public hearing is required prior to the City
Council making decisions pertaining to this Ordinance.
205.5 Board of Appeals. In general, decisions of the Code Enforcement Officer or
Planning Board may be taken to the Ellsworth Board of Appeals with the exception of
Subdivision Plans which shall be taken directly to the Hancock County Superior
Court, or as specifically stipulated in this Ordinance. The Code Enforcement Officer
coordinates review processes on behalf of the Board of Appeals and maintains
records. Refer to Article 1 section 114 and Article 13 Board of Appeals.
206. PROCEDURES FOR BUILDING PERMIT AND MINOR USE PLAN REVIEW
206.1 Building Permit Application. Any application for a building permit shall be in
writing and signed by the applicant. All applications shall be dated, and the Code
Enforcement Officer shall note upon each application the date of its receipt.
206.2. Minor Use Site Development Plan Notice to Abutters. In consideration of a
Minor Use Site Development Plan application, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall send abutters notice by first class mail to property owners within 250 feet of
any property line if the applicant's property is in the Urban Core Area, and within
500 feet elsewhere. The Code Enforcement Officer shall also send notice to the
review authority of neighboring political divisions if any portion of a proposed
development is within 500 feet of the political boundary or unless otherwise
specified in this Ordinance. This notice shall provide a brief description of the
proposed project, the physical location, and announce a 10-day public comment
period. The public comment period will commence upon the mailing of said
notices to the address of record as maintained by the City Assessor. At the end of
the public comment period, the Code Enforcement Officer will review the public
comments and either grant Minor Use Site Development Approval and issue the
building permit or move the proposed project up to Major Use Site Development
Plan to be reviewed by the Planning Board. Agricultural and forestry activities
pertaining to soil disturbance and addition of fill are exempt from public notices.
206.3 Processing of Building Permit Applications. One copy of the building permit
application shall be returned to the applicant by the Code Enforcement Officer
who shall have marked such copy either approved or denied or approved with
conditions and attested to same by the Code Enforcement Officer’s signature on
such copy. The second copy of such application, similarly marked, shall be
retained by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall be kept on file as a public
record. The third copy shall be given to the City Assessor. Failure of the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue written notice of the decision within 30 days of the
date of filing of the application shall constitute refusal of the permit.
206.4 Posting of Building Permits. The applicant shall conspicuously post any permit
issued, on the lot where the activity will occur, at a location clearly visible from
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
5 | P a g e
the street unless other means of posting are authorized by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
206.5 Expiration of Building Permits. If no substantial start of construction has been
made within 12 months beginning with the date the building permit is issued, the
permit shall expire. If construction has not been completed within 36 months
beginning with the date the permit is issued, the permit shall expire. The Code
Enforcement Officer may grant a onetime extension for a building permit when a
project is delayed by circumstances beyond the applicant’s control.
206.6 Expiration of Minor Use Site Development Plan Approval. Minor Use Site
Development Plan approval shall remain in force for a period not to exceed 36
months. If the proposed use has not been established during that period or a
building permit has not been obtained, said approval shall be deemed to have
lapsed.
206.7 Certificates of Occupancy and Site Compliance. Prior to the sale, lease, or
occupancy of any new building, or use of a site, the builder or developer (person
who received a valid building permit) shall secure a Certificate of Occupancy
and/or a Certificate of Site Compliance, as applicable, from the Code
Enforcement Officer. Prior to issuance of any certificates, the Code Enforcement
Officer will check to see that all requirements under this Ordinance and other
applicable City Ordinances have been met. Any person who sells, leases, or
occupies a building or uses a site within the City of Ellsworth prior to securing the
appropriate certificate(s) by the Code Enforcement Officer is in violation of this
Ordinance and is subject to its penalties. The Code Enforcement Officer shall
maintain a record of all certificates and copies shall be furnished upon request.
A. Certificate of Occupancy. This is a document issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer allowing the occupancy or use of a structure and
certifying that the structure has been constructed or will be used in compliance
with the applicable Code and Ordinances. Said Certificate shall be requested
by the applicant within 15 days after the erection or alteration have been
completed and approved.
B. Certificate of Site Compliance. This is a document issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer certifying that the proposed site work complies with the
terms and provisions of this Ordinance and with applicable approvals and
conditions. Certificate of Site Work Compliance shall be secured by the
applicant within 6 months of securing a Certificate of Occupancy if applicable
or prior to beginning of the activities for which approval is intended including
but not limited to offering for sale.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
6 | P a g e
207 PROCEDURES FOR MAJOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND
SUBDIVISION REVIEW
207.1 Applications in Writing. All applications for Major Use Site Development Plan,
Subdivision, Revisions and/or other plan approval by the Planning Board, as
specified shall be made in writing to the City Planner and include the completed
Land Use Application form. All applications shall be made by the owner of the
property or agent as designated in writing by the owner.
207.2 Application Deadline. Applications shall be delivered to the City Planner with all
appropriate fees no later than 4:00 PM, twenty days before the scheduled
Planning Board meeting. The Office of the City Planner shall post at City Hall a
schedule of meetings each December for the coming calendar year.
207.3 Supplemental Application Materials.
A. City Planner. In general, no supplemental application materials shall be
accepted by the City Planner after noon on the first Monday following the
Regular Technical Review Team Meeting.
B. Planning Board. Supplemental application materials shall NOT be
distributed by the applicant to the Planning Board members at the Planning
Board meeting unless it is determined by the Chairman to be relevant,
necessary, brief enough to be quickly assimilated, and ten copies are provided
and of a type that is compatible with information technology currently
available at the City of Ellsworth.
207.4 Application Completeness. The City Planner shall make an initial determination
of the completeness of applications for inclusion on the Planning Board meeting
agenda. Determination of completeness for approval purposes will be made by the
Planning Board at a scheduled meeting. Any application which the City Planner
initially determines to be incomplete shall not be placed on the agenda but shall
be returned to the applicant with an indication of the additional information
required. When this additional information has been supplied, the City Planner
shall place the application on the Planning Board's agenda.
207.5 Planning Board Agenda. Complete applications shall be placed on the Planning
Board's next regular monthly agenda for consideration. The Chairman may call a
special meeting if the number of agenda items or other circumstances seem to
require it.
207.6 Technical Review Team Regular Meeting. The City Planner shall call an
Ellsworth Technical Review Team meeting consisting of the Police Chief, the
Fire Chief, the Highway Foreman, the Water Superintendent, the Wastewater
Superintendent, the Code Enforcement Officer, and the Planner, within 7 days of
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
7 | P a g e
an application deadline. This meeting shall be referred to as the Regular Technical
Review Team meeting. The City Planner, in coordination with the Technical
Review Team, conducts a final qualitative review of the applications on the
agenda and issues a memorandum of findings to the Planning Board and the
applicants
207.7 Public Hearing. Prior to taking final action on any preliminary or final
application, the Planning Board shall hold a hearing to afford the public the
opportunity to comment on the application.
207.8 Notice to Abutters. In consideration of an application to the Planning Board, the
City Planner shall send notice by first class mail to property owners within 250
feet of any property line if the applicant's property is in the Urban Core Area, and
within 500 feet elsewhere. The City Planner shall also send notice to the review
authority of neighboring political divisions if any portion of a proposed
development is within 500 feet of the political boundary or unless otherwise
specified in this Ordinance. This notice shall indicate the time, date, and place of
the Planning Board meeting or site visit. Other notices may apply as specified in
this Ordinance or applicable State laws.
207.9 Conditions. The Planning Board may attach reasonable conditions to plan
approvals to ensure conformity with the standards and criteria of this Ordinance.
207.10 Planning Board Approval.
A. Major Use Site Development Plan Expiration. Approval shall remain in
force for a period not to exceed 36 months. If the proposed use has not been
established during that period or a building permit has not been obtained, said
approval shall be deemed to have lapsed.
B. Subdivision Expiration. The plan shall be null and void if the period of time
between Planning Approval and recording at the Hancock Registry of Deeds
is greater than 100 days.
C. Existing Violations. Planning Board approval shall not be granted for an
application involving a structure if the structure would be located in an
unapproved subdivision; the application is in violation of the provision of a
previously approved plan; or the approval would violate any other local
ordinance or regulation or any state law, which the City of Ellsworth is
responsible of enforcing
208 PLAN REVIEW AND BUILDING PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
208.1 Building Permit Fees.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
8 | P a g e
Before a building permit may be issued, the applicant shall show right, title or interest
and pay a fee to the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the fee schedule in
Table 208.1 below:
Table 208.1 BUILDING PERMIT FEE RATES
New Construction and
Additions
Demolition Alterations*
per estimated cost
Activities
within the
Shoreland
Zone
setbacks*
Minor Use
Site Plan*
One- & two- Family Dwellings
$0.17 per sf $0.05 per sf $3 per $1,000 cost $25 flat fee $100 flat fee
Accessory Structures $0.15 per sf $0.05 per sf $3 per $1,000 cost $25 flat fee $100 flat fee
Other Buildings $0.20 per sf $0.05 per sf $3per $1,000 cost $25 flat fee $100 flat fee
NOTES:
sf = building size in square feet.
The chart above provides the Building Permit Fee Rates for one-story buildings. To
calculate the fee for multi-story building construction, addition or demolition, multiply the
total building square footage by the Rate and by the appropriate Story Factor provided at
right.
*Do Not use the Story Factor at right to calculate the fee for alterations, Shoreland Zone,
and Minor Use Site Development Plan as these are flat fees.
More than one fee may be applicable.
Number of Stories
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Story Factor
1.00
1.45
1.70
1.85
2.05
2.30
2.45
208.2 Major Use Site Development Plan and Subdivision Plan Review Fees.
Acceptance of applications will be contingent upon receipt by the Administrator
or the City Planner as applicable of all fees described in this Section.
Note: To learn about other fees that may apply to your project such as, but not
limited to, electrical, internal plumbing, utility hook-ups, development fee,
licensing, etc. please dial 207-667-4910 during regular business hours.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
9 | P a g e
Note: Retained land and/or community
space shall be counted as one lot or unit
for the purpose of fee calculations.
A. Minor Use Site Development Plan. $200
B. Major Use Site Development Plan.
i. Sketch Plan. $25.
ii. Preliminary Plan. $200.
iii. Final Plan. Apply the cost per square footage of buildings and
structures as shown in Table 207.2.1, in addition to the cost of Site
Disturbance as presented in Table 207.2.2:
C. Subdivision Review.
Applications for Subdivision Approval shall be accompanied by the following
fees:
i. Sketch Plan. $25.
ii. Preliminary Plan. $20 per lot or dwelling unit
iii. Final Plan. $25 per lot or dwelling unit.
iv. Subdivision of New or Existing Structures. Site Plan Review fees
apply.
D. Additional Fees.
i. Revisions. Applications for revisions to approved plans shall be charged a
fee of $100.
Table 207.2.1
COST PER SQUARE FOOTAGE (sf)
Total Square Footage Fee
Up to 5,000 sf $250
5,001-10,000 sf $500
10,001-20,000 sf $750
20,001-30,000 sf $1,000
30,001-40,000 sf $1,250
40,001-50,000 sf $1,500
50,001-100,000sf $2,000
100,001 sf and more $2,500
Table 207.2.2 Site Disturbance Fees
Excludes buildings and structures
Acres of Soil Disturbance Fee
First acre $0
More than one acre $100/acre over 1 acre or
any part of an acre
Example: Disturbed Area = 2.2 acres: Fee = $ 200 (1.2 acres more than 1 acre)
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures
10 | P a g e
ii. Rezoning. Applications for rezoning shall be charged $100.
iii. Others. Any other costs to the City for extraordinary measures needed to
review applications may result in additional fees.
209 PEER REVIEW
A. Request by City Planner. When, in its advisory capacity to the Planning Board, the
City Planner determines that the Ellsworth Technical Review Team does not have
the expertise to ensure compliance with this Ordinance, the City Planner may ask the
applicant for a peer review. The applicant may comply with the request or decide to
ask for a determination by the Planning Board.
B. Request by the Planning Board. When the Planning Board determines that it
and/or the Ellsworth Technical Review Team does not have the expertise to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance it may require a peer review.
C. Request by Code Enforcement Officer. When the Code Enforcement Officer
determines that it does not have the expertise to ensure compliance with this
Ordinance it may require a peer review.
D. Hiring of Expert Consultant for Peer Review. Per the above sub-sections A
through C, the City may choose to hire an expert consultant to review any
submission of an application. The consultant shall report as to the compliance or
non-compliance with this Article, and report, if applicable, of procedures which will
result in compliance. The selected consultant shall estimate the cost of such review
and the applicant shall deposit with the City the full estimated cost, which the City
shall place in an escrow account. The City shall pay the consultant from the escrow
account and reimburse the applicant if funds remain after payments are completed.
To be selected, the consultant shall be fully qualified to provide the required
information and shall be mutually acceptable to the Administrator or the City
Planner and the applicant.
E. Hiring of Expert, Request for Additional Studies. Only the Planning Board may
require the applicant to undertake any additional study, which it deems reasonable
and necessary to ensure that the requirements of this Ordinance are met. The costs of
all such studies shall be borne by the applicant.
210 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
Performance guarantees including surety bonds, money, or letters of credit may be
required by the City Manager, the City Council, or the Planning Board in an amount
sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the improvements.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
1 | P a g e
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3
Zoning Districts
Amended August 20, 2012
Amended January14, 2013
Amended April 21, 2014
Amended May 21, 2018
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 3 ZONING DISTRICTS
301 GENERAL
301.1 District Classification. In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of
uses and locations of buildings designated for specific areas; and to regulate and
determine the areas of yards and other open spaces within or surrounding such
buildings, property is hereby classified into districts.
301.2 Establishment of Zoning Districts. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the City is
hereby divided into General Land Use including overlays and Shoreland Zoning
Districts.
A. General Land Use Zoning Districts. These districts are regulated per this
Article.
Downtown (DT)
Urban (U)
Neighborhood (N)
Commercial (C)
Commerce Park (CP)
Industrial (I)
Business Park (BP)
Rural (R)
Drinking Water (DW)
Well Overlay
B. Shoreland Zoning Districts. These districts are defined and regulated in
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning.
Limited Commercial (LC)
General Development (GD)
Limited Residential (LR)
Resources Protection (RP)
Drinking water Protection (DP)
Stream Protection (SP)
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
3 | P a g e
302 OFFICIAL LAND USE MAP.
The boundaries of each zoning districts are to be indicated upon the official Land Use Map
which together with all notations and explanatory material thereon is hereby adopted by
reference and made a part of this ordinance, said map being entitled "Land Use Map, City of
Ellsworth". The official Land Use Map shall be certified by the attested signature of the City
Clerk and shall be located in the City Clerk’s office. Any alteration in the location of the
boundaries of a zoning district hereafter approved by the City Council, and by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection for the shoreland areas, shall be reflected in a
corresponding alteration of the Map (including addendum).
The official Land Use Map shall be located in the City Clerk’s office and shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of the land and water area, building and other structures
in the city.
303 INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
303.1 Where uncertainty exists to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official
Land Use Map, the following shall apply:
A. Where boundaries are shown as approximately following the centerlines of
streets or railroad right-of-ways, they shall be construed to follow such
centerlines;
B. Boundaries shown as approximately following the location of property, lot
lines, or municipal boundary shall be construed as following such lines;
C. Boundaries shown as following shore lines or the center lines of streams,
rivers, or water bodies shall be construed to follow such lines;
D. Boundaries shown as parallel to or extensions of the features listed in section
A through C above, shall be so construed and distances not specifically
indicated shall be determined by the scale of the map;
E. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground differ from those
shown on the official Land Use Map, or uncertainty exists with respect to the
location of a boundary, the Board of Appeals shall interpret said map.
304 ZONING AFFECTS ALL STRUCTURES AND LAND.
Except as hereinafter specified, no structures or land hereafter be used or occupied and no
structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or altered unless in
conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
305 USE REGULATIONS
305.1 Generally. Those uses permitted as principal uses or building within each zoning
district are those uses listed in the Table of Land Use Regulations presented
below. Permitted accessory uses and structures and home occupations shall be
allowed only if the use is permitted as principal uses with the zone and shall meet
the performance standards for such use.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
4 | P a g e
305.2 Interpretation – Materially Similar Uses. The Administrator shall determine if
a use not mentioned can reasonably be interpreted to fit into a use category where
similar uses are described. The Administrator shall only grant approval of a
similar use after having found that the impact of the use will not be any greater
than the impact of the use to which it is being compared. It is the intent of the
matrix to group similar or compatible land uses into specific zoning districts as
permitted uses. Uses not listed as a permitted use are presumed to be prohibited
from the applicable zoning district. In the event that a particular use is not listed in
the use matrix, and such use is not listed as a prohibited use and is not otherwise
prohibited by law, the Administrator shall determine whether a materially similar
use exists in this section.
Should the Administrator determine that a materially similar use does exist, the
regulations governing that use shall apply to the particular use not listed, and the
Administrator’s decision shall be recorded in writing.
305.3 Dimensional Regulations. The lot design (frontage, setback, coverage, etc.) and
building design (height) requirements are established for each zoning district in
the table of Dimensional Requirements below. Additional dimensional regulations
may apply as presented in Article 8 Performance Standards.
305. 4 More than one principal building on a lot. Except for cluster subdivisions, if
there is more than one principal building on a lot, the area, yard, height and
density requirements of the applicable district shall apply separately to each
building, but the combined area occupied by the total number of buildings on the
lot shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage requirement of the district.
306. ZONE PURPOSE.
306.1 Through the establishment of the zoning districts, the City seeks to encourage
development, safeguard quality of life; encourage density in the growth area
including networking, walkability, and enhance business climate; foster creativity
in development; support sustainability including long term economic prosperity,
protect natural resources, an d protect neighborhood for incompatible uses.
A. Downtown (DT). The heart of this zone is Main Street. It is what is special
about Ellsworth. This zone allows a mixture of uses. Uses in this zone are
concentrated making it highly walkable steering away from single-purpose
automobile trips. Off-street parking requirements are flexible. It is the intent
of this zone to provide for a mixture of uses such as commerce, culture, and
residential.
B. Urban (U). The purpose of this zone is to provide for a mix of commercial
uses including retail business, professional offices, and dense residential.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
5 | P a g e
C. Neighborhood (N). The purpose of this zone is to recognize those transition
areas and provide for a well-planned compatible mixed use environment. It
encourages a combination of land uses which might normally be regarded as
incompatible. Uses locating in this zone shall be landscaped to ensure
compatibility and screening. This purpose of this zone is to protect existing
and attract new residential neighborhoods. It is either served or has the
potential to be served by public water and sewer.
D. Commercial (C). This is a high traffic automobile-oriented zone designed
specifically to serve as an attractive retail trade area for the region. This zone
will allow for dense residential.
E. Commerce Park (CP). The purpose of this zone is to attract service business
and light manufacturing. It aims to present an attractive environment for new
employees in a business park-type setting.
F. Industrial (I). The purpose of this zone is to provide for business,
professional offices, and light and heavy industries with appropriate site
design. Uses locating in this zone shall be landscaped to ensure compatibility
and screening. The purpose of this zone is to provide space for existing
industries, their expansion, and future industrial development and to prevent
conflicts with residential and business uses.
G. Business Park (BP). The purpose is to accommodate a mix of uses including
concentrated fabrication, manufacturing, and industrial uses that are suitable
based upon adjacent land uses, access to transportation and public services
and facilities. It is the intent to provide an environment for industries that is
unencumbered by nearby residential and commercial development.
H. Rural (R). The zone offers a low-density rural area that is primarily for single
family-homes, traditional rural occupations, agricultural activities, and
forestry. Significant incentives are provided for the creation of cluster
developments.
I. Drinking Water (DW). The purpose of this zone is to protect the Branch
Lake Watershed area from development that may threaten drinking water
quality. It aims to protect areas with high natural resource value from
incompatible development. The development that does occur in this area is
intended to have a low environmental impact. In lieu of the creation of cluster
development fees will be imposed.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
6 | P a g e
307. Table of Use Regulations. GROWTH
AREAS
RURAL
AREAS
DT
Downtown
U
Urban
N
Neighborhood
C
Commercial
CP
Commerce
Park
I
Industrial
BP
Business
Park
R
Rural
DW
Drinking
Water
RESIDENTIAL/LODGING
Accessory Dwelling Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y
Boarding House/Congregate Housing/Assisted
Living Facility
Y Y Y N N N N Y N
Campground N Y N N N N N Y N
Campsite N Y Y Y N N N Y Y
Dwelling Single Family Detached/Attached Y Y Y N N N N Y Y
Multi-Family - 3 to 6 units Y Y Y Y N N N Y Y
Multi-Family - 7 or more units Y Y Y Y N N N N N
Homeless Shelter Y Y Y N N N N Y N
Mobile Home N Y Y Y N N N Y Y
Mobile Home Park N Y N N N N N Y N
Lodging Bed and breakfast Y Y Y Y N N N Y Y
Hotel/motel Y Y N Y N N N Y Y
INSTITUTIONAL, SOCIAL &PUBLIC
SERVICES/FACILITIES
Business and Trade School Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y
Cemetery, private N Y Y N N N N Y Y
Day Care Y Y Y Y N Y N Y Y
Educational Institution Y Y Y N N Y N Y Y
Religious Institution Y Y Y N N N N Y Y
Special Uses Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Telecommunication Tower N Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
7 | P a g e
307. Table of Use Regulations -
continued
GROWTH
AREAS
RURAL
AREAS
DT
Downtown
U
urban
N
Neighborhood
C
Commercial
CP
Commerce
Park
I
Industrial
BP
Business
Park
R
Rural
DW
Drinking
Water
RURAL/RECREATION
Agricultural Activity N Y Y N N N N Y Y
Boat Launch, Private and/or Commercial N N N N N N N N N
Boat Launch, Public Y N Y N N N N Y Y
Feedlot, Agricultural N N Y N N N N Y N
Golf Course N N Y N N N N Y N
Junkyard N N N N N Y N Y N
Landing Area N N N N N N N Y Y
Marina Y N Y N N N N Y N
Mineral Extraction N N N N N Y N Y N
Sawmill N N N N N Y Y Y N
Stable N N Y N N N N Y Y
Timber Harvesting N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USES
Agriculture and Processing, Commercial Y N N N Y Y Y Y Y
Animal Hospital N Y N Y N Y N Y N
Automobile Sales, Repair, and Leasing - Major N Y N Y N Y Y N N
Automobile Sales, Repair, and Leasing - Minor Y Y N Y N Y Y Y Y
Bulk Storage N N N N N Y Y Y Y
Bulk Tank Facility N N N Y N Y Y N N
Commercial Use Y Y N Y N Y Y Y Y
Convenience Store Y Y Y Y N N N Y Y
Custom Manufacturing Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Equipment Sales and Rental N Y N Y N Y Y Y Y
Gas Station Y Y N Y N Y N Y N
Industrial Service Y Y N Y N Y Y Y Y
Industry, Heavy N N N N N Y Y N N
Industry, Light N Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
8 | P a g e
307. Table of Use Regulations -
continued
GROWTH
AREAS
RURAL
AREAS
DT
Downtown
U
urban
N
Neighborhood
C
Commercial
CP
Commerce
Park
I
Industrial
BP
Business
Park
R
Rural
DW
Drinking
Water
Laboratory, Research, and Development Facility Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y N
Personal Service Establishment Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Medical Marijuana Primary Caregiver Operation
(cultivation, production, dispensing, and all related
activities) Outside the Primary Residence and
collectives
N N N N N N N N N
Processing, Fish Wholesale Y N N N Y Y Y Y Y
Professional Establishment Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Restaurant/Bar and/or Cocktail Lounge Y Y N Y N N N Y Y
Shopping Center Small N Y N Y N N N Y N
Community N Y N Y N N N N N
Big Box N N N Y N N N N N
Warehouse N Y N Y N Y Y Y Y
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
9 | P a g e
308. DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS. The following table shall govern dimensional requirements in the various zoning districts:
Table of Dimensional Requirements
Zoning Districts Minimu
m Lot
Size
(square
feet)
Minimum
Road
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Building Setback Maximum Height
(feet)
Units
per
Acre
Other Requirements
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Back
(feet)
Downtown (DT) NA NA
NA *No front setback
requirements except buildings
fronting on Main Street
between the Union River and
High Street shall have a
minimum building height of
25 ft with 0 ft front setback
(built at the property line) and
a maximum building height of
60 ft. Building with a height
greater than 25 ft shall benefit
from an enclosure ratio of
1:1.5
0 0 *Maximum height of 48 ft
except for buildings
Main Street between the
Union River and High Street
shall have a minimum
building height of 25 ft with
0 ft front setback (built at the
property line) and a
maximum building height of
60 ft. Building with a height
greater than 25 ft shall
benefit from an enclosure
ratio of 1:1.5.
NA 1. Lot Landscaping
2. Focus on parking lot
location Ch. 56
section 1102.5 and on
Cross Access Ch. 56
Section 910.4.
3. Drive-in facilities
shall be located
behind the building
and pedestrian
circulation shall be
protected from auto
traffic.
Urban (U) 10,000 18 100 NA 5 5 60 NA
Neighborhood (N) 20,000 50 100 20 10 20 NA 10
Industrial (I) 0 0 100 0 0 0 65 NA
Business Park (BP) 0 0 100 0 0 0 65 NA
Rural (R) 40,000 50 100 20 15 15 35 6
Drinking Water
(DW)
80,000 50 100 50 15 20 48 feet except that there is a
side and rear setback
enclosure ratio of 10:1 for
every foot of height over 35
feet.
0.5
Commerce Park (CP) 40,000 100 100 40 20 20 65 NA
Commercial (C) 20,000 100 100 0 10 10 65 NA 75 % maximum
impervious surface
*Exempts single family attached and detached
Projects shall meet State law for minimum lot size or requirements for smaller lots, and for subsurface wastewater disposal
Setbacks apply to structures, accessways excluding driveways, parking lots and stormwater retention facilities.
The minimum frontage for a lot serviced by a subsurface wastewater disposal system is 100 feet.
An access serving two houses or less is referred to as a residential driveway and minimum road frontage does not apply.
Special Uses have to meet setbacks but do not have to meet the lot size
Enclosure Ratio is the ratio of building height to the distance between building and the center of the right-of-way; for every foot of height you get 1.5 foot of setback.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
10 | P a g e
309. WELL OVERLAY ZONE
309.1 Description and Purpose. The Well Overlay Zone encompasses properties
having bedrock drinking water wells which have been demonstrated by the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection to be impacted by hazardous substances.
The intent of this overlay zone is to restrict bedrock ground water use and land
use per the July 10, 2009, Portland-Bangor Waste Oil Company Site agreement
between the City of Ellsworth and the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection. The Well Overlay Zone consists of two separate and distinct areas
referred to as Well Area A: Bedrock Well Restricted Area and Well Area B:
Bedrock Well Treatment Area.
309.2 Uses in Well Area A: Bedrock Well Restricted Area shall be regulated as
follows:
A. Bedrock water users are required to connect to the Ellsworth public water
system.
B. Drilling for, or use of, bedrock ground water for any means, including
residential wells is prohibited.
C. Commercial blasting as part of any quarrying or mining operation is
prohibited
D. Bedrock ground water may be withdrawn for sampling to assess water quality
by scientific analysis only from wells still in existence prior to July 10, 2009.
E. Bedrock ground water may be withdrawn from wells installed on or after July
10, 2009, as part of a Maine Department of Environmental Protection
hydrogeologic study or a City of Ellsworth approved hydrogeologic study.
F.
309.3 Uses in Well Area B: Bedrock Well Treatment Area shall be regulated as
follows: drilling for, or use of, bedrock groundwater for any means including
residential wells is allowed but:
A. All bedrock wells, both commercial and residential, must install a Pointof-
Entry Treatment Systems(POETS) such as an activated carbon filter to
ensure water-born, site-related contaminants are not ingested, discharged
to a septic system, or otherwise discharged to the ground.
B. The City of Ellsworth shall provide on a “first come, first serve basis” one (1)
POETS per lot in existence as of April 1, 2009 unless such lot is required by
another Ordinance of the City of Ellsworth to connect to the Ellsworth public
water system. Any additional POETS shall be the responsibility of the
property owner(s).
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 3 Zoning Districts
11 | P a g e
C. Water extracted from any bedrock wells on any one parcel shall be limited
to a maximum usage rate of 500 gallons per day.
D. Water extraction from any bedrock well on any one parcel with a usage to
exceed 500 gallons per day requires review by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board shall determine whether the applicant has adequately
demonstrated that the increased usage will not cause contaminated ground
water to spread beyond Well Areas A and B.
E. Commercial blasting as part of any quarrying or mining operation is
prohibited.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4
Shoreland Zoning
Adopted June 15, 2009 – Effective July 1, 2009
Amended August 17, 2009
Amended April 19, 2010
Incorporated into Ch. 56 Unified Development Ordinance on June 18, 2012
Amended November 19, 2012
Attest:
City Clerk
Heïdi-Noel Grindle
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 2
Table of Contents:
401 Shoreland Zoning Purposes and Applicability ............................................................................................. 3
402 Authority, Administration and Legal Provisions ......................................................................................... 4
403 Shoreland Zoning Administration ................................................................................................................ 5
404 Shoreland Zoning Appeals ........................................................................................................................... 8
405 Shoreland Zoning Enforcement ................................................................................................................. 11
406 Non-conformance in the Shoreland Zone. ................................................................................................. 12
407 Shoreland Zoning Districts and the Land Use Map ................................................................................... 17
408 Establishment of Shoreland Zoning Districts ............................................................................................. 19
TABLE 408.8 - LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE ......................................................................... 21
409 Land Use Standards in the Shoreland Zone ............................................................................................... 24
TABLE 409.2 Minimum Lot Area and Shore Frontage Within the Shoreland Zone (SZ) ..................... 24
TABLE 409.3 Structure and Lot Standards Within the Shoreland Zone .............................................. 25
410 Performance Standards in the Shoreland Zone .......................................................................................... 29
410.1 Piers, docks, wharves, bridges…. extending over or below the normal high-water line…
410.2 Campgrounds
410.3 Campsites, Individual Private
410.4 Commercial and Industrial Uses
410.5 Parking lots
410.6 Accessways
410.7 Signs
410.8 Stormwater Runoff
410.9 Septic Waste Disposal
410.10 Essential Services
410.11 Mineral exploration and extraction
410.12 Agricultural, Activities
410.13 Timber Harvesting
410.13-1 Timber Harvesting Statewide Standards
410.14 Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting
410.15 Erosion and sedimentation control
410.16 Soils
410.17 Water Quality
410.18 Archaeological Site
410.19 Phosphorus Control
411 Shoreland Zoning Definitions. ................................................................................................................... 45
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 3
City of Ellsworth Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
401 Shoreland Zoning Purposes and Applicability
401.1 Purposes. The purposes of this Article are to:
A. Further the maintenance of safe and healthful conditions;
B. Prevent and control water pollution;
C. Protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat;
D. Protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion;
E. Protect archaeological and historic resources;
F. Protect commercial fishing and maritime industries;
G. Protect freshwater and coastal wetlands;
H. Control building sites, placement of structures and land uses;
I. Conserve shore cover, and visual and actual points of access to inland and coastal waters;
J. Conserve natural beauty and open space; and
K. Anticipate and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
401.2 Authority.
This Article has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 sections 435-449 of
the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
401.3 Applicability.
A. Within the City of Ellsworth, this Article applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal
distance, of:
i. The normal high-water line of any great pond or river;
ii. The upland edge of a coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action; or
iii. The upland edge of a freshwater wetland; and
B. This Article also applies to all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a stream as defined and/or as identified on the Official Land Use Map for
the City of Ellsworth.
C. This Article also applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or
other structure extending or located below the normal high-water line of a water body or
within a wetland.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 4
402 Authority, Administration and Legal Provisions
402.1 Effective Date.
A. This Article and future amendments, which are adopted by the Ellsworth City Council on
May 17, 2009, shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner of the Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP). A certified copy of the Article, or Amendment, attested
and signed by the City Clerk, shall be forwarded to the Maine DEP Commissioner for
approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this Article or Amendment, within 45 days of
the DEP Commissioner’s receipt of the Article, or Amendment, it shall be automatically
approved.
Any application for a permit submitted to the City of Ellsworth within the above mentioned
45-day period shall be governed by the terms of this Article, or Article Amendment, if the
Article, or Article Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
B. Section 410.13. Section 410.13 is repealed on the statutory date established under 38
M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5), at which time 410.13-1 shall become effective. Until such time as
Section 410.13 is repealed, 410.13-1 is not in effect.
NOTE: The statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5) is the effective date of
statewide timber harvesting standards. That date is “the first day of January of the 2nd year
following the year in which the Commissioner of Conservation determines that at least 252 of
the 336 municipalities identified by the Commissioner of Conservation as the municipalities
with the highest acreage of timber harvesting activity on an annual basis for the period 1992-
2003 have either accepted the state-wide standards or have adopted an ordinance identical to
the statewide standards.” 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5) further provides that “the
Commissioner of Conservation shall notify the Secretary of State in writing and advise the
Secretary of the effective date of the statewide standards.”
402.2 Availability.
A certified copy of this Article shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be accessible to any
member of the public. This Article shall also be posted on the City of Ellsworth web site. Copies
shall be made available to the public at reasonable cost at the expense of the person making the
request. Notice of availability of this Article shall be posted.
402.3 Severability.
Should any section or provision of this Article be declared by the courts to be invalid, such
decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Article.
402.4 Conflicts with Other Ordinances.
Whenever a provision of this Article conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of
this Article or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute administered by the City of Ellsworth,
the more restrictive provision shall control.
402.5 Amendments. Refer to and use City of Ellsworth Code of Ordinance, Chapter 19 – Land Use
Ordinance, Article VIII Amendments Procedures. In addition to the procedures set forth in
Chapter 19, copies of amendments, attested and signed by the Ellsworth City Clerk, shall be
submitted to the DEP Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection following
adoption by the Ellsworth City Council and shall not be effective unless approved by the DEP
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 5
Commissioner. If the DEP Commissioner fails to act on any amendment within 45 days of his/her
receipt of the amendment, the amendment is automatically approved. Any application for a permit
submitted to the City of Ellsworth within the 45 day period shall be governed by the terms of the
amendment, if such amendment is approved by the Commissioner.
403 Shoreland Zoning Administration
403.1 Administration. This Article shall be administered in general by the Planning Board or the Code
Enforcement Officer, referred herein as the Administrator and described below:
A. The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall administer projects requiring CEO or LPI approval
per Table 408.8 - Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone. A CEO shall be appointed or reappointed
annually by July 1st.
B. The Planning Board (PB) shall administer projects requiring PB approval per Table 408.8 - Land
Uses in the Shoreland Zone. The PB shall operate in accordance with the provisions of Ellsworth
Code of Ordinances Chapter 18 and State law.
The City Planner and its designee(s) represent the Planning Board and are responsible to provide
guidance to the applicant whose project requires Planning Board Review.
C. Board of Appeals (BOA). The BOA operates in accordance with the provisions of Ellsworth
Code of Ordinances Chapter 38 and 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691.
403.2 Permits Required. After the effective date of this Article, no person shall, without first obtaining
a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the district in
which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use or
structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit pursuant
to this Article shall have a copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by the permit is
performed.
Any permit required by this Article shall be in addition to any other permit required by other law
or ordinance.
A. Culverts Exemption. A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing private
accessway culvert if the conditions listed below are met. However, the CEO shall be notified
before the replacement of any culvert. The CEO will notify the Water Dept. of any projects in the
Branch Lake watershed:
i. The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced;
ii. The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
iii. Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, and
the crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse. See 409.18 for standards.
B. Archaeological Excavation Exemption. A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation
as long as it is conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s
level 1 or level 2 approved lists, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by
means of adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization measures.
403.3 Permit Application Requirements.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 6
A. Application Form. Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application on a form
provided by the City of Ellsworth, with a scaled site plan, to the Administrator per Table 408.8 -
Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone.
B. Right, Title and Interest. All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show
evidence of right, title or interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or
contractor of the owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder,
certifying that the information in the application is complete and correct.
C. Date. All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall note upon each application the date and time of its receipt.
D. Sewage Disposal Provisions. If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing
permit or a completed application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved
by the Plumbing Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or
use would require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
403.4 Procedure for Administering Permits.
Application Receipt. Within 35 days of the date of receiving a written application, the
Administrator or designee shall notify the applicant in writing either that the application is a
complete application; or if the application is incomplete, shall specify additional material that is
needed to make the application complete.
Application Period. The Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny all permit
applications in writing within 35 days of receiving a completed application. However, if the
Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a decision on the application shall occur within
35 days after the first available date on the Planning Board's agenda following receipt of the
completed application, or within 35 days of the public hearing, if the proposed use or structure is
found to be in conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Article.
Planning Board Applications. Applications that require Planning Board Review per this Article shall
follow the general procedures in the City of Ellsworth Land Use Ordinance and/or UDO Section 208.
Burden of Proof. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use
activity is in conformity with the purposes and provisions of this Article.
Decision/Findings. After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the
Board shall approve an application or approve it with conditions if it makes a positive finding
based on the information presented that the proposed use:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife
habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover, visual and actual, points of access to inland and coastal waters;
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 7
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the comprehensive plan;
(7) Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime activities;
(8) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
(9) Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 409, Land Use Standards and Section 410
Performance Standards in the Shoreland Zone.
Conditions in Writing. If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as
well as conditions shall be stated in writing.
Other Provisions May Apply. No approval shall be granted for an application involving a
structure if the structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any
other Ordinance, or regulation or statute administered by the City of Ellsworth.
403.5 Special Resource Protection Zoning Districts (RP) Exceptions. In addition to the criteria
specified in Section 403.4 above, excepting structure shoreline setback requirements, the
Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family residential structure in a Resource
Protection Zoning District (RP) provided that the applicant demonstrates that all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within the RP, where the structure
can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded
in the Hancock County Registry of Deeds before the adoption of the RP encompassing the
lot.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year floodplain along rivers and artificially
formed great ponds along rivers and outside the velocity zone in areas subject to tides,
based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps for the City of Ellsworth; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least
one foot above the 100-year floodplain elevation; and the development is otherwise in
compliance with any applicable Ellsworth Floodplain Ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is
deemed to be 1/2 the width of the 100-year floodplain.
(4) The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all
principal and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This
limitation shall not be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest
practical extent, but not less than 100 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land,
the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 8
building site's elevation in regard to the floodplain, and its proximity to moderate-value and
high-value wetlands.
403.6 Expiration of Permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial
start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a substantial
start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one additional
year to complete the project, at which time the permit shall expire.
403.7 Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any
utility company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland
zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all City permits
required under this Article, any other Ordinance, or any previous Ordinance of the City of
Ellsworth has been issued by the CEO or other written arrangements have been made between
City of Ellsworth officials and the utility.
404 Shoreland Zoning Appeals
404.1 The Board of Appeals (BOA): The BOA shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate basis, where it
is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the administration of this Article;
and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved
party that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure
to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer in his/her review of and action on a permit application
under this Article. Any order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the
enforcement of this Article is not appealable to the BOA.
B. Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in this
Article.
404.2 Variance Appeals. Variances may be granted only under the following conditions:
A. Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including, but not limited to, lot
width, structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
B. Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this Article.
C. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Sections 409 and 410 except for
the specific provision which has created the non-conformity and from which relief is sought;
and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Article would result in undue hardship. The term
"undue hardship" shall mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to
the general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
D. Notwithstanding Section 404.2 C(ii) above, the BOA may grant a variance to an owner of a
residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to a person with a disability
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 9
who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The BOA shall restrict any variance granted under
this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or the construction of structures necessary for
access to or egress from the dwelling by the person with the disability. The BOA may impose
conditions on the variance, including limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the
time that the person with the disability lives in the dwelling. The term “structures necessary for
access to or egress from the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the
safety or effectiveness of the structure.
E. The BOA shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to ensure conformance
with the purposes and provisions of this Article to the greatest extent possible, and in doing so may
impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary. The party receiving the variance shall
comply with any conditions imposed.
F. A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information supplied
by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the CEO to the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection at least 20 days prior to action by the BOA. Any comments received
from the Commissioner prior to the action by the BOA shall be made part of the record and shall be
taken into consideration by the BOA.
404.3 Administrative Appeals
When the BOA reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the BOA shall hold a “de
novo” hearing. At this time the BOA may receive and consider new evidence and testimony, be it
oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the BOA shall hear and decide the matter
afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of evidence and the law, and reaching its own
decision.
When the BOA hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate hearing, and may
reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision was contrary to
specific provisions of the Article or contrary to the facts presented to the Planning Board. The BOA
may only review the record of the proceedings before the Planning Board. The Board Appeals shall
not receive or consider any evidence which was not presented to the Planning Board, but the BOA
may receive and consider written or oral arguments. If the BOA determines that the record of the
Planning Board proceedings is inadequate, the BOA may remand the matter to the Planning Board
for additional fact finding.
404.4 Appeal Procedure
A. Making an Appeal:
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, except for
enforcement-related matters as described in Section 404.1(A) above. Such an appeal shall be
taken within 30 days of the date of the official, written decision appealed from, and not
otherwise, except that the Board, upon a showing of good cause, may waive the 30-day
requirement.
(ii) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written notice of
appeal which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why the appeal or
variance should be granted.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 10
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and structures and
other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance, the Code Enforcement
Officer or City Planner on behalf of the Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the
Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or a request for a
variance within 35 days of its receipt of a complete written application, unless this time period
is extended by the parties.
B. Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose
of deciding an appeal.
(ii) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(iii) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals within 35 days after the
close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a statement of
the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board. The Board shall cause written notice of
its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant and to the Department of
Environmental Protection within 7 days of the Board’s decision. Copies of written decisions of
the Board of Appeals shall be given to the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the
City Council.
404.5 Appeal to Superior Court.
Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), any aggrieved party who participated
as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals may take an appeal to Superior
Court in accordance with State laws within 45 days from the date of any decision of the Board of
Appeals.
404.6 Reconsideration of Appeals.
In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals may reconsider any
decision within 45 days of its prior decision. A request to the Board to reconsider a decision must
be filed within 10 days of the decision that is being reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the
action taken on that reconsideration must occur and be completed within 45 days of the date of
the vote on the original decision.
Reconsideration of a decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board members
originally voting on the decision, and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner, Planning
Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and other parties of interest, including abutters and those who
testified at the original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive
additional evidence and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within 15 days after the
decision on reconsideration.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 11
405 Shoreland Zoning Enforcement
405.1 Nuisances. Any violation of this Article shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
405.2 Code Enforcement Officer (CEO). The CEO shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the CEO to enforce the provisions of this Article.
B. On-Site Inspections. The CEO shall conduct on-site inspections to ensure compliance with all
applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The CEO shall also investigate all
complaints of alleged violations of this Article.
C. Notice of Violation If the CEO shall find that any provision of this Article is being violated, he/she
shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of
land, buildings or structures, or work being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and
abatement of nuisance conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the City Manager
and City Council and be maintained as a permanent record.
D. Records Kept. The CEO shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of the office,
including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or denied, revocation
actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations investigated, violations found, and
fees collected. On a biennial basis, a summary of this record shall be submitted to the Director of
the Bureau of Land and Water Quality within the Department of Environmental Protection.
405.3 Legal Actions.
When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation or nuisance
condition, the Ellsworth City Council, upon notice from the Code Enforcement Officer, are hereby
directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either legal or equitable, including seeking
injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that may be appropriate or necessary to
enforce the provisions of this Article in the name of the City of Ellsworth.
The City Council, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter into administrative
consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this Article and recovering fines
without Court action. Such agreements shall not allow an illegal structure or use to continue unless
there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal structure or use was constructed or conducted
as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an authorized Ellsworth official and there is no
evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or unless the removal of the structure or use will result in
a threat or hazard to public health and safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
405.4 Fines.
Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a contractor, who
violates any provision or requirement of this Article shall be penalized in accordance with 30-A,
M.R.S.A. section 4452.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 12
406 Non-conformance in the Shoreland Zone.
406.1 Purpose. It is the intent of this Article to promote land use conformities, except that nonconforming
conditions that existed before the effective date of this Article or amendments thereto
shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 406. Except as
otherwise provided in this Article, a non-conforming condition shall not be permitted to become
more non-conforming.
406.2 Non-conformance, General.
(1) Transfer of Ownership. Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and the
new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the non-conforming structure
or lot, subject to the provisions of this Article.
(2) Repair and Maintenance. This Article allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and
maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do not
involve expansion of the non-conforming use or structure, and such other changes in a nonconforming
use or structure as federal, state, or City building and safety codes may require.
406.3 Non-conforming Structures
(1) Expansions. A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a permit
from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or expansion does
not increase the non-conformity of the structure, and is in accordance with subparagraphs (a), and
(b) below.
(a) Legally existing non-conforming principal and accessory structures that do not meet the
shoreline setback requirements may be expanded or altered as follows, as long as all other
applicable standards contained in this Article are met.
i. Expansion of any portion of a structure within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland is
prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the shoreline
setback requirement.
ii. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland than the principal structure is
prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the shoreline
setback requirement.
iii. For structures located less than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum
combined total floor area for all portions of those structures within that 75-foot distance
is 1,000 square feet, and the maximum height of any portion of a structure that is within
75 feet, horizontal distance, of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland
is 20 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
iv. For structures located less than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a great pond or a river flowing to a great pond, the maximum combined
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 13
total floor area for all portions of those structures within that 100-foot distance is 1,500
square feet, and the maximum height of any portion of a structure that is within 100
feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond is 25 feet or the height of the existing
structure, whichever is greater, except that any portion of those structures located less
than 75 feet, horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland must meet the floor area and height
limits of division (iii).
For the purposes of Section 406.3(1)(a), a basement is not counted toward floor area.
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a non-conforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the shoreline setback
requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer, basing his/her decision on the criteria specified in Section 406.3(2) Relocation,
below. If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior dimensions of the
structure and the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated by more than 3
additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the structure, it shall not be considered to
be an expansion of the structure.
(1-A) Special expansion allowance. Existing principal and accessory structures that exceed the floor
area or height limits set in Section 406.3(1)(a)(iii) and Section 406.3(1)(a)(iv) above, may not be
expanded, except that the limits may be exceeded by not more than 500 square feet provided that
all of the following requirements are met.
(a) The principal structure is set back at least 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland.
(b) A well-distributed stand of trees and other natural vegetation as defined in Section
410.14(2)(b), extends at least 50 feet, horizontal distance, in depth as measured from the
normal high-water line or upland edge for the entire width of the property.
If a well-distributed stand of trees and other vegetation meeting the requirements of Section
410.14(2)(b) is not present, the 500 square foot special expansion allowance may be
permitted only in conjunction with a written plan, including a scaled site drawing, by the
property owner, and approved by the Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, to
reestablish a buffer of trees, shrubs, and other ground cover within 50 feet, horizontal
distance, of the shoreline or tributary stream.
(c) Adjacent to great ponds and rivers flowing to great ponds, except for the allowable footpath,
there exist complete natural ground cover, consisting of forest duff, shrubs and other woody
and herbaceous vegetation within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line.
Where natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark mulch
and plantings of native shrubs, and other woody and herbaceous vegetation in quantities
sufficient to retard erosion and provide for effective infiltration of stormwater.
(d) A written plan by the property owner, including a scaled site drawing, is approved by the
Planning Board and is developed, implemented, and maintained to address the following
mitigation measures for the property within the shoreland zone.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 14
(i) Unstabilized areas resulting in soil erosion must be mulched, seeded, or otherwise
stabilized and maintained to prevent further erosion and sedimentation to water
bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands.
(ii) Roofs and associated drainage systems, driveways, parking areas, and other
nonvegetated surfaces must be designed or modified, as necessary, to prevent
concentrated flow of storm water runoff from reaching a water body, tributary stream
or wetland. Where possible, runoff must be directed through a vegetated area or
infiltrated into the soil through the use of a dry well, stone apron, or similar device.
(1-B) Planting requirements. Any planting or revegetation required as a condition to the Special
Expansion Allowance must be in accordance with a written plan drafted by a qualified
professional, be implemented at the time of construction, and be designed to meet the rating
scores contained in paragraph (b) and the ground cover requirements of paragraph (c) when
the vegetation matures within the 50-foot strip. At a minimum, the plan must provide for the
establishment of a well-distributed planting of saplings spaced so that there is at least one
sapling per 80 square feet of newly established buffer. Planted saplings may be no less than 3
feet tall for coniferous species and no less than six feet tall for deciduous species. The
planting plan must include a mix of at least three native tree species found growing in
adjacent areas, with no one species making up more than 50% of the number of saplings
planted unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer,
based on adjacent stand comparison. All aspects of the implemented plan must be maintained
by the applicant and future owners.
(2) Relocation. A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel
on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all shoreline
setback requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with
the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the
structure to be more non-conforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the shoreline setback to the greatest
practical extent, the CEO shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the land, the potential
for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on adjacent properties,
the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic systems, and the
type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation. When it is
necessary to remove vegetation within the shoreline setback area in order to relocate a
structure, the CEO may require replanting of native vegetation to compensate for the
destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated structure was removed
must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native
tree, 3 feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than 5 trees are planted, no one
species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted. Replaced
trees must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that were
removed.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 15
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same
size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or
removed must be reestablished within the shoreline setback area. The vegetation and/or
ground cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was
disturbed, destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the
structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or
a combination thereof.
(3) Reconstruction or Replacement. Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the
required shoreline setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is
removed, or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market
value of the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or
replaced provided that a permit is obtained within 18 months of the date of said damage,
destruction, or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in
compliance with the shoreline setback requirement to the greatest practical extent as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer in accordance with the purposes of this Article.
In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced so as to increase its non-conformity.
If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than the required shoreline setback it shall
not be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed pursuant to Section 406.3(1)
above, as determined by the non-conforming floor area and volume of the reconstructed or
replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of floor area and volume of the
original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the required shoreline setback
area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced or constructed at
less than the shoreline setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary to
remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation may be replanted
in accordance with Section 406.3(2) above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required shoreline setback from
a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market
value, or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding
normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the
CEO within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the shoreline
setback to the greatest practical extent the CEO shall consider, in addition to the criteria in
Section 406.3(2) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if any.
(4) Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure. The use of a non-conforming structure may
not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application, determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than
the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require
written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover,
visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management,
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 16
archaeological and historic resources, and commercial fishing and maritime activities, and
other functionally water-dependent uses.
406.4 Non-conforming Uses.
(1) Expansions. Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that non-conforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within
existing residential structures or within expansions of such structures as allowed in Section
406.3(1) above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use,
may not again be devoted to a non-conforming use except that the Planning Board may, for
good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period. This
provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the
structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding 5 year
period.
(3) Change of Use. An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources, including water dependent uses, than the former use, as determined
by the Planning Board. The determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made
according to criteria listed in Section 406.3(4) above.
406.5 Non-conforming Lots
(1) Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of this Article
or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance, provided that such
lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the same ownership, and
that all provisions of this Article except lot area, lot width and shore frontage can be met.
Variances relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot area, lot width or shore
frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Article, if all or part of the lots do not
meet the dimensional requirements of this Article, and if a principal use or structure exists on
each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that the
State Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and the State
of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the effective
date of this Article, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced law
and rules are complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as
conforming as possible to the dimensional requirements of this Article.
(3) Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in
single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this
Article, if any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 17
Article or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no
principal structure the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
requirements.
This provision shall not apply to 2 or more contiguous lots, at least one of which is nonconforming,
owned by the same person or persons on December 12, 1992 and recorded in the
registry of deeds if the lot is served by a public sewer or can accommodate a subsurface
sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules; and
(a) Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at least 20,000 square feet of lot
area; or
(b) Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of Section 406.5(3)(a)
are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of shore
frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
407 Shoreland Zoning Districts and the Land Use Map
407.1 Official Land Use Map. The areas to which this Article is applicable are hereby divided into the
following districts as shown on the Official Land Use Map which is made a part of this Article:
A. Resource Protection (RP)
B. Drinkingwater Protection (DP)
C. Stream Protection (SP)
D. Limited Residential (LR)
E. Limited Commercial (LC)
F. General Development (GD)
407.2 Scale of Map. The Official Land Use Map shall be available at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 2000 feet (1’’ = 2000’). Zoning district boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend
indicating the symbols for each district shall be placed on the map.
407.3 Certification of Official Land Use Map. A one inch equals 2000 feet (1’’ = 2000’) copy of the
Official Land Use Map shall be certified by the attested signature of the Ellsworth City Clerk and
shall be located in the Code Enforcement Office and in the City Planner’s Office.
407.4 Changes to the Official Land Use Map. If amendments, in accordance with this Article, are made
in the boundaries of the Shoreland Zone or other shoreland zoning matter portrayed on the Official
Land Use Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Land Use Map within 30 days after the
amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental
Protection.
407.5 Interpretation of Shoreland Zoning District Boundaries. Unless otherwise set forth on the
Official Land Use Map, district boundary lines are property lines, the centerlines of accessways,
and the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact
location of district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location,
except, when applicable, a landowner complies with Section 407.6 Verification of Habitat Value.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 18
407.6 Verification of IF&W Determination of Waterfowl and Wading Bird Habitat Value.
(1) Following the review of existing Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IF&W)
data and/or new documentation submitted to the IF&W regarding a moderate or high value
habitat, the IF&W may modify the rating or boundary of the habitat. A landowner submitting
documentation will receive a written determination from either the IF&W or the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). Upon determination that the habitat rating or
boundary has changed, the landowner may then proceed to request an amendment to the Land
Use Map by contacting the City Planner. Determination of habitat rating or boundary may be
done by any of the following methods:
(a) Desktop Review. A re-examination by the DEP of the aerial photography and other GIS
data available may be sufficient documentation for determination. Should DEP find
evidence that the habitat rating or boundary should be change, DEP will submit
documentation to IF&W for determination.
(b) Field Verification by Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). A landowner
may submit to the DEP evidence that the wetland rating or boundary is incorrect, such as
photographs showing that the wetland is either not a wetland as defined by this Article or is
an altered wetland. Should the evidence be convincing that the rating or boundary may be
incorrect, the DEP may then conduct a field visit using the criteria in Section 407.6(1)(d).
Following a field visit, DEP will write an advisory opinion regarding the presence or
absence of a wetland with a moderate or high value to the IF&W for determination
(c) Field Verification by a professional. A landowner may submit documentation regarding
the presence of absence of a wetland with a moderate or high value to the IF&W for
determination. Such Documentation must be completed by an individual who has
experience and training in either wetland ecology or wildlife ecology and therefore has
qualifications sufficient to identify and document a moderate or high value habitat based on
the criteria in Section 407.6(1)(d).
(d) Moderate and high value habitat criteria. A moderate or high value inland habitat is an
inland wetland complex, and a 250-foot wide zone surrounding the wetland complex, that
through a combination of dominant wetland type, wetland diversity, wetland size, wetland
type interspersion, and percent open water, meets the IF&W guidelines or is an inland
wetland complex that has documented outstanding use of waterfowl or wading birds.
Determination of moderate or high value habitat is based on the following:
i. Dominant wetland type is rated by the assigned score for the wetland type of
greatest area in the wetland. Wetland type is determined using the classification
system published by IF&W based on McCall, 1972, for waterfowl and wading bird
habitat rating. A score for the value to waterfowl and wading birds is assigned to
each type using the IF&W rating procedure; and/or
ii. Wetland diversity is rated by assigning the wetland to one of the diversity categories
based on the number of wetland types present in the wetland using the IF&W rating
procedure; and/or
iii. Wetland size is rated by assigning the wetland to one of three size categories based
on the total area of the wetland using the IF&W rating procedure: and/or
iv. Wetland type interspersion is rated by assigning the wetland to one of three
interspersion categories using the Golet (1974) system, as modified for Maine in the
IF&W rating procedure; and/or
v. Percent open water is rated by assigning the wetland one of four categories, based
on the percent of the wetland in open water using the IF&W rating procedure.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 19
NOTE: The following are literature citations as referenced above:
McCall, C.A. 1972. Manual for Maine wetlands inventory. Maine Department of Inland
Fisheries and Game, Augusta, Maine. 38pp.
Golet, F.C., and J.S. Larson. 1974. Classification of freshwater wetlands in the glaciated
northeast. Resource Publication 116. U.S. Dept. of the Interior, Washington, D.C. 56pp.
408 Establishment of Shoreland Zoning Districts
408.1 The Resource Protection District (RP) includes areas in which development would adversely
affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems, or scenic and natural values. This
district shall include the following areas when they occur within the limits of the shoreland zone,
exclusive of the Stream Protection District, except that areas which are currently developed or in
the General Development District need not be included within the Resource Protection District.
(1) Rated Wetlands. Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
freshwater wetlands, salt marshes and salt meadows, and wetlands associated with great
ponds and rivers, which are rated "moderate" or "high" value waterfowl and wading bird
habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries
and Wildlife (IF&W) that are depicted on a Geographic Information System (GIS) data
layer maintained by either IF&W or the DEP as of January1, 1973 for Coastal Wetlands
and as of December 31, 2008 for Freshwater Wetlands. For the purposes of this paragraph
“wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers” shall mean areas characterized by nonforested
wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are contiguous with a great pond or river,
and have a surface elevation at or below the water level of the great pond or river during
the period of normal high water. “Wetlands associated with great ponds or rivers” are
considered to be part of that great pond or river.
(2) Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed great ponds along rivers,
defined by the 100-year floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps for the
City of Ellsworth, or the flood of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified
as recent floodplain soils. This district shall also include 100-year floodplains adjacent to
tidal waters as shown on FEMA's Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary
Maps.
(3) Steep Slopes. Areas of 2 or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater.
(4) Hydric Soils. Areas of 2 or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and
hydric soils, which are not part of a freshwater or coastal wetland as defined, and which are
not surficially connected to a water body during the period of normal high water.
(5) Erodable Areas. Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or
river bed movement, and lands adjacent to tidal waters which are subject to severe erosion
or mass movement, such as steep coastal bluffs.
(6) Significant Natural Areas. Areas designated by federal or state government or the City of
Ellsworth as natural areas of significance to be protected from development; and
(7) Other significant areas which should be included in this district to fulfill the purposes of
this Article, such as, but not limited to, existing public access areas and certain significant
archaeological and historic sites deserving of long-term protection as determined by the
City of Ellsworth after consultation with the Maine Historic Preservation Commission.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 20
408.2 The Drinkingwater Protection District (DP) includes all areas that lie within the Shoreland Zone
of the watershed of Branch Lake that are not zoned Resource Protection. The DP zoning district has
lot size, frontage and other environmental standards designed to protect Ellsworth’s public drinking
water supply. For regulation of surface water activities on Branch Lake, refer to the Ellsworth Code
of Ordinances Chapter 55 Public Water Supply Protection Ordinance.
408.3 The Stream Protection District (SP) includes all land areas within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of
the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of those areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of a great pond, or river, or within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland. Where a stream and its associated shoreland area
are located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land
area shall be regulated under the terms of the shoreland district associated with that water body or
wetland.
In addition to streams as defined, all perennial and intermittent streams within the watershed of
Branch Lake have a 75-foot shoreland zone and are designated Stream Protection District as
shown on the Official Land Use Map.
408.4 The Limited Residential District (LR) includes those areas suitable for residential and
recreational development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource Protection District, or
Stream Protection District, and areas which are used less intensively than those in the General
Development District and Limited Commercial District.
408.5 The Limited Commercial District (LC) includes areas of mixed, light commercial and residential
uses exclusive of the Stream Protection District, which should not be developed as intensely as the
General Development District. This district includes areas of two or more contiguous acres in size
devoted to a mix of residential and low intensity business and commercial uses.
408.6 The General Development District (GD) includes the following types of existing, intensively
developed areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or intensive
recreational activities, or a mix of such activities, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial activities;
(b) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities, or other
commercial activities; and
(c) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development consistent with the Ellsworth
Waterfront Master Plan and Waterfront Redevelopment Plan.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial, industrial or
recreational uses.
408.7 The Shoreland Zoning Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 408.8
Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone, shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in
Sections 409 and 410. The district designation for a particular site shall be determined from the
Official Land Use Map.
Key to Table 408.8 Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone:
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable land use standards.)
No - Prohibited.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 21
PB - Allowed with Planning Board approval, followed by CEO permit if applicable.
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer.
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the City Plumbing Inspector.
District Abbreviations on Table 408.8 – Land Uses in the Shoreland Zone:
RP - Resource Protection
DP - Drinkingwater Protection
SP - Stream Protection
GD - General Development
LC - Limited Commercial
LR - Limited Residential
TABLE 408.8
LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
More RESTRICTIVE less
DISTRICT
RP DP SP LR LC GD
SUMMARY OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Depth of Shoreland Zone (in feet) 250 250 75 250 250 250
DISTRICT
LAND USE CATEGORY RP DP SP LR LC GD
1. Non-intensive recreational uses w/o structures such as
hunting, fishing and hiking
YES YES YES YES YES YES
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing
accessways/trails
YES YES YES YES YES YES
3. Forest management activities except for timber
harvesting & land mgmt. roads
YES YES YES YES YES YES
4. Timber harvesting CEO YES YES YES YES YES
5. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other
than timber harvesting
1
In RP not allowed within 75 feet horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of Great Ponds, except to remove safety hazards.
CEO1 CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
6. Fire prevention activities YES YES YES YES YES YES
7. Wildlife management practices YES YES YES YES YES YES
8. Soil and water conservation practices YES YES YES YES YES YES
9. Mineral exploration NO NO NO CEO CEO CEO
10. Mineral extraction (including sand and gravel extract.) NO NO NO PB PB PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis YES YES YES YES YES YES
12. Emergency operations YES YES YES YES YES YES
13. Agricultural, Activities (as defined) PB NO CEO CEO NO NO
14. Agricultural, Gardening CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
15. Agricultural, Feed Lot NO NO NO NO NO NO
16. Agricultural Processing, Major NO NO NO NO NO NO
17. Agricultural Processing, Minor NO NO NO NO PB PB
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 22
TABLE 408.8 (continued) DISTRICT
LAND USE CATEGORY RP DP SP LR LC GD
18. Processing, Fish Wholesale NO NO NO NO PB PB
19. Principal structures and uses
19.1. One & two family residential and driveways
2 Single family structures may be allowed by special exception
only according to the provisions of Section 403.5, Special RP
Exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited.
3
New structures with a footprint greater than 3,000 s. f. must
be approved by the Planning Board.
4 Provided that a variance from the shoreline setback
requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
PB2 CEO
/PB3
PB4 CEO NO NO
19.2 . Multi-unit residential NO NO NO PB NO PB
19.3.Commercial NO5 NO5 NO NO5 CEO6 CEO6
5 Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table,
such as, but not limited to, marinas and campgrounds, that are
allowed in the respective district.
6 Allowed commercial uses are limited to the ones allowed in
land use zoning districts for adjacent upland with the exception
of the uses, as listed and described in 410.4.
19.4 Industrial
7 Allowed industrial uses are limited to the ones allowed in land
use zoning districts for adjacent upland with the exception of
the uses, as listed and described in 410.4.
NO NO NO NO NO CEO7
19.5 Special Uses, except as otherwise prohibited by this
article
19.6 Government and Institutional
PB
NO
PB
PB
PB
NO
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
19.7. Small non-residential facilities for educational,
scientific, or nature interpretation
4 Provided that a variance from the shoreline setback
requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
PB PB PB4 CEO CEO CEO
20. Structures accessory to allowed uses 2 Single family structures may be allowed by special exception
only according to the provisions of Section 403.5, Special RP
Exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited. 3
New structures with a footprint greater than 3,000 s. f. must
be approved by the Planning Board.
4 Provided that a variance from the shoreline setback
requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
PB2 CEO
/PB3 PB4 CEO CEO CEO
21. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges, boat launching
facilities and other structures and uses extending
over or below the normal high-water line or
within a wetland
21.1. Temporary CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
21.2. Permanent, private - 8See 410.1 PB8 PB8 PB8 PB8 PB8 PB8
21.3. Permanent, commercial - 8See 410.1 NO NO PB8 PB8 PB8 PB8
21.4. Permanent, public facility - 8See 410.1 NO PB8 PB8 PB8 PB8 PB8
22. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
23. Home occupations PB PB PB PB CEO CEO
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 23
24. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI LPI
TABLE 408.8 (continued) DISTRICT
LAND USE CATEGORY RP DP SP LR LC GD
25. Essential services
25.1. Distribution CEO9 YES10 CEO9 YES10 YES10 YES10
25.2. Transmission PB9 PB PB9 PB PB PB
25.3. Facilities PB9 NO PB9 PB PB PB
9Except buildings which shall not be permitted in the RP or SP
unless a variance from shoreline setback is granted. See further
restrictions in Section 410.10.
10Permit not required but must file a written “Notice of Intent to
Construct” with CEO.
26. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses YES YES YES YES YES YES
27. Public and private recreational areas involving
minimal structural development
PB PB PB PB CEO CEO
28. Campgrounds NO NO NO PB NO NO
29. Campsite, private individual. See 410.3 PB PB CEO CEO NO NO
30. Accessway, consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil,
gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material
constructed for or created by the repeated passage of
motorized vehicles
30.1. Construction of an accessway of more than 500 ft.
11Except as provided in Section 410.6.
NO11 PB PB PB PB PB
30.2. Construction of an accessway of less than 500 ft. PB CEO PB CEO CEO CEO
31. Land management roads PB YES YES YES YES YES
32. Parking Lot NO PB PB PB PB PB
33. Marinas NO NO NO PB NO PB
34. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO CEO CEO YES YES YES
35. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic yards PB CEO PB CEO CEO CEO
36. Creation of more than 20,000 s. f. of shoreland lot
coverage area (in the aggregate) on one lot.
PB PB PB CEO CEO CEO
37. Signs CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
38. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO CEO
39. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB PB PB
40. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO to determine level of review needed
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over or
adjacent to a natural resource including but not limited to freshwater or coastal wetland, great pond, river,
stream or tributary stream and operates in such a manner that material or soil may be washed into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand, vegetation or other materials;
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 24
409 Land Use Standards in the Shoreland Zone (SZ)
All land use activities within the SZ shall conform to the following provisions, where applicable.
409.1 General Land Use Requirements. No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or
occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed,
expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created, except in conformity with all of the
regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is granted.
409.2 Minimum Lot Standards: All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with
the following provisions when applicable:
TABLE 409.2 Minimum Lot Area and Shore Frontage within the Shoreland Zone (SZ)
Residential Uses in SZ Adjacent to: Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) Min. Shore Frontage (ft.)
Tidal Areas in the GD Zoning District 10,000 per dwelling unit 100 per dwelling unit
Tidal Areas in the LR Zoning District 40,000 per dwelling unit 150 per dwelling unit
Non-Tidal Areas except DP, SP & RP Districts 40,000 per dwelling unit 200 per dwelling unit
Governmental, Institutional, Commercial or
Industrial Uses in SZ Adjacent to: Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) Min. Shore Frontage (ft.)
Tidal Areas in the GD Zoning District 10,000 per principal structure 100 per principal structure
Tidal Areas in the LR Zoning District 40,000 per principal structure 200 per principal structure
Non-tidal areas except DP, SP & RP District 60,000 per principal structure 300 per principal structure
Public or Private Recreational Facilities: Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) Min.Shore Frontage (ft.)
All SZ Areas except the DP & RP Zoning District 40,000 per principal structure 200 per principal structure
All Uses in: Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.) Min.Shore Frontage (ft.)
All Areas of DP Zoning District 90,000/unit or princ.
structure
300/unit or princ. structure
All Areas of SP* & RP* Zoning District Apply lot and structure requirements of the most restrictive
adjacent zoning district.
*Structure permitting in RP and SP is very limited. See provisions in Sections 408, 409 and 410.
A. Minimum Lot Area. Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a
wetland and land beneath accessways serving more than 2 lots shall not be included toward
calculating minimum lot area.
B. Lots Split by Accessways. Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private accessway shall be
considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such accessway was established by the
owner of land on both sides thereof after September 22, 1971.
C. The Minimum Width of any portion of any lot within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be equal to or greater than the
shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
D. Multiple Uses. If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional,
commercial or industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a
single parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal
structure, or use.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 25
409.3 Structure Standards:
A. General Structure Setback. All new principal and accessory structures shall be constructed
according to the requirements specified in Table 409.3 Structure and Lot Standards within the
Shoreland Zone below.
B. Resource Protection District Shoreline Setback requirements shall be 250 feet, horizontal
distance from the shoreline, except for structures, accessways, or other regulated objects
specifically allowed in that district in which case the setback requirements specified in Table
409.3 Structure and Lot Standards within the Shoreland Zone below shall apply.
TABLE 409.3 Structure and Lot Standards within the Shoreland Zone
STANDARD:
Shoreland Zoning Districts
Dimensions in feet
RP* DP SP* LR LC GD
Minimum structure shoreline setback from the normal highwater
line of great ponds and rivers, as defined.
100* 100 n/a 100 100 25
Minimum structure shoreline setback from fresh water bodies
(other than above) tributary streams, tidal water bodies or the upland
edge of a wetland, as defined.
75* 75 75* 75 75 25
Minimum structure setback from the edge of a right-of-way. 20* 20 20* 20 20 20
Minimum structure setback from a property line, as defined. 25* 25 25* 15 10 10
Minimum lot frontage along the edge of a right-of-way 200 200 200 150 200 100
Maximum height of a structure, as defined. 35* 35 35* 35 35 45
Maximum shoreland lot coverage as defined below. 20% 20% 20% 20% 20% 70%
*Structure permitting in RP and SP is very limited. See provisions in Sections 408, 409, and 410.
C. Structure Shoreline Setback Exceptions. The shoreline setback provision shall not apply to
structures of functionally water-dependent uses, as defined.
D. Structure Shoreline Setbacks near Coastal Bluffs. For principal structures, shoreline setback
measurements shall be taken from the top of a coastal bluff that has been identified on Coastal
Bluff maps as being “highly unstable” or “unstable” by the Maine Geological Survey pursuant
to its “Classification of Coastal Bluffs” and published on the most recent Coastal Bluff map a
copy of which is available in the Ellsworth Code Office. If the applicant and the permitting
official(s) are in disagreement as to the specific location of a “highly unstable” or “unstable”
bluff, or where the top of the bluff is located, the applicant may at his or her expense, employ a
Maine Registered Professional Engineer, a Maine Certified Soil Scientist, a Maine State
Geologist, or other qualified individual to make a determination. If agreement is still not
reached, the applicant may appeal the matter to the board of appeals.
E. Structure Height. Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures shall
not exceed the heights listed in Table 409.3 Structure and Lot Standards within the Shoreland
Zone. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission towers, windmills,
antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 26
F. Floodplain Elevation. The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures,
including basements, shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year
flood, the flood of record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types
identified as recent floodplain soils. However, accessory structures, as defined, may be placed
in accordance with the standards of the Ellsworth Floodplain Management Ordinance even if
they do not meet the elevation requirements of this paragraph.
G. Shoreland Lot Coverage: The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other nonvegetated
surfaces, within the shoreland zone shall not exceed the requirements specified in
Table 409.3 Structure and Lot Standards within the Shoreland Zone above for the lot or for a
portion thereof that is located within the shoreland zone, including land area previously
developed.
H. Retaining Walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure shoreline
setback requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of the
following conditions are met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not
exist;
(b) The wall is at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
(c) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a
site eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be
stabilized with vegetative plantings;
(d) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, is no more than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams,
coastal wetlands, and tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency’s (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps for the City of Ellsworth, or the flood of record, or in the absence
of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the shoreline
setback area, including patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a
wetland when a natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the
following characteristics:
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 27
i. The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where
natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark
mulch;
ii. Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide for
effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
iii. Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
iv. A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured
perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
v. A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 410.14(2)(a) may traverse the
buffer;
I. Shoreline Access. Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar
structures may be allowed with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide
shoreline access in areas of steep slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is
limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in width; that the structure does not extend below or
over the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless
permitted by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources
Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C); and that the applicant demonstrates that no
reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
410 Performance Standards in the Shoreland Zone
410.1 Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges, Boat Launching Facilities, and Other Structures and Uses
Extending Over or Below the Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a
Wetland.
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as
to control erosion.
(2) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
(4) The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be
consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or
wharf in non-tidal waters shall not be wider than 6 feet for non-commercial uses.
(5) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure
extending below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the
structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity.
(6) New permanent piers and docks on non-tidal waters shall not be permitted unless it is clearly
demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit
has been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act.
(7) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure
extending below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be
converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 28
(8) Except in the General Development Districts, structures built on, over or abutting a pier,
wharf, dock or other structure extending below the normal high-water line of a water body or
within a wetland shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or other
structure.
(9) Boat launches and ramps shall only be permitted as permanent public or quasi-governmental
facilities. All public and quasi-governmental trailer-able boat launching facilities providing
access to Branch Lake shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) The facility shall be gated and locked during off-hours.
(b) The facility shall be supervised by an attendant during hours of operation.
(c) The facility shall be equipped with a boat wash-down facility for the sole purpose of
washing down boats.
(d) The facility attendant shall conduct a boat inspection on all watercraft prior to entering
Branch Lake.
(e) A boat inspection includes: a) a visual inspection of a boat, motor vehicle, trailer, marine
engine, live well, bilge, bait bucket and all other related equipment to ensure that no
aquatic invasive plants or animals are introduced into Branch Lake and b) a boat wash
down.
410.2 Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of land for each site, not
including accessways and driveways. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land below
the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land area per
site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and
service buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a great pond or a river flowing to a great pond, and 100 feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams,
or the upland edge of a wetland.
410.3 Campsites, Individual Private. Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds
are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
A. One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Article, or one campsite per 30,000
square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be permitted. A
maximum of four campsites not to exceed a combined total of 20 individuals may be
permitted on any one lot. If there is more than one campsite per lot each campsite shall have a
minimum of 30,000 square feet.
B. Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent
platform, shall be set back 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a
great pond or river flowing to a great pond, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a wetland.
C. Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle shall
not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure
except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 29
D. The clearing of vegetation for the siting of a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a
Resource Protection District shall be limited to 1,000 square feet.
E. A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the City Plumbing
Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land
owner is required.
F. When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than 120 days
per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be met, including the installation of a
subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage facilities.
410.4 Commercial and Industrial Uses. The following new commercial and industrial uses, and
similar uses, are prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds and rivers and
streams which flow to great ponds:
(1) Auto washing facilities
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
(3) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts
normally associated with individual households or farms
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
(6) Dry cleaning establishments
(7) Electronic circuit assembly
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as
use occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
(11) Photographic processing
(12) Printing
410.5 Parking Lots
(1) Parking lots shall meet the shoreline setback requirements for structures for the district in
which such lots are located. The shoreline setback requirement for parking lots serving public
boat launching facilities in Districts other than the General Development District shall be no
less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary stream if the Planning
Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the shoreline or tributary
stream.
(2) Parking lots shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent
stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and
where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking lots, parking and loading provisions
of the Ellsworth Land Use Ordinance shall be applied.
410.6 Accessways. See Ellsworth Code of Ordinances Chapter 56 Article 9 Street Design and
Construction Standards and Article 10 Storm Water Management, Design and Construction
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 30
Standards for standards that apply to the construction of accessways and drainage systems,
culverts and other related features.
410.7 Signs. See Ellsworth Code of Ordinances Chapter 9 Sign Ordinance for standards to apply to
the erection signs. Where a Shoreland Zone is not mentioned, provisions for the adjacent upland
zone shall apply.
410.8 Storm Water Runoff See Ellsworth Code of Ordinances Chapter 56 Article 10 Storm Water
Management, Design and Construction Standards for standards to apply all new construction and
development to minimize storm water runoff from the site.
410.9 Septic Waste Disposal
All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following:
(1) clearing or removal of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated
fill extensions, shall not extend closer than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and
(2) a holding tank is not allowed for a first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
410.10 Essential Services
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways
and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in
a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted
use within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable
alternative exists. Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to
minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related
equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
(4) Essential services structures must meet the shoreline setback requirements in the shoreland
zoning district in which they are located.
410.11 Mineral Exploration and Extraction. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of
mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which
create minimal disturbance of less than 100 square feet of ground surface. A permit from the
Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the above
limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped, filled or
secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the public
health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the Planning Board before a permit
is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the
requirements of Section 410.11(3) below.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 31
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features, shall be
permitted within one 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great
pond or a river, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of any
other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland. Extraction operations
shall not be permitted within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of any property line without written
permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
(3) Within 12 months following the completion of extraction operations at any extraction site,
which operations shall be deemed complete when less than 100 cubic yards of materials are
removed in any consecutive 12 month period, ground levels and grades shall be established in
accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two and one-half to one (2½: 1) slope or flatter.
(c) Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be
reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam
shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
(4) In keeping with the purposes of this Article, the Planning Board may impose such conditions
as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral extraction
operations on surrounding uses and resources.
410.12 Agricultural, Activities
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines (latest version) published by the Maine Department of Agriculture and the
Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209).
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond
or a river, or within 75 feet horizontal distance, of other water bodies, tributary streams, or
wetlands. All manure storage areas within the shoreland zone must be constructed or
modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or contaminated storm water.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than 40,000 square feet in surface area,
within the shoreland zone shall require a Conservation Plan as defined to be filed with the
Planning Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of said plan shall be considered to be
a violation of this Article.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of a great pond; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, from other water bodies and
coastal wetlands; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary streams and freshwater
wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this Article and not in conformance
with this provision may be maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within 100 feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond; within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of
other water bodies and coastal wetlands; nor within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with ongoing farm activities,
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 32
and which are not in conformance with the above shoreline setback provisions may continue,
provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Conservation Plan as defined.
410.13 Timber Harvesting
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, timber harvesting shall be limited to
the following:
(a) Within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line, timber harvesting may be conducted when the following conditions are
met:
(1) The ground is frozen;
(2) There is no resultant soil disturbance;
(3) The removal of trees is accomplished using a cable or boom and there is no entry of
tracked or wheeled vehicles into the 75-foot strip of land;
(4) There is no cutting of trees less than 6 inches in diameter; no more than 30% of the
trees 6 inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level, are cut
in any 10-year period; and a well-distributed stand of trees and other natural
vegetation remains; and
(5) A licensed professional forester has marked the trees to be harvested prior to a permit
being issued by the municipality.
(b) Beyond the 75 foot strip referred to in Section 410.13(1)(a) above, timber harvesting is
permitted in accordance with paragraph 2 below except that in no case shall the average
residual basal area of trees over 4 ½ inches in diameter at 4 ½ feet above ground level be
reduced to less than 30 square feet per acre.
(2) Except in areas as described in Section 410.13(1) above, timber harvesting shall conform
with the following provisions:
(a) Selective cutting of no more than 40 % of the total volume of trees 4 inches or more in
diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level on any lot in any 10-year period is
permitted. In addition:
(i) Within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a great pond or
a river flowing to a great pond, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland, there shall be no clearcut openings and a well-distributed stand of trees and
other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be maintained.
(ii) At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond or a river
flowing to a great pond, and greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of other water bodies or the upland edge of a wetland, harvesting
operations shall not create single clearcut openings greater than 10,000 square feet in
the forest canopy. Where such openings exceed 5,000 square feet they shall be at
least 100 feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such clearcut openings shall be included in
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 33
the calculation of total volume removal. Volume may be considered to be equivalent
to basal area.
(b) Timber harvesting operations exceeding the 40% limitation in Section 410.13(2)(a)
above, may be allowed by the Planning Board upon a clear showing, including a forest
management plan signed by a Maine licensed professional forester, that such an
exception is necessary for good forest management and will be carried out in accordance
with the purposes of this Article. The planning board shall notify the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Protection of each exception allowed, within 14 days
of the Planning Board's decision.
(c) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body. In all other areas slash shall either be removed or
disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the ground and no part thereof extends more
than 4 feet above the ground. Any debris that falls below the normal high-water line of a
water body or tributary stream shall be removed.
(d) Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as travel routes except when:
(i) Surface waters are frozen; and
(ii) The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
(e) All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert, except in areas with low
banks and channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface
which would not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
(f) Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and designed so as to prevent
water runoff from directly entering the water body or tributary stream. Upon completion
of timber harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed and areas of
exposed soil re-vegetated.
(h) Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the operation of
machinery used in timber harvesting results in the exposure of mineral soil
shall be located such that an unscarified strip of vegetation of at least 75 feet,
horizontal distance, in width for slopes up to 10% shall be retained between the
exposed mineral soil and the normal high-water line of a water body or upland
edge of a wetland. For each 10% increase in slope, the unscarified strip shall be
increased by 20 feet, horizontal distance. The provisions of this paragraph
apply only to a face sloping toward the water body or wetland, provided,
however, that no portion of such exposed mineral soil on a back face shall be
closer than 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a
water body or upland edge of a wetland.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 34
410.13-1. Timber Harvesting – Statewide Standards [Effective on effective date established in
Section 402.1.B]
(1) Shoreline integrity and sedimentation. Persons conducting timber harvesting and related
activities must take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of water body and tributary stream
banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within water
bodies, tributary streams and wetlands. If, despite such precautions, the disruption of
shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of water body and tributary
stream banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within
water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(2) Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall be conducted such that slash or
debris is not left below the normal high-water line of any water body or tributary stream, or
the upland edge of a wetland. This section [410.13-1(2)] does not apply to minor, incidental
amounts of slash that result from timber harvesting and related activities otherwise conducted
in compliance with this section.
(a) Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by equipment or to stabilize exposed
soil, may be left in place, provided that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet above the
ground.
(b) Adjacent to great ponds, rivers and wetlands:
(i) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland; and
(ii) Between 100 feet and 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line or
upland edge of a wetland, all slash larger than 3 inches in diameter must be disposed
of in such a manner that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
(3) Timber harvesting and related activities must leave adequate tree cover and shall be
conducted per one of the three options presented below so that a well-distributed stand of
trees is retained.
(a) Option #1 - 40% Volume Removal, as follows:
(i) Harvesting of no more than 40% of the total volume on each acre of trees 4.5 inches
DBH or greater in any 10-year period is allowed. Volume may be considered to be
equivalent to basal area;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation including
existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of rivers, streams,
and great ponds, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
freshwater or coastal wetlands, there must be no cleared openings. At distances
greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a river or
great pond or upland edge of a wetland, timber harvesting and related activities must
not create single cleared openings greater than 14,000 square feet in the forest
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 35
canopy. Where such openings exceed 10,000 square feet, they must be at least 100
feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such cleared openings will be included in the
calculation of total volume removal. Volume may be considered equivalent to basal
area.
(b) Option # 2 (60 square foot basal area retention), as follows:
(i) The residual stand must contain an average basal area of at least 60 square feet per
acre of woody vegetation greater than or equal to 1.0 inch DBH, of which 40 square
feet per acre must be greater than or equal to 4.5 inches DBH;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation including
existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
(iii)Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of water bodies and
within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of wetlands, there must be no
cleared openings. At distances greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a river or great pond, or upland edge of a wetland, timber
harvesting and related activities must not create single cleared openings greater than
14,000 square feet in the forest canopy. Where such openings exceed 10,000 square
feet, they must be at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such cleared openings
will be included in the calculation of the average basal area. Volume may be
considered equivalent to basal area.
(c) Option #3 (Outcome based), which requires: an alternative method proposed in an
application, signed by a Licensed Forester or certified wildlife professional, submitted by
the landowner or designated agent to the State of Maine Department of Conservation’s
Bureau of Forestry (Bureau) for review and approval, which provides equal or better
protection of the shoreland area than this rule.
Landowners must designate on the Forest Operations Notification form required by 12
M.R.S.A. chapter 805, subchapter 5 which option they choose to use. If landowners
choose Option #1 or Option #2, compliance will be determined solely on the criteria for
the option chosen. If landowners choose Option 3, timber harvesting and related activities
may not begin until the Bureau has approved the alternative method.
The Bureau of Forestry may verify that adequate tree cover and a well-distributed stand of
trees is retained through a field procedure that uses sample plots that are located randomly or
systematically to provide a fair representation of the harvest area.
(4) Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement applies to the construction,
maintenance, and use of skid trails and yards in shoreland areas.
(a) Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities shall not use river, stream or
tributary stream channels as travel routes except when surface waters are frozen and snow
covered, and the activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 36
(b) Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to prevent sediment and concentrated
water runoff from entering a water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Upon termination of
their use, skid trails and yards must be stabilized.
(c) Setbacks:
(i) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of mineral soil within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of any water body, tributary stream, or wetland. On slopes of 10% or
greater, the shoreline setback for equipment operation must be increased by 20 feet,
horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal distance, for each 5% increase
in slope above 10%. Where slopes fall away from the resource, no increase in the 25-foot
shoreline setback is required.
(ii) Where such shoreline setbacks are impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used to
avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland. Such techniques may
include the installation of sump holes or settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation
or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(5) Land Management Roads. Land management roads, including approaches to crossings of water
bodies, tributary stream channels, and freshwater wetlands, ditches and other related structures,
must be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff
from directly entering the water body, tributary stream or wetland. Surface water on or adjacent
to water crossing approaches must be diverted through vegetative filter strips to avoid
sedimentation of the watercourse or wetland. Because roadside ditches may not extend to the
resource being crossed, vegetative filter strips must be established in accordance with the
shoreline setback requirements in Section 410.13-1(7) of this rule.
(a) Land management roads and associated ditches, excavation, and fill must be set back at least:
(i) 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond, river or
freshwater or coastal wetland;
(ii) 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of streams; and
(iii) 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of tributary streams
(b) The minimum 100-foot shoreline setback specified in Section 410.13-1(5)(a)(i) above may be
reduced to no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, and the 50-foot shoreline setback
specified in Section 410.13-1(5)(a)(ii) above may be reduced to no less than 25 feet,
horizontal distance, if, prior to construction, the landowner or the landowner’s designated
agent demonstrates to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists
and that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body,
tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the
installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland. If,
despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such
conditions must be corrected.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 37
(c) On slopes of 10% or greater, the land management road shoreline setback must be increased
by at least 20 feet, horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal distance, for each
5% increase in slope above 10%.
(d) New land management roads are not allowed in a Resource Protection District, unless, prior
to construction, the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent makes a clear
demonstration to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative route exists
outside the shoreland zone, and that the new road must be set back as far as practicable from
the normal high-water line and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
(e) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other water control installations associated
with roads must be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective functioning. Drainage
structures shall deliver a dispersed flow of water into an unscarified filter strip no less than
the width indicated in the shoreline setback requirements in Section 410.13-1(7). Where such
a filter strip is impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid sedimentation of
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include the installation of
sump holes or settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity
occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(f) Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the water control installations required in
Section 410.13-1(5)(e) must continue until use of the road is discontinued and the road is put
to bed by effective installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage structures at
appropriate intervals, constructed to avoid surface water flowing over or under the water bar,
and extending a sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that water does not reenter the
road surface.
(g) Upgrading existing roads. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads must conform
to the provisions of Section 410.13-1. Any nonconforming existing road may continue to
exist and to be maintained, as long as the nonconforming conditions are not made more
nonconforming.
(h) Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads need not conform to the
shoreline setback requirements of Section 410.13-1(5)(a) if, prior to extension or
enlargement, the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent demonstrates to the
Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate
techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions,
sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be
corrected.
(i) Additional measures. In addition to the foregoing minimum requirements, persons
undertaking construction and maintenance of roads and river, stream and tributary stream
crossings must take reasonable measures to avoid sedimentation of surface waters.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 38
(6) Crossings of waterbodies. Crossings of rivers, streams, and tributary streams must allow for fish
passage at all times of the year, must not impound water, and must allow for the maintenance of
normal flows.
(a) Determination of flow. Provided they are properly applied and used for the circumstances for
which they are designed, methods including but not limited to the following are acceptable as
a means of calculating the 10 year and 25 year frequency water flows and thereby
determining water crossing sizes as required in Section 410.13-1: The United States
Geological Survey (USGS) Methods; specifically: Hodgkins, G. 1999. Estimating the
Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in Maine for Selected Recurrence Intervals. U.S.
Geological Survey. Water Resources Investigations Report 99-4008. 45 pp.
(b) Upgrading existing water crossings. Extension or enlargement of presently existing water
crossings must conform to the provisions of Section 410.13-1. Any nonconforming existing
water crossing may continue to exist and be maintained, as long as the nonconforming
conditions are not made more nonconforming; however, any maintenance or repair work
done below the normal high-water line must conform to the provisions of Section 410.13-1.
(c) Other Agency Permits. Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design,
construction, and maintenance of crossings on waterbodies other than a river, stream or
tributary stream may require a permit from the Land Use Regulation Commission, the
Department of Environmental Protection, or the US Army Corps of Engineers.
(d) Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design, construction, and
maintenance of crossings of freshwater wetlands identified by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife as essential wildlife habitat require prior consultation with the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(e) Notice to Bureau of Forestry. Written notice of all water crossing construction maintenance,
alteration and replacement activities in shoreland areas must be given to the Bureau prior to
the commencement of such activities. Such notice must contain all information required by
the Bureau, including:
(i) a map showing the location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(ii) the GPS location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(iii) for any temporary or permanent crossing that requires a permit from state or federal
agencies, a copy of the approved permit or permits; and
(iv) a statement signed by the responsible party that all temporary and permanent
crossings will be constructed, maintained, and closed out in accordance with the
requirements of this Section.
(f) Water crossing standards. All crossings of rivers require a bridge or culvert sized according to
the requirements of Section 410.13-16(g) below. Streams and tributary streams may be
crossed using temporary structures that are not bridges or culverts provided:
(i) concentrated water runoff does not enter the stream or tributary stream;
(ii) sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
(iii) there is no substantial disturbance of the bank, or stream or tributary stream channel;
(iv) fish passage is not impeded; and,
(v) water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 39
Subject to Section 410.13-1(6)(f)(i-v) above, skid trail crossings of streams and tributary
streams when channels of such streams and tributary streams are frozen and snow-covered or
are composed of a hard surface which will not be eroded or otherwise damaged are not
required to use permanent or temporary structures.
(g) Bridge and Culvert Sizing. For crossings of river, stream and tributary stream channels with a
bridge or culvert, the following requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to provide an opening sufficient in
size and structure to accommodate 10-year frequency water flows or with a crosssectional
area at least equal to 2 ½ times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream, or
tributary stream channel.
(ii) Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than provided in Section 410.13-
1(6)(g)(i) if techniques are effectively employed such that in the event of culvert or
bridge failure, the natural course of water flow is maintained and sedimentation of the
water body or tributary stream is avoided. Such crossing structures must be at least as
wide as the channel and placed above the normal high-water line. Techniques may
include, but are not limited to, the effective use of any, a combination of, or all of the
following:
1. use of temporary skidder bridges;
2. removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen ground conditions;
3. using water bars in conjunction with culverts;
4. using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
(iii) Culverts utilized in river, stream and tributary stream crossings must:
1. be installed at or below river, stream or tributary stream bed elevation;
2. be seated on firm ground;
3. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side of the culvert;
4. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot or according to the
culvert manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater; and
5. have a headwall at the inlet end which is adequately stabilized by riprap
or other suitable means to reasonably avoid erosion of material around the
culvert.
(iv) River, stream and tributary stream crossings allowed under Section 410.13-1, but
located in flood hazard areas (i.e. A zones) as identified on a the Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM) for Ellsworth, must be
designed and constructed under the stricter standards contained in the National Flood
Insurance Program (NFIP) for Ellsworth. For example, a water crossing may be
required to pass a 100-year flood event.
(v) Exception. Skid trail crossings of tributary streams within shoreland areas and
wetlands adjacent to such streams may be undertaken in a manner not in conformity
with the requirements of the foregoing subsections provided persons conducting such
activities take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of stream banks, stream
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 40
channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds and wetlands. If, despite such
precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or the
disturbance of stream banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds
and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(h) Skid trail closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting and related activities, or upon the
expiration of a Forest Operations Notification, whichever is earlier, the following
requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts installed for river, stream and tributary stream crossings by skid
trails must either be removed and areas of exposed soil stabilized, or upgraded to
comply with the closeout standards for land management roads in Section 410.13-
1(6)(i) below.
(ii) Water crossing structures that are not bridges or culverts must either be removed
immediately following timber harvesting and related activities, or, if frozen into the
river, stream or tributary stream bed or bank, as soon as practical after snowmelt.
(iii) River, stream and tributary stream channels, banks and approaches to crossings of
water bodies and tributary streams must be immediately stabilized on completion of
harvest, or if the ground is frozen and/or snow-covered, as soon as practical after
snowmelt. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(i) Land management road closeout. Maintenance of the water control features must continue
until use of the road is discontinued and the road is put to bed by taking the following
actions:
(i) Effective installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage structures at
appropriate intervals, constructed to reasonably avoid surface water flowing over or
under the water bar, and extending sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that
water does not reenter the road surface.
(ii) Water crossing structures must be appropriately sized or dismantled and removed in a
manner that reasonably avoids sedimentation of the water body or tributary stream.
(iii) Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be discontinued shall satisfy one of the
following requirements:
1. it shall be designed to provide an opening sufficient in size and structure to
accommodate 25 year frequency water flows;
2. it shall be designed to provide an opening with a cross-sectional area at least 3 ½
times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream or tributary stream channel; or
3. it shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to reasonably avoid sedimentation of
the river, stream or tributary stream.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs,
such conditions must be corrected.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 41
(7) Slope Table
Filter strips, skid trail shoreline setbacks, and land management road shoreline setbacks must be
maintained as specified in Section 410.13-1, but in no case shall be less than shown in the
following table.
Average slope of land between exposed
mineral soil and the shoreline (percent)
Width of strip between exposed mineral
soil and shoreline (feet along surface of the
ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
410.14 Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
(1) Vegetation Cutting in the RP. In a Resource Protection District (RP) abutting a great pond,
there shall be no cutting of vegetation within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal
distance, inland from the normal high-water line, except to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(2) Buffer Strip Preservation. Except in areas as described in Section 410.14(1), above, and
except to allow for the development of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending 100
feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal high-water line of a great pond or a river,
and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland
edge of a wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or
other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the
outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a footpath not to exceed 6 feet in width
as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed provided that a cleared
line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a welldistributed
stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of
this section 410.14(2)(b) a "well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to a great pond or a
river or stream flowing to a great pond, shall be defined as maintaining a rating score of
24 or more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as determined
by the following rating system.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 42
Diameter of Tree at 4 ½ feet Above Points
Ground Level (inches)
2 - < 4 in. 1
4 - < 8 in. 2
8 - < 12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand
of trees" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the
landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii)Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed
except as otherwise allowed by this Article;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to
the minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by this Article;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-
foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 410.14(2)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as
retaining existing vegetation under 3 feet in height and other ground cover and retaining
at least 5 saplings less than 2 inches in diameter at 4½ feet above ground level for each
25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not exist, no woody stems less than
2 inches in diameter can be removed until 5 saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees 4
inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level may be removed in
any 10-year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under 3 feet in
height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall not be
cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses as
described in Section 410.14 paragraphs (2) and (2)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged,
diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings
shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present.
Section 410.14(2) does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to
public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area necessary.
(3) Selective Cutting. At distances greater than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from a great pond or
a river, and 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any other water
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 43
body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any lot, in
any 10-year period, selective cutting of not more than 40% of the volume of trees 4 inches or
more in diameter, measured 4½ feet above ground level. Tree removal in conjunction with
the development of permitted uses shall be included in the 40% calculation. For the purposes
of these standards volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and
accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate,
25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or 10,000 square feet, whichever is greater,
including land previously cleared. This provision shall not apply to the General Development
Districts.
(4) Cleared Openings. Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but
shall not be enlarged, except as allowed by this Article.
(5) Reverted Openings. Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily
shrubs, trees, or other woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of Section
410.14.
410.15 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Acceptable measures shall be those specified in the Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best
Management Practices Manual (latest revision) by the DEP Bureau of Land and Water Quality
and the following:
A. Applicability. All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar
activities which result in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also
require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to
the permitting authority for approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
(i) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(ii) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
(iii) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or riprap.
B. Design Provisions. In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be
designed to fit with the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts
and fills may be required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be
followed as closely as possible.
C. All Construction Phases. Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all
aspects of the proposed project involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during
all stages of the activity. The amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be
minimized to reduce the potential for erosion.
D. Stabilization. Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within
one (1) week from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and
mulch, or other effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within 9
months of the initial date of exposure. In addition:
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 44
(i) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) 30-pound bale per 300
square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
(ii) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be
required to maintain the mulch cover.
(iii) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the
water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
E. Drainageways. Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected
from erosion from water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and
constructed in order to carry water from a 25-year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized
with vegetation or lined with riprap.
410.16 Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can
be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include
Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified
Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation
of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
410.17 Water Quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the
State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
410.18 Archaeological Site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days
prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider
comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
410.19 Phosphorus Control. Refer to City of Ellsworth Code of Ordinance, Chapter 56, Unified
Development Ordinance, Article 10. Stormwater Management Design and Construction
Standards.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 45
411 Shoreland Zoning Definitions.
Accessway - Any public or private street, right-of way, or driveway used to enter or leave a public or private
street or adjacent land using an on-road vehicle. All streets are considered accessways but not all accessways are
considered streets. Within the Shoreland Zone, an accessway also includes a route or track consisting of a bed of
exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage
of motorized vehicles, excluding a residential driveway less than 500 feet in length.
Accessory Use or Structure - A subordinate use or structure customarily incidental to and located on the same
lot as the principal use or structure, such as a garage, workshop, or the like. Accessory uses, in the aggregate, shall
not subordinate the principal use or structure on a lot.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or
denial of a permit or variance under this Article; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit or
variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized injury
as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agricultural, Activity - Farming, including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of best management
practices, seeding, cultivating, or harvesting for the production of food and fiber products (except timber
harvesting); grazing or raising of livestock (except in feedlot); aquaculture; sod productions; orchards.
Agricultural, Gardening – Consists of agricultural activities involving tillage of soil of 40,000 square
feet or less.
Agricultural, Feedlot - A lot, structure, building, or confined area used intensively for the keeping of
farm animals, including but not limited to, of bovine, equine, swine, ovine, or sheep species in close
quarter for the purpose of fattening for market or slaughter and where animal waste may accumulate. Does
not include a barn or similar structure.
Agricultural Processing, Major – Agricultural activities involving a variety of operations on crops or
livestock which may generate dust, noise, odors, pollutants, or visual impacts that could adversely affect
adjacent properties. These uses include but are not limited to slaughterhouse, mills, refineries, canneries,
and milk processing plants.
Agriculture Processing, Minor - Agricultural activities not regulated as major agricultural processing
which involve a variety of operations on crops after harvest to prepare them for market, or further
processing and packaging at a distance from the agricultural area. Included activities are cleaning,
milling, pulping, drying, roasting, storing, packing, selling and other similar activities.
Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and inclusive of
bark.
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more
than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft, and
which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Bureau – State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry
Campground - A business, public or private establishment operated as a recreational site for tents,
camper, trailer, and travel trailer or other forms of temporary living shelter that can accommodate two or
more parties.
Campsite, Individual private – Private land for exclusive personal use not associated with a
campground, but which is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed 10
individuals and which involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad,
parking area, fire place, or tent platform.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Commercial use - the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation," defined
below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling of
goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
Conservation Plan - a customized document that outlines the use and best management practices of
the natural resources on public or private lands. Typically, the plan will include land use maps, soil
information, inventory of resources, engineering notes, and other supporting information.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 46
Cross-sectional area – the cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel is determined
by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average stream or tributary stream
channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is the straight line distance from the normal
high-water line on one side of the channel to the normal high-water line on the opposite side of the
channel. The average stream or tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical distances
from a straight line between the normal high-water lines of the stream or tributary stream channel to the
bottom of the channel.
DBH – the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level
Development - Uses including but not limited to the construction of a new building or other structures on a lot
or below the shoreline or in a wetland, the relocation of an existing building on another lot, or the use of open land
for a new use; any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to parking,
temporary uses, clearing of land or vegetation, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling
operations; it includes a building, a development site under the same ownership, a consolidated development, and
phased development.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness; and
also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial handicap as
determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as
any other health or sensory impairment which requires special education, vocational rehabilitation or
related services.
Disruption of shoreline integrity - the alteration of the physical shape, properties, or condition of a
shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A shoreline where shoreline integrity
has been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil, an abnormal channel or
shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing waters, a profile and character altered from natural
conditions.
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such as
protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to rescue
human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential Services, Distribution - Small-scale facilities serving a local area, including power lines,
water and sewer lines, storm drainage facilities, transformers, pump stations and hydrants, switching
boxes, and other buildings normally, but not always, found in a street right-of-way to serve adjacent
properties.
Essential services, Facilities - A building or other structure used or intended to be used by public or
private utilities, including but not limited to gas tank and other storage facilities; water or sewer storage
facilities; compost facility; and electrical transmission and distributions substations.
Essential Services, Transmission - Large-scale facilities serving the entire city or region such as
power transmission lines, natural gas transmission lines, water storage tanks and reservoirs, major water
transmission lines or sewer collectors and interceptors, solid waste disposal or processing facilities,
excluding landfill, sewage or wastewater treatment plants, and generating facilities.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use of more
floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single non-profit housekeeping unit
whether or not related to each other by birth, marriage or adoption, but not to consist of more than five (5)
unrelated persons.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation by
more than one foot in height.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 47
Floor area - the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls,
plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
Forest management activities - timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning,
regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting and
the construction, creation or maintenance of accessways and land management roads.
Forest Stand - a contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution, composition,
and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a distinguishable unit.
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and
post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block, brick
or similar material.
Frontage, Shore - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland waters and that cannot be
located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to dams, commercial and
recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat storage buildings; finfish and
shellfish processing; fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities; waterfront dock and
port facilities; shipyards and boat building facilities; marinas; navigation aids; basins and channels;
retaining walls; industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of
cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland site; and uses that
primarily provide general public access to coastal or inland waters.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten
acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess of
30 acres. For the purposes of this Article, Ellsworth’s Great Ponds are: Branch Lake, Graham Lake,
Green Lake, Jesse Bog, Little Duck Pond, Little Rocky Pond, Lower Patten Pond, Upper Patten Pond,
Wormwood Pond, and Leonard Lake.
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor.
Harvest Area - the area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the cutting of trees,
skidding, yarding, and associated accessways and land management roads construction take place. The
area affected by a harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these activities, excepting
unharvested areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest.
Height of a structure - the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction) grade at
the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys, steeples,
antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitat - High and moderate value waterfowl
and wading bird habitats are significant wildlife habitats. Waterfowl are members of the family Anatidae
including but not limited to brant, wild ducks, geese, and swans. Wading birds include but are not limited
to herons, glossy ibis, bitterns, rails, coots, common moorhens, and sandhill cranes. High and moderate
value waterfowl and wading bird habitats are depicted on a GIS data layer maintained by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (IF&W) and available from either IF&W or the Maine
Department of Environmental Protection. The IF&W rating procedure and list of waterfowl and wading
bird species was created December 22, 1993, updated September 1, 2005, and is available at IF&W
offices.
Home occupation - an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a residential
structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons other than
family members residing in the home.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 48
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which causes further
deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited to,
reduction in shoreline setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or increase in height of a structure.
Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the dimensional standard or which cause no
further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the existing structure shall not be considered to
increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase in nonconformity with the shoreline setback
requirement if the expansion extends no further into the required shoreline setback area than does any
portion of the existing nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided
that the expansion extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest
portion of the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this
allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Industrial - The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods,
or the extraction of minerals.
Institutional – a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or City-owned or -operated building, structure or land used for public purposes.
Land Management Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, or
other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and used
primarily for timber harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not including
skid trails or skid roads.
Licensed Forester - a forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter 76.
Lot area - The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath accessways serving more
than two lots.
Lot, minimum width, shoreland - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only
two lot lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be side lot lines.
Lot Coverage, Shoreland - The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other nonvegetated
surfaces, within the shoreland zone for the lot or for a portion thereof that is located within the
shoreland zone, including land area previously developed.
Marina - A use of waterfront land involved in the operation of a marina including structures and activities
normally integral to the operation of a marina, such as servicing, fueling, pumping-out, chartering, launching, and
dry-storage and boating equipment.
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing
market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the property
and with prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include reasonable
measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction - any operation within any 12 month period which removes more than100 cubic
yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its natural location
and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming condition – non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it
was in lawful existence at the time this Article or subsequent amendment took effect.
Non-conforming lot - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Article, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is located.
Non-conforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Article or subsequent amendments took effect.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 49
Non-conforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not
allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Article or subsequent amendments took effect.
Normal high-water line (non-tidal waters) - that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and which
distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas contiguous with
rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils and that are at the
same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during the period of normal highwater
are considered part of the river or great pond.
Parking Lot: An open area other than an accessway used for the parking of two or more vehicles,
excluding an area associated with a residential driveway serving no more than two residential dwelling
units.
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or below the normal
high-water line or within a wetland. Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less
than seven (7) months in any period of 12 consecutive months. Permanent: Structures which remain in
or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any period of 12 consecutive months.
Principal structure - a building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the
same premises.
Processing, fish wholesale - The loading, unloading, packing, processing, and packaging of edible
fish and other seafood products but not including processing of fish wastes or fish by-products.
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and
accessways, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.
Recent floodplain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:Fryeburg, Hadley, Limerick, Lovewell, Medomak, Ondawa, Alluvia, Cornish,
Charles, Podunk, Rumney, Saco, Suncook, Sunday, and Winooski.
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time activities,
and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper,
travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a
structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with the State Division
of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace:
1) an existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of
design flow or use of the structure, or
2) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing cooking,
sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that contain cooking,
sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational vehicles are not residential
dwelling units.
Residual basal area - the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Residual Stand - a stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting and related
activities
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 50
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control and
soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit vertical or
less.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands. For the purposes of
this Article, Ellsworth’s only River is the Union River from the Graham Lake dam to Leonard Lake. The
Union River below the Leonard Lake dam is a tidal estuary considered a coastal wetland.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water
body provided that:1. in the case of electric service: a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of
utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting service or upon an
accessway right-of-way; and b. the total length of the extension is less than 1,000 feet. 2. in the case of
telephone service: a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone
wires to existing utility poles, or b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or
placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length.
Setback, shoreline - the horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, accessway, parking lot or
other regulated object or area.
Setback from a property line- The horizontal distance from a side or rear property line to the nearest part of a
structure or other regulated object or area.
Setback from the edge of a right-of-way- The horizontal distance from a right of way to the nearest part of a
structure or other regulated object or area
Shoreland zone - the land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a coastal
wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet of the upland edge of a freshwater
wetland; or within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, as defined,
and/or streams mapped on the Official Land Use Map.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Skid Road or Skid Trail - a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or drag
forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal
excavation.
Slash - the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Special Use - A governmental or public service use providing public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, or the general welfare for the general benefit of the citizens funded in whole or in part by
the City of Ellsworth or a quasi-municipal organization, including by way of illustration, municipal
buildings, schools, public parks and recreational facilities, cemetery, public art, museum, interpretation
center, public parking, fire stations, ambulance services, highway garage, distribution and transmission of
essential services ; essential facilities, hospital, Federal Aviation Administration –designated commercial
service airport, heliport.
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2)
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute
series topographic map, or a perennial or intermittent stream shown as such on the most recent edition of
a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map and/or mapped on the Official Land
Use Map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland
within the shoreland area.
Structure - Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property
of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground. The
term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and patios. Only structures
covering more than 10 square feet must comply with the requirements of zoning districts, exclusive of
shoreland zoning districts, where all structures, regardless of size, must comply with the shoreland zoning
requirements.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 51
The following are not considered structures: fences, poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally
associated with service drops as well as guying and guy anchors, a retractable awning or shade used
solely to shade a door or window.
The following are not considered structures outside of shoreland zoning districts: parking lots, driveways,
an awning or tent for a temporary event and backyard tents used for sleeping.
Substantial start - completion of 30 percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage
of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – any system designed to dispose of waste or waste water on or
beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields; grandfathered
cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture, mechanism, or apparatus used
for those purposes; does not include any discharge system licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. section 414, any
surface waste water disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment
system.
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Tidal waters – all waters affected by tidal action during the highest annual tide.
Timber harvesting - the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less than
two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or
removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 410.14, Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for
Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Timber harvesting and related activities - timber harvesting, the construction and maintenance of
accessways and land management roads used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities
conducted to facilitate timber harvesting.
Tributary stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water,
which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of topsoil,
containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which is connected
hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies forming
because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been removed by
human activity. This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Article,
and only applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving
water body or wetland.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a coastal
wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant vegetation and/or the
highest annual tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For purposes of a freshwater
wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration sufficient to support
wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is
dominated by woody stems that are 6 meters (approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and
under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4½ feet above ground level.
Velocity zone - an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior
walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river or stream.
Water crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects include
but may not be limited to accessways, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables as well
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 4 Shoreland Zoning rev. 11/19/2012
P a g e | 52
as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber harvesting
equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Wetland, forested - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall
(approximately 20 feet) or taller.
Wetland, freshwater - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which are:
1) Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a surface water
body, excluding any river, stream, such that in a natural state, the combined surface area is in excess of
10 acres; and
2) Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to
support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or
inclusions of land that do not conform to the criteria of this definition
Wetland, Coastal - all tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant of salt
water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog, beach, flat or
other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest tide level for the year in which
an activity is proposed as identified in tide tables published by the National Ocean Service. Coastal
wetlands may include portions of coastal sand dunes.
Windfirm - the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist windthrow, wind rocking,
and major breakage.
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 5
Nonconforming Uses
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 5 Nonconforming Uses
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 5 NON-CONFORMING USES
501 PURPOSE.
The purpose of this Article is to protect the rights of property owners who have lawfully
established a use prior to the adoption of this ordinance or prior to any amendment to this
ordinance that otherwise renders such use unlawful.
502 GENERALLY
502.1 Applicability. Applies to any nonconformity with the exception of non
conformity in the Shoreland Zones which are addressed in Article 4 Shoreland
Zoning section 506 Nonconformance in the Shoreland Zone. There are three
categories of nonconformities, as defined in Table 502.1 Nonconformities.
Table 502.1 Nonconformities
Situation Definition
Nonconforming Uses A use that was lawfully established but that no longer complies with the use regulations applicable to the
zoning district in which the property is located.
Nonconforming Structure A structure that was lawfully erected but that no longer complies with all the regulations applicable to the
zoning district in which the structure is located.
Nonconforming Lot A lot that fails to meet the requirements for area, height, yards, buffer, or other bulk standards and regulations,
generally applicable in the zoning district because of a change in the applicable zoning district regulations or a
government action.
502.2 Continuation. On or after the effective date of the adoption of the Unified
Development Ordinance, a nonconformity that was lawfully operated, established,
or commenced in accordance with the provisions of all ordinances, statutes, or
regulations in effect at that time may continue subject to this Article.
502.3 Abandonment. If a nonconforming use or site is abandoned for 24 months, any
future use of such premise shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
Article. Abandonment of a nonconforming use or site shall terminate the right to
continue the nonconformity.
502.4 Restoration of Unsafe Property. Nothing in this Article or in this ordinance
shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any
nonconforming building or nonconforming structure declared unsafe by the Code
Enforcement Officer or by the Fire Chief.
502.5 Construction Underway. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in
the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any building, structure, or part
thereof upon which lawfully permitted construction has been initiated at the time
of the adoption of this ordinance.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 5 Nonconforming Uses
3 | P a g e
503 NONCONFORMING USES
503.1 Applicability. This section applies to the continuation, enlargement, or expansion
of a nonconforming use.
503.2 Continuance. The use of any nonconforming structure may be continued. Such
use may be extended throughout the structure, provided that no structural
alterations or additions to the structure, except those made in conformance with
the ordinance.
503.3 Changes to Conforming Uses. Any nonconforming use may be changed to a use
conforming with this ordinance as established for the zoning district in which the
nonconforming use is located, provided, however, that a nonconforming use so
changed shall not in the future be changed back to a nonconforming use.
503.4 Changes to other Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use may be changed
to another nonconforming use after determination by the Planning Board that the
new nonconforming use is more consistent with the spirit of the Unified
Development Ordinance and the neighborhood.
503.5 Expansion of Nonconforming Uses. The Planning Board may allow the
expansion of a nonconforming use to proceed if the use was made nonconforming
by the adoption of Article 3 Zoning Districts or if the use has been operating for at
least 10 years prior to the adoption of Article 3 Zoning Districts. The expansion of
a nonconforming use shall be on land where the nonconforming use is taking
place or on a piece of land that is contiguous to the land where the nonconforming
use is taking place. The Planning Board shall also determine that the expansion of
the nonconforming use will not be contrary to the public interest; will not
substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming
property in the same zoning districts; and will not adversely affect the public
health, safety, and welfare of the community.
503.6 Limitations. Sections 503.3, 503.4 and 503.5 shall conform to all applicable
standards and regulations established in this ordinance including, but not limited
to, Article 6 Site Development Review.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 5 Nonconforming Uses
4 | P a g e
504 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
504.1 Applicability. No nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or extended.
504.2 Enlargement. A nonconforming structure in which only permitted uses are
operated may be enlarged or extended if the enlargement or extension can be
made in compliance with all of the provisions of this ordinance established in
Article 3 Zoning Districts for structures in the zoning district in which the
nonconforming structure is located. Such enlargement shall also comply with all
other applicable Ellsworth ordinances including, but not limited, to Article 6 Site
Development Review.
504.3 Termination of Nonconforming Structures.
A. Damage to Structures. The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming
structure shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the nonconforming
structure is damaged in any manner and from any cause whatsoever, and the
cost of repairing such damage exceeds 65% of the replacement costs of such
structure on the date of such damage with the exception listed below:
i. Nonconforming structures located within the Ellsworth Urban Core may
be rebuilt or repaired regardless of the extent of damage, so long as there
is no increase in nonconformity.
B. Determination of Replacement Cost. In determining the replacement cost of
any nonconforming structure, the cost of land or any factors other than the
replacement cost of the nonconforming structure itself shall not be included.
505 NONCONFORMING LOTS
505.1 Applicability. Applies to the continuation, enlargement or expansion of a
nonconforming lot.
505.2 Generally. A permitted allowed use may be erected on any single lot of record at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. Such lot must be in
separate ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet
the requirements applicable in the zoning district for area or width or both,
provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width
or both of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the zoning district in which
such lot is located (Article 3 Zoning Districts). And the lot is provided with
adequate sewage disposal system. A variance of such yard requirements for any
requirements other than yard area or width shall be obtained only by permission
of the Board of Appeals.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 5 Nonconforming Uses
5 | P a g e
505.3 Contiguous Lots. If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in single or joint
ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this
ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional
requirements of this ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of
the lots are vacant or contain no principal structure, the lots shall be combined to
the extent necessary to meet the dimensional requirements of Article 3 Zoning
Districts unless the lot is served by a public sewer or the lot can accommodate a
subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules and contains at least 100 feet of frontage
and at least 20,000 square feet of lot area.
505.4 Lots with Contiguous Frontage. If two or more lots or combinations of lots and
portions of lots with continuous frontage are in single ownership of record at the
time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do
not meet the requirements for lot width and areas established by this ordinance
(Article 3 Zoning Districts), the lands involved shall be considered to be an
undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel
shall be used which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by
the ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel be made which leaves
remaining any lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this
ordinance. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply where only two lots
with continuous frontage are in single ownership at the time of the adoption or
amendments of these requirements, provided that: A) There is a principal use
structure on one of the lots; and B) Each lot has a minimum of 100 feet of
frontage and 20,000 square feet in area.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6
Site Development Review
Amended August 20, 2012
Amended July 15, 2013
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
2 | P a g e
Informational Meeting. Applicants are
encouraged to schedule an optional,
informal meeting with the City
Planning staff and/or with the
Technical Review Team to discuss their
plans and gain an understanding of the
review procedures, requirements and
standards. Call 207-669-6608
ARTICLE 6 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW
601 PURPOSE.
The purpose of site development plan review is to provide an
adequate level of review for projects of greater scope and
magnitude than limited scope projects.
601.1 Prevent undue adverse impact upon:
A. The natural and man-made environment;
B. The present and future facilities and services of the City;
C. The abutters, the neighborhood, and the community.
601.2 Sustain the comfort, health, and contentment of residents.
602 GENERALLY
602.1 Applications. Applications for site development plan review shall include a
completed application form provided by the Administrator. The filled out
application form, required fees, and the required plans and other related
information shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer or to the City
Planner, as applicable. The City Planner shall forward the application to the
Planning Board and place the application on the Planning Board agenda per
Article 2 Approval and Permitting section 207 Procedures for Major Site
Development Plan and Subdivision Review.
602.2 Processing. No application for site development plan review shall be considered
complete, and the Administrator and/or the City Planner shall not process any
application for site development plan approval, unless all the information required
is included. The City Administrator and/or the City Planner shall not delay the
processing of any application for site development plan approval if it contains the
required information.
602.3 Submittal to Administrator. The site development plan information shall be
presented in a narrative form and plan formats. All written materials shall be
dated and contained in a bound report.
602.4 Certifications. Where applicant, professional or Planning Board certification
and/or signatures are required, the signature lines shall be provided in the lower
right-hand corner of the plans or other required documents.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
3 | P a g e
602.5 Approved Plan Requirements. The applicant shall submit two approved
durable, permanent, transparent material (mylar) final site development plans and
one paper copy for each approved site development plan. These plans shall be
signed by the reviewing authority. A digital plan shall also be submitted. Unlike
the hard-copy plan, which represents a legal document, the digital plan has no
legal significance.
602.6 Administrator Site Visit. The Administrator may schedule a site visit at any time
in the review process. Prior to the site visit and upon request of the administrator,
the applicant shall place “flagging” at the centerline of any proposed streets, at the
approximate intersections of the street center and lot corners, as well as at the
location of other important proposed structures and features as may be requested
by the Administrator.
602.7 Number of Copies Needed for Plan Review. In general, the number of copies
shall be provided as stipulated below. The City Planner and the Administrator
reserve the right to request a greater or lesser number of copies as may be needed.
A. Code Enforcement Officer. Submission materials shall include: one copy of
the application form, one copy of required submittal information, one copy of
the responses demonstrating compliance with the criteria and performance
standards, and two sets of all final plans and drawings. Digital copies of all
approved material shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Planning Board. Thirteen hard copies of all material (including but not
limited to application form, required submittal information, responses
showing compliance with the criteria and performance standards, and plans
and drawings) shall be provided to the City Planner. Digital copies of all
approved material shall be provided to the City Planner. Only three hard
copies of the following are needed: stormwater calculations graphs, and state
and federal permit applications and approvals.
602.8 Scale. Accurate scale plan of the parcel or drawings shall be provided at a scale
sufficient to allow review of the information and make determination of
consistency with the regulations and standards, but in no case shall the scale be
more than 100 feet to the inch for that portion of the tract of land being proposed
for development.
602.9 Waivers
A. Submission Requirements. The Administrator may modify or waive any of
the submission requirements when it determines that because of the size of the
project or circumstances of the site such requirements would not be applicable
and that such modification or waiver would not adversely affect the abutting
landowners or the general health, safety, and welfare of the City.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
4 | P a g e
B. Criteria and Performance Standards. Where the Administrator makes
written findings of fact that due to special circumstances of a particular
project, the compliance with one or more criteria or performance standards of
this Article and other pertaining articles is not requisite to provide for the
public health, safety or welfare, or is non applicable, the Administrator may
waive the criteria or performance standard, subject to appropriate conditions
provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this ordinance or other City ordinances, and further provided the
criteria or performance standards of this ordinance have been or will be met
by the proposed project.
C. Conditions and Waivers to be shown on Final Plan. When granting waivers
per the above sections A and B, the Administrator shall set conditions as
needed so the purposes of these regulations are met. Granted waivers and
imposed conditions, as well as the date these actions were taken shall be
indicated on the signed final site development plan.
602.10 Subsequent Applications. If a site development plan is denied by the
Administrator, a new site plan proposing the same development for the same
property shall not be filed within six months after a final decision.
602.11 Rights Not Vested/Rights Vested.
A. Not Vested – Sketch Plan. The submittal of material to the City Planner or to
the Administrator or review by the Administrator of the Sketch Plan shall not
be considered the initiation of the review process for the purpose of bringing
the plan under the protection of Title 1, M.R.S.A section 302.
B. Vested – Preliminary Plan and Final Plan. The submittal of material to the
City Planner or the Administrator or review by the Administrator of the
Preliminary Plan and/or the Final Plan shall be considered the initiation of the
review process for the purpose of bringing the plan under the protection of
Title 1, M.R.S.A section 302.
602.12 Attendance at Meetings. The developer or the developer’s duly authorized
representative shall attend the meeting of the Planning Board to discuss the
application.
602.13 Planning Board Review and Action Procedure.
A. Mandatory Preliminary Plan and Final Plan Meetings. It is mandatory for
any application to come before the Planning Board at least twice; once for a
preliminary plan review and a second time for a final plan review. Sketch plan
reviews do not count toward the mandatory meeting requirements.
B. Application Deadline. The developer shall submit an application for review
and/or approval by the Planning Board at least 20 days prior to a scheduled
meeting of the Planning Board per Article 2 Approval and Permitting
Procedures section 207.2 Application Deadline.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
5 | P a g e
C. Notice to Abutters. Upon receipt of any application for major use site
development plan review, the City Planner shall notify in writing all land
owners of abutting property that an application for development has been
submitted per Article 2 Approval and Permitting Procedures section 207.8
Notice to Abutters and that a public hearing will be held on the subject
application at the Planning Board meeting. Land owners shall be considered to
be those against whom property taxes are assessed. Failure of any abutting
landowner to receive a notice of public hearing shall not necessitate another
hearing or invalidate any action of the Planning Board.
D. Public Hearing. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing at all phases
of application review to include sketch plan, preliminary plan, and final plan.
Notice of said hearing shall be mailed to abutting landowners and published in
a local newspaper at least two times, the date of the first publication to be at
least seven days prior to the hearing. A notice of said hearing shall be mailed
by the City Planner to each landowner abutting the proposed development.
The purpose of the public hearing shall be to receive input from the general
public relative to the Site Plan.
E. Final Decision. Within 30 days after the latest of (1) the second public
hearing per above section D Public Hearing, or (2) the date on which the
applicant furnished all information required by the Planning Board, the
Planning Board shall render its decision in writing and said decision shall
include findings of fact and reasons in support of the decision. In granting an
approval, the Planning Board may impose such restrictions and conditions, as
it deems necessary to insure compliance with the standards set forth in this
ordinance, which govern each site development plan.
603 CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS
Projects subject to site development plan review shall be divided into two classes: minor
use site development plan and major use site development plan. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall classify each project. The Code Enforcement Officer, after determination
that a minor use site development plan project may have significant impact to the
physical, social, economy, or the environment because of stormwater, traffic, erosion,
dust, phosphorus loading, sediments or other factors such as but not limited to the need
for public hearings, or that there is an attempt or intent to circumvent major use site
development plan review may classify the project as a major use site development plan
project. The Code Enforcement Officer may also classify a minor use site development
plan as a major use site development plan when the use is categorized as a high pollutant
land uses impacts for the same reasons as above described. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall classify as a major use site development all projects involving the
consumption, generation, or handling of hazardous wastes as defined in Title 38, MRSA,
Section 1303, radioactive wastes, as defined in Title 38, MRSA, Section 1451.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
6 | P a g e
604 APPLICABILITY
604.1 Minor Use Site Development Plan. Level of review by the Code Enforcement Officer in
conformity with the criteria and performance standards of this Article for non-residential
projects involving:
A. The new construction and/or expansion of gross non-residential floor area not to
exceed 5,000 square feet in any five year period;
B. The creation of impervious area between 10,000 square feet and 40,000 square feet
of gross non-residential area;
C. A change of use within an existing building or structure of less than 20,000 square
feet;
D. A project not requiring a Maine Department of Transportation Traffic Movement
Permit or a modification or change to an existing Maine Department of
Transportation Traffic Movement Permit;
E. Soil disturbance, extraction industries, commercial earth moving and mining
activities between 20,000 square feet and 40,000 square feet; and
F. All projects located within the Commerce Park zoning district regardless of size.
604.2 Major Use Site Development Plan. Level of review conducted by the Planning Board in
conformity with the criteria and performance standards of this Article for non-residential
projects except as noted below involving:
A. The new construction and/or expansion of gross non-residential floor area greater
than 5,000 square feet in any five year period;
B. The creation of impervious area greater than 40,000 square feet of gross nonresidential
area;
C. A change of use within an existing building or structure of greater than 20,000 square
feet;
D. A Project requiring a Maine Department of Transportation Traffic Movement Permit
or a modification or change to an existing Maine Department of Transportation
Traffic Movement Permit;
E. Subdivision into residential units of a new or existing structure. Such subdivision
shall be recorded in the Registry of Deeds per Article 2 Approval and Permitting
Procedures section 207.10.B. Condominiums need also to be reviewed under the
Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance.
F. Soil disturbance, extraction industries, commercial earth moving and mining
activities between greater than 40,000 square feet.
G. The consumption, generation, or handling of hazardous wastes as defined in Title 38,
MRSA, Section 1303, radioactive wastes, as defined in Title 38, MRSA, Section
1451.
604.3 Site Development Plan Review - Not Applicable. The following projects are to be
reviewed as Limited Scope Project by the Code enforcement Officer.
A. Construction of detached single-family dwellings and duplexes.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
7 | P a g e
B. Customary outbuildings for the use of the residents thereof.
C. Construction of non-commercial barns, stables, and other agriculture- and forestry
related buildings.
D. All non-structural uses of land for agricultural or forestry purposes.
605 ADMINISTRATION OF SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW
605.1 Plan Approval and Permitting Procedures. Refer to Article 2.
605.2 Submissions and Standards. Minor Use Site Development Plan and Major Use Site
Development Plan require the submission of the same materials and shall be held to the
same performance standards.
605.3 Advisory Application Review – Sketch Plan Meeting. The Sketch Plan review meeting
is a low cost way for the applicant to receive feedback from the Administrator and hear
comments from the public without the need to hire a design professional. It provides
guidance to the developer on the project’s feasibility. It helps acquaint the developer, the
public, and the Administrator with the proposed project. The Sketch Plan review is not a
decision-oriented meeting.
The developer shall provide a location map showing the project within the City of
Ellsworth and a sketch plan (free hand sketch is acceptable) on a map depicting basic
project information:
A. The names and addresses of the owner of record and the applicant.
B. The names and addresses of all consultants working on the project.
C. Right, title, or interest in the property. A copy of the deed to the property, option to
purchase the property or other documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in
the property on the part of the applicant.
D. Proportionate scale plan of the parcel showing at a minimum:
i. The name of the development, north arrow, date, and bar scale;
ii. The boundaries of the parcel;
iii. Tax map and lot numbers;
iv. Size of the property;
v. Existing restrictions, easements, or conditions on the site;
vi. Description of proposed drinking water and sewage disposal methods.
vii. Location, orientation, height, square footage, dimensions of the existing and
proposed structures on the property;
viii. Proposed use of each structure;
ix. Existing and proposed impervious surface area; and
x. Existing and proposed gross floor area.
605.4 Decisive Application Reviews - Preliminary and Final Plan Meetings
A. Purpose. The Preliminary and Final Plan meetings are outcome-based. These
meetings result in a yes/no decision for completeness and an approval or denial
decision based on compliance with the performance standards, respectively.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
8 | P a g e
B. Preliminary Plan Meeting. The Administrator shall review the submission material
– site information and related analysis provided by the developer to determine if the
information provides a clear understanding of the site, as well as the opportunities and
constraints they create for the use and development of the subject site. The
Administrator shall advise the applicant, in writing, of needed additional information
and analysis. The intent of the Preliminary Plan Meeting is for the Administrator to
make a determination of completeness of material submission, as well as identify
issues and constraints that must be addressed in the Final Plan meeting. The applicant
will provide the information as listed below in section 606 Submission Materials –
Preliminary Plans.
C. Final Plan Meeting. The Administrator shall evaluate if the project meets the criteria
and performance standards - finding of facts and conclusion of law. These are either
written or orally read into the record to explain the rationale for the final decision.
The Administrator has the authority to evaluate impacts, hire experts, and impose
conditions as long as it is to ensure compliance with a criteria and a performance
standard. The applicant will provide information as listed below in section 607
Standards and Criteria Governing Site Development Plan Review – Final Plan
Meeting.
606 SUBMISSION MATERIALS – PRELIMINARY PLAN MEETING
606.1 Application Form. A completed and signed City of Ellsworth Land Development
Application.
606.2 Right, Title or Interest. A copy of the deed to the property, option to purchase the
property or other documentation to demonstrate right, title or interest in the property on
the part of the applicant.
606.3 Schedule of construction. Anticipated beginning and completion dates.
606.4 Cost. Statement of overall project cost. Statement of cost for all work to take place within
a public or private right-of-way and evidence of financial capacity to complete it. This
evidence should be in the form of a letter from a bank or other source of financing
indicating the name of the project, amount of financing proposed, and interest in
financing the project.
606.5 Base Plan. In general, the Base Plan information shall be shown on all other plans as the
base layer and shall include.
A. The name of the development.
B. The names and addresses of the owner of record and of the developer.
C. The name, address and registration number and seal of the designers (land surveyor,
architect, engineer and/or similar professional who prepared the plan).
D. True and magnetic north arrows, date and bar scale.
E. Vicinity map inset.
F. The boundaries of the parcel and size.
G. The bearings and distances of all property lines of the property to be developed and
the source of this information.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
9 | P a g e
H. All monuments erected and concerns established in the field. The material of which
the monuments, corners or other points are made shall be noted by legend.
I. Boundaries of all contiguous property under the control of the owner or applicant
regardless of whether all or part is being developed at this time.
J. The topography of the site at an appropriate contour interval of 2-foot to 5-foot
depending on the nature of the uses and character of the site.
K. Major natural features of the site including wetlands, streams, ponds, floodplains,
groundwater aquifers, significant wildlife habitats or other important natural features.
L. Location of burial grounds, right-of-ways, and other major features.
M. Areas with sustained slopes greater than 25% covering more than one acre of land.
N. The tax map and lot number of the parcel(s).
O. The location of all zoning district boundary (ies) including shoreland zones, flood
hazard areas, and the 100-year flood elevation.
P. The location of dimensional requirements required by this ordinance including but
not limited to building setbacks.
Q. Depiction of existing deed restrictions, conditions, or easements on the site.
R. In tabular form, the zoning classification(s) of the property and dimensional
requirements.
606.6 Existing and Proposed Site Conditions Plan(s). The Existing and Proposed Site
Conditions should be presented on one plan and include a signature block and may be
supplemented by a stand-alone individual Existing Conditions Plan and a Proposed
Conditions Plan if necessary.
606.7 Existing Site Conditions
A. Location and size of any existing sewer infrastructure within 500 feet and water
mains within 200 feet of the project property line or remainder of land.
B. Location and size of well and septic system on the property and located within 100
feet of the development (on and off property).
C. Location and size of culverts and drains on the property and of any that will serve the
development from abutting streets or land.
D. Location, names, and present widths of existing streets and rights-of-ways within or
adjacent to the proposed development. The name, location and dimensions of existing
streets, right-of-ways, driveways, parking and loading areas and walkways within or
adjacent to the proposed development.
E. Location of intersecting roads or driveways within 200 feet of the site.
F. The location of open drainage courses, wetlands, stands of trees, and other important
natural features.
G. The direction of existing surface water drainage across the site.
H. The location, front view and dimensions of existing signs.
I. Dimension, height, location and orientation of existing structures on the property and
the use.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
10 | P a g e
J. Copy of maintenance agreements for any privately owned stormwater management
facilities, parks or open space, and right-of-way.
K. Tabulation of the number of acres in the existing development including square
footage of all buildings and structures; square footage of all paved or otherwise hardsurfaces
streets, parking facilities, including curb and gutters, walks, loading areas
and asphalt or concrete aprons for solid waste containers, or outdoor mechanical
equipment.
L. Copy of the portion of the Hancock County Soil Survey covering the project. When
the medium intensity soil survey shows soils which are unsuitable for the uses
proposed, the Administrator may require the submittal of a high intensity soil survey
or a report by a registered soil scientist or registered professional engineer
experienced in geotechnics, indicating the sustainability of soil conditions for those
uses.
M. The location and methods of disposing for land clearing and construction debris.
N. Emergency vehicle access on the property to and/or around the building.
606.8 Proposed Site Conditions.
A. General. The location, dimensions, and ground floor elevations of all proposed
buildings on the site; the location and dimensions of proposed right-of-ways,
driveways, and walkways; the dimension and location of the area to be used for snow
storage.
B. Lots.
i. All lots shall meet the minimum requirements of Article 3 Zoning Districts for
the zoning district in which they are located.
ii. If a lot on one side of a stream, tidal water, road, utility easement or wetland
fails to meet the minimum requirements for lot size, it may not be combined
with a lot on the other side of the stream, tidal water, or road to meet the
minimum lot size.
iii. The ratio of lot length to width shall not be more than five to one. Flag lots
and other odd shaped lots in which narrow strips are joined to other parcels in
order to meet minimum lot size requirements are prohibited.
C. Sign. Location, front view, and dimensions of proposed signs.
D. Septic System. Soils information if on-site sewage disposal is proposed. This
information should be detailed enough to allow those portions of the site not suitable
for on-site disposal systems to be identified.
E. Lighting. A Lighting Plan per Article 8 Exterior Lighting section 812 Lighting Plan
Submittal Contents.
F. Traffic. Traffic and Street Design information per Article 9 Street Design and
Construction Standards section 902.1 Plan Submissions.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
11 | P a g e
G. Parking. Off street parking and loading areas and structures, including the number of
spaces, dimensions of spaces and aisles, and landscaping of parking areas.
H. Bike and Pedestrian. Pedestrian circulation system, including walkways and bicycle
paths where applicable.
I. Stormwater Management Plan.
i. Stormwater information per Article 10 Stormwater Management and Construction
Standards section 1002 Plan Submittals.
ii. Low Impact Design information statement shall be submitted to the Administrator
documenting suitable low impact design for the site, which will help to reduce
stormwater volumes and help to enhance stormwater quality. Low impact design
includes, but is not limited to green roofs, rain gardens, tree wells, infiltration
basins, and permeable pavement.
J. Utility Plan. A utility plan showing the location and dimension of water and sewer
improvement, including force-mains and pump stations, electric and telephone lines,
and any other utility services to be installed on the site.
K. Wastewater Disposal.
i. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used.
ii. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public
sewer, a written statement from the Sewer Department indicating the
Department has reviewed and approved the sewerage system design compliant
with Chapter 5, Sewer Ordinance shall be submitted.
L. Drinking Water.
i. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used.
ii. When water is to be supplied by a public water supply any proposed
development located within 500 feet at its closest point to a water line must
connect to the public water system. The developer shall provide a written
statement from the Water Department that adequate water for both domestic
and fire fighting purposes can be provided without placing an undue burden
on the source, treatment facilities or distribution system involved. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the costs of system improvements
necessary to serve the development. The size and location of mains, gate
valves, hydrants, and service connections shall be reviewed and approved in
writing by the Water Department Superintendent and the Fire Chief.
iii. When water is to be supplied by private well, evidence of adequate ground
water supply and quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a
hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
M. Hydrogeology. A groundwater impact analysis prepared by a groundwater
hydrologist, or designed and prepared by a professional engineer registered in the
State of Maine for projects involving:
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
12 | P a g e
i. Common on-site water supply or sewage disposal facilities with a capacity of
2,000 gallons or more per day.
ii. Any part of a project located over a significant sand and gravel aquifer by the
Maine Geological Survey.
Groundwater Impact Analysis. The groundwater impact analysis shall contain
at least the following information:
a. A map showing the basic soils types.
b. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the site.
c. Drainage conditions throughout the site.
d. Data on the existing groundwater quality, either from test wells on the site
or from existing wells on neighboring properties.
e. Projections of groundwater quality based on the assumption of drought
conditions (assuming 60% of annual average precipitation).
f. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the development on
groundwater resources. In the case of residential development, the
evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post-development
nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within the site, at the
boundaries and at a distance of 1,000 feet from potential contamination
sources, whichever is a shorter distance.
g. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal
systems and drinking water wells within the site and within 200 feet of the
site.
N. Fire Suppression. Letter from the Ellsworth Fire Department stating the applicant has
met with the Fire Department to discuss the project and the type of fire suppression
system to be used, as well as emergency vehicle access. Provide all hydrant locations, as
well as information on other fire protection measures.
O. Landscaping. The location, dimension, and type of walls, fences and landscaping. A
planting schedule keyed to the plan and indicating the general varieties and sizes of trees,
shrubs, and other plants to be planted on the site.
P. Park and Open Space.
i. Any areas reserved as a park or open space shall be indicated on the application.
A park and open space provision and maintenance plan shall be submitted as part
of the application for development approval. This plan shall designate and
indicate the type and boundaries of all proposed parks and open space.
ii. The following areas are not considered park or open space:
a. Areas covered by buildings, parking lots, or other impervious surfaces
accessible to automobiles;
b. Utility easement, drainage easements, or street right-of-ways, unless such
areas are usable for public recreational purposes and will not be
permanently converted to a street or trench;
c. Land underneath overhead utility lines.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
13 | P a g e
Q. Critical Natural Area. Identify areas within or in close proximity to the project which
have been identified by the State of Maine as High or Moderate Value Wildlife Habitat or
is part of the Maine Natural Area’s Program.
R. National Register of Historic Places. Identify all areas within or in close proximity to
the project which are either listed or have the potential to be listed in the National
Register of Historic Places, or are indentified in the Comprehensive Plan or in Chapter 39
Historic Preservation Ordinance as having historic significance.
S. Tabular Information. Provide in table format the number of acres in the existing
development including square footage of all buildings and structures; square footage of
all paved or otherwise hard-surfaces: streets, parking facilities including curb and gutters,
walks, loading areas and asphalt or concrete aprons for solid waste containers, or outdoor
mechanical equipment.
T. Easements. For any proposed easement, the developer shall submit the proposed
easement language with a signed statement certifying that the easement will be executed
upon approval of the development.
U. Owner’s Association. Evidence that all requirements relative to establishment of a
maintenance association or owner's association have been met. The submission shall
include copies of the by-laws of any association charged with maintaining common
spaces, infrastructures and lands. The association’s documents shall clearly state that the
association shall properly maintain the infrastructure or land serving the development
after the developer has legally relinquished that responsibility and/or until such time as
the City may accept ownership. The existence of this association and its purpose shall be
noted on the plan.
V. Signature Block. Space shall be provided on the plan on the bottom right hand corner or
the signature of the Administrator and date together with the following: "Approved" or
"Approved with Conditions."
607 STANDARDS AND CRITERIA GOVERNING SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
REVIEW – FINAL PLAN MEETING.
607.1 State and Federal Permits. Prior to the review of criteria and performance standards
compliance by the Administrator, the developer shall show written proof that applications
have been filed for all state and federal permits including, but not limited to:
i. Maine Department of Environmental Protection Site Location of Development Act;
Great Ponds Act; Alteration of Coastal Wetlands; Freshwater Wetland Act; Alteration
of Stream and Rivers; Wastewater Discharge License; Stormwater; Natural Resources
Protection Act.
ii. Maine Department of Human and Health Services applications for central water
supply system and centralized or shared subsurface sewage disposal system.
iii. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
iv. Maine Department of Transportation Driveway and Entrance Permit; and Traffic
Movement Permit
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
14 | P a g e
607.2 Criteria and Standards. The following criteria and standards shall be utilized by the
Administrator in reviewing applications for site development plan approval. The criteria
and standards are not intended to discourage creativity, invention and innovation.
A. Conformance with Comprehensive Plan. All proposed projects shall be in
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, policy statements of the City of Ellsworth,
and with other pertinent provisions and ordinances.
B. Land Not Suitable For Development
i. The following lands shall not be included in the calculations of the minimum
lot area: Land which is situated below the normal high water mark of any
water body.
ii. Land which is located within the 100-year floodplain as identified by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, Flood Insurance Administration, unless the developer
shows proof though the submittal of materials prepared by a Registered Land
Surveyor which show that the property in question lies at least two feet above
the 100-year flood level. The elevation of filled or man-made land shall not be
considered.
iii. Wetlands.
C. Lots.
i. Lot configuration and lot area shall be designed to provide for adequate offstreet
parking and service facilities based upon the type of development
contemplated.
ii. Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the street.
D. Shoreland Standards. Projects which propose structures or uses located within the
shoreland zone, as defined in Article 4 Shoreland Zoning may be reviewed
concurrently with site development plans. It may be approved, or approved with
conditions if the Administrator makes a positive finding based on the application and
its supporting information that, in addition to any requirements imposed by this
Article, the proposed use:
i. Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
ii. Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
iii. Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
iv. Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird
or other wildlife habitats;
v. Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to
inland and shoreland waters;
vi. Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the
comprehensive plan;
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
15 | P a g e
vii.Will not adversely affect existing commercial fishing or maritime activities in
the General Development Zoning District;
viii. Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
ix. Is in conformance with the provisions of Article 4 Shoreland Zoning.
E. Landscaping.
i. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by
minimizing tree and soil removal, retaining existing vegetation where
desirable, and keeping any grade changes in character with the general
appearance of neighboring areas. Scenic vistas should be preserved.
ii. Environmentally sensitive areas such as wetlands, steep slopes, floodplains
and unique natural features shall be maintained and preserved to the greatest
extent possible. Natural drainage areas shall be preserved to the maximum
extent.
iii. Landscaping shall meet Article 8 Performance Standards section 813 Buffers,
Screening, and Landscaping Standards.
F. Accessways, Traffic Impacts and Access.
i. Provisions shall be made for vehicular access to the development and
circulation within the development in such a manner as to safeguard against
hazards to traffic and pedestrians in existing streets and within the
development site, to avoid traffic congestion on any accessways and to
provide safe and convenient circulation on and off-site.
ii. All projects shall provide an estimate of the amount and type of vehicular
traffic to be generated on a daily basis and at peak hour. Where applicable
provide a traffic impact analysis demonstrating the impact of the proposed
project on the capacity, level of service and safety of adjacent City and or
State-owned streets.
iii. Where a development abuts or contains an existing or proposed State- or Cityowned
road, permits must be obtained from the appropriate agency for
entrance/driveway. This requirement shall be noted on the Plan and in the
deed.
iv. Vehicular access to and into the site shall meet the standards of Article 9
Street Design and Construction Standards, as applicable:
a. 907 - Street Design Standards;
b. 909 – Street System Design Standards;
c. 910 – Access Management;
d. 915 – Accessways in the Shoreland Zone; and
e. 916 – Accessway Constructions Standards.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
16 | P a g e
v. The layout of the site shall provide for the safe movement of passenger,
service and emergency vehicles through the site.
a. Non-residential projects shall provide a clear route for delivery
vehicles with appropriate geometric design to allow turning and
backing for vehicles expected to use the facility.
b. Clear routes of access shall be provided and maintained for emergency
vehicles to all portions of the site and shall be posted with appropriate
language.
c. The layout and design of parking areas shall provide for safe and
convenient circulation of vehicles throughout the site and should
prohibit vehicles from backing out onto a street.
d. All streets and accessways shall be designed to follow the topographic
and natural features of the site. The road network shall provide for
vehicular and pedestrian safety, all season emergency access, snow
storage, and delivery and collection services.
vi. Where the street is designed to a private road design standard or where the
street is to remain a private way until it is duly adopted by the City Council,
the following words shall appear on the recorded plan & within the deed.
"The roads in this development shall remain private roads to be
maintained by the developer or the lot owners until and if it meets the
standards of a public road and it is duly adopted by the City Council”
G. Bike/Pedestrian Access and Circulation. The development plan shall provide for
safe pedestrian circulation within the development. This pedestrian circulation system
shall connect with existing sidewalks if they exist in the vicinity of the project. The
pedestrian network may be located either in the street right-of-way and/or outside of
the right-of-way in open space or recreation areas. The system shall be designed to
link residential units with recreational and commercial facilities, other common
facilities, school bus stops and existing sidewalks in the neighborhood. Pedestrian and
bike access to the site shall also meet the standards of Article 9 Street Design and
Construction Standards section 912 Sidewalks and Bikeways and section 916.5.G
Sidewalk Materials.
H. Parking. The plan shall meet the criteria of Article 11 Parking Standards.
I. Environmental Standards. The development plan shall be designed in accordance
with applicable standards designed to protect the environment.
i. Stormwater. The development shall be designed to meet Article 10
Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards. Maintenance
responsibilities shall be reviewed to determine their adequacy.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
17 | P a g e
ii. Low Impact Design. The applicant shall submit technical documentation
about the suitability of low impact design features which will help to reduce
stormwater volumes and help to enhance stormwater quality. If non-low
impact design features are selected, the applicant shall provide a statement
explaining the reason why. Each applicant is required to submit a statement to
the Planning Board documenting proposed Low Impact Design (LID) for the
site.
iii. Erosion and Sediment control. The development shall preserve salient natural
features, keep cut-fill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
the topography so as to create the least erosion potential and so as to
adequately handle surface water runoff. The disturbed area shall be kept to a
practical minimum. Any activity on a stream, watercourse or swale or upon a
floodway or right-of-way shall comply with the State's Natural Resources
Protection Act, Title 38 M.R.S.A. Sections 480(A)-480(S). Any such activity
shall also be conducted in such a manner so as to maintain as nearly as
possible the present state of the stream, watercourse, swale, floodway or rightof-
way for the duration of the activity and shall be returned to its original or
equal condition after such activity is completed.
J. Parks, Open Space, Natural or Historical Features.
i. To the greatest extent possible common open space areas shall be contiguous.
ii. Parks and open spaces, as shown on any approved development plan, shall
contain a notation that these areas shall not be further developed for any other
use.
iii. Parks and open spaces should include irreplaceable natural features located on
the tract (such as, but not limited to, stream beds, significant stands of trees,
individual trees of significant size, and rock outcroppings).
iv. If the proposed development contains any identified historical or
archaeological sites, or any areas identified in the Comprehensive Plan or by
the Maine Critical Areas Program as rare and irreplaceable natural areas, these
areas shall be protected through inclusion in an open space plan, and suitably
protected by appropriate covenants and management plans.
v. Any public rights of access to the shoreline of a water body shall be
maintained by means of easements or rights-of-way, or should be included in
the open space plan, with provisions made for continued public access.
K. Drinking Water Supply.
i. The development shall be provided with a system of water supply that provides
each use with an adequate supply of water meeting the standards of the State
of Maine for drinking water.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
18 | P a g e
ii. Groundwater Protection. The proposed site development and use shall not
adversely impact either the quality or quantity of groundwater available to
abutting properties or public water supply systems. Projects involving
common on-site water supply or sewage disposal systems with a capacity of
2,000 gallons per day or greater shall demonstrate that the groundwater at the
property line will comply, following development, with the standards for safe
drinking water as established by the State of Maine. Subsurface waste water
disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be constructed as shown on
the map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking
water wells are recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be
included as a note on the Final Plan, and as restrictions in the deed.
L. Sewage Disposal.
i. Public Sewer. Any proposed development shall connect to the existing or
proposed public sewer if said sewer is located within 500 feet of the
development property line. Only the City Council may waive this standard.
ii. Private Systems.
a. The developer shall submit evidence of soil suitability for subsurface
sewage disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator or Soil
Scientist in full compliance with the requirements of the State of Maine
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
b. In no instance shall a disposal area be permitted on soils or on a lot which
requires a New System Variance from the Subsurface Wastewater
Disposal Rules.
M. Utilities. Any utility installations above ground shall be located so as not to be
unsightly or hazardous to the public and shall be landscaped or otherwise buffered so
as to screen the components from public view.
N. Construction Debris. If on-site disposal of the street or right-of-way construction
stumps and debris is proposed, the disposal site shall be suitably covered with fill and
topsoil, lined, fertilized, and seeded.
O. Street Names and Traffic Signs. Streets which join and are in alignment with streets
of abutting or neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Names of new streets
shall not duplicate, nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing streets
within the City, and shall be subject to the approval of the City Assessor’s Office.
The developer shall reimburse the City for the costs of installing street names, traffic
safety and traffic devices.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 6 Site Development Review
19 | P a g e
P. Advertising Features. The size, location, texture and lighting of all exterior signs
and outdoor advertising structures or features shall not detract from the layout of the
property and the design of proposed buildings and structures and the surrounding
properties, and shall not constitute hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
Q. Special Features. Exposed storage areas, exposed machinery installations, service
areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and similar accessory areas
and structures, shall be subject to such setbacks, screen plantings or other screening
methods as shall reasonably be required to prevent their being incongruous with the
existing or contemplated environment and the surrounding properties.
R. Exterior Lighting. All exterior lighting shall be designed to ensure safe movement of
people and vehicles, and to minimize adverse impact on neighboring properties and
public ways. Lighting shall be arranged to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties and the traveling public and comply with Article 8 Performance Standards
Section 812 Exterior Lighting.
S. Emergency Vehicle Access. Provisions shall be made for adequate emergency
vehicle access to buildings and structures in compliance with Chapter 4 Fire
Protection and Prevention Ordinance.
T. Fire Suppression. The proposed development shall comply with the applicable
sections of Chapter 4 Fire Protection and Prevention Ordinance relating to fire
suppression.
U. Waste Disposal. The proposed development shall provide for adequate disposal of
solid wastes and hazardous wastes; all solid waste shall be disposed of at a licensed
disposal facility having adequate capacity to accept the project's wastes; and all
hazardous wastes shall be disposed of at a licensed hazardous waste disposal facility
and evidence of a contractual arrangement with the facility shall be submitted.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development ordinance
Article 8
Performance Standards
Amended November 19, 2012
Amended March 17, 2014
Amended April 19, 2016
Amended May 21, 2018
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 8 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
801 GENERAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
801.1 Applicability. Notwithstanding any other requirements, all development must meet the
minimum performance standards set forth in this section.
801.2 Site Conditions.
A. During construction, the site shall be maintained and left each day in a safe and sanitary
manner, and any condition, which could lead to personal injury, or property damage
shall be immediately corrected by the developer upon an order by the Code Enforcement
Officer or other authorized personnel. The developer shall make provisions for disposal
of oil and grease from equipment, and the site area should be regularly treated to control
dust from construction activity.
B. Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush, weeds, dead and
dying trees, roots and debris, and excess or scrap building materials shall be removed or
destroyed immediately upon the request of and to the satisfaction of the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to issuing an occupancy permit.
C. No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or site by the removal of
earth to another lot or site other than as shown on an approved site development plan.
Minimal changes in elevations or contours necessitated by field conditions may be made
only after approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
801.3 Dust, Fumes, Vapors, Gases, Odors, Glare, and Explosive Materials.
A. Emission of dust, dirt, fly ash, fumes, vapors or gases, which could damage human
health, animals, vegetation or property or which could soil or stain person or property, at
any point beyond the lot line of the commercial or industrial establishment creating that
emission, shall be prohibited.
B. No land use or establishment shall be permitted to produce offensive or harmful odors
perceptible beyond their lot lines, measured either at ground or habitable elevation.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
3 | P a g e
801.4 Oil and Chemical Storage. All above ground outdoor storage facilities for fuel, chemicals,
chemical or industrial wastes and potentially harmful raw materials shall be located on
reinforced cement and shall be completely enclosed by an impervious dike monolithically
poured, which shall be high enough to contain the total volume of liquid kept within the
storage area, plus the rain falling into this storage area during a 50-year storm event, so that
such liquid shall not be able to spill onto or seep into the ground surrounding the paved
storage area. Storage tanks for home heating fuel and diesel fuel shall be exempted from this
requirement.
801.5 Buffers and Screening Standards.
A. Buffers in the form of fences, landscaping, berms and mounds shall be required to
minimize any adverse impacts or nuisance on the site or on adjacent properties.
B. Buffers shall be considered in the following areas and for the following purposes:
i. Along property lines, to shield various uses from each other;
ii. Along service or site roads running parallel to roads exterior to the site, to
prevent confusion, particularly at night;
iii. Parking lot, garbage collection areas, and loading and unloading areas; and
iv. To block prevailing wind patterns and to stop wind-borne debris from leaving the
site.
C. Buffers shall be sufficient to shield structures and uses from the view of incompatible
abutting properties and public roadway, and to otherwise prevent any nuisances.
D. Exposed storage areas, service areas, exposed machinery installation, sand and gravel
extraction operations, truck-loading areas, utility buildings and structures, and areas used
for the storage or collection of discarded automobiles, auto parts, metals or any other
articles of salvage or refuse, and similar accessory areas and structures, shall have
sufficient setbacks and screening to provide an audio/visual buffer sufficient to minimize
their adverse impact on other land uses within the development site and surrounding
properties, such as a stockade fence or a dense evergreen hedge 6 feet or more in height.
E. Where a potential safety hazard to children would be likely to arise, physical screening
sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall be provided and shall
be maintained in good condition.
F. Natural features shall be maintained wherever possible to provide a buffer between the
proposed development and incompatible abutting properties and public roadways. When
natural features such as topography, gullies, stands of trees, shrubbery, rock outcrops do
not exist or are insufficient to provide a buffer, other kinds of buffers shall be
considered.
G. Evergreens can be used as buffers, provided they are planted properly. An evergreen
buffer requires 3 rows of staggered plantings. The rows should be 5 feet apart and the
evergreens planted 4 feet on center.
H. Fencing and screening shall be durable and properly maintained at all times by the
owner.
I. Fencing and screening shall be so located within the property line to allow access for
maintenance on both sides without intruding upon abutting properties.
J. All buffer areas shall be maintained in a neat and sanitary condition by the owner.
K. Buffers shall not obstruct or conceal Fire Department access to sprinkler and/or
standpipe connections for fire protection.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
4 | P a g e
801.6. Stormwater Runoff.
A. All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize stormwater runoff
from the site in excess of the natural pre-development conditions. Where possible,
existing natural runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded
areas shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwater.
B. Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
802 BACKYARD LIVESTOCK
802.1 Purpose. Ensure that non-commercial housing of livestock in urban backyards and on small
lots does not create a nuisance to neighbors and the animals remain healthy. Livestock are
generally accepted outdoor farm animals (i.e. cows, goats, horses, pigs, barnyard fowl, etc.)
not to include cats and dogs, and other house pets.
802.2 Applicability. As defined for each type of animal. All housing of animals is prohibited from
the Business Park and the Commerce Park zoning districts.
802.3 General.
A. No owner shall allow or permit livestock to be at large meaning to be found in any place
other than the property of the owner of the animals.
B. Removal of feces should be hygienic and prompt.
C. All animal open enclosure must be at least 50 feet from water bodies.
802.4 Standards for Chickens and Other Poultry.
A. Roosters are prohibited from the Ellsworth Urban Core Area.
B. Within the Downtown Zoning Districts chickens must be kept in a chicken coop and/or
run.
C. All chicken coops and run shall be located at least 20 feet from any side and rear lot line
of the lot on which it is located, and 50 feet from all windows and doors of dwellings
that are located on an abutting property.
802.5 Standards for Pigs, Horses, Cows, and Others.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any horse, cow, goat, sheep, or
other livestock unless such animal is kept within an enclosure located within a minimum
of 200 feet of any dwelling, except the dwelling of the owner of such animals.
B. All livestock pens, stables, and enclosures shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition,
shall provide enough space for the number of animals is houses and shall be open to
inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer.
C. No person shall allow the livestock to run at large.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
5 | P a g e
803 SHOPPING CENTER - BIG BOX
803. 1 Applicability. This section shall apply to Big Box Stores as defined.
803.2 Facade. Developments with facade over 100 feet in linear length shall incorporate wall
projections or recesses a minimum of 3 foot depth and a minimum of 20 contiguous feet
within each 100 feet of facade lengths and shall extend over 20% of the facade. Display
windows, entry areas, awning, etc shall be used along at least 60% for the facade.
803.3 Roof. Roof lines shall be varied with a change in height every 100 linear feet in the building
length. Parapets, mansard roofs, gable roof, hip roofs, dormers, etc. shall be used to conceal
flat roofs and roof top equipment from public view. Alternating lengths and designs may be
acceptable.
803.4 Pedestrian flows.
A. Walkways shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal
entrance(s) of all principal buildings on the site.
B. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal point of pedestrian activity such as, but not
limited to, street crossing, building and store entry points.
C. Walkways shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade
featuring a customer entrance.
804 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES (NON-RESIDENTIAL)
804.1 Purpose. To provide standards for the establishment of non-residential accessory uses and
structures.
804.2 Applicability. This article applies to any subordinate use of a building or other structure, or
use of land that is:
A. Conducted on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related; and
B. Clearly incidental to, and customarily found in connection with, the principal use or
structure.
804.3 Standards and requirements. The location of permitted accessory uses or structures is
governed by the same dimensional regulations as set forth for the principal uses or principal
structure(s) in Article 3 Zoning Districts.
805 ACCESSORY DWELLING
805.1 Purpose. To provide the opportunity for owners of single family detached dwellings to
develop a small detached dwelling unit without having to meet the minimum lot area
requirement.
805.2 Applicability. This Article applies to any accessory dwelling unit that is located in a
building that is not attached to the principal dwelling.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
6 | P a g e
805.3 Number Permitted. Only one accessory dwelling unit is permitted per lot.
805.4 Size.
A. The gross floor areas of an accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 50% of the principal
building’s floor area.
B. Each dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 500 square feet.
806 CAMPGROUNDS
806.1 Purpose and Applicability. This Section is to establish standards for campground
construction and maintenance that promote public health, safety and welfare and shall apply
to all campground construction in the City of Ellsworth. A campground is a business, public
or private establishment operated as a recreational site for tents, campers, trailers, and traveltrailers,
or other forms of temporary shelter.
806.2 Administration. This Section shall be administered according to all administrative and legal
provisions of the City of Ellsworth Chapter 19 Land Use Ordinance.
806.3 Date. This Section shall be effective immediately after passage by the City Council.
806.4 Application. Permits required for development under this Section shall be administered
according to provisions of the Ellsworth Chapter 19 Land Use Ordinance.
806.5 Management. The management of the campground shall be responsible for operating the
premises in accordance with all City and State regulations. The maintenance of all open
space areas, roads, and utilities in a park shall be the responsibility of its management.
806.6 Occupancy No campsite shall be used as a permanent dwelling place. Permanent occupancy
of a dwelling in the campground shall only be allowed for the purpose of housing the owner
and/or caretaker of the campground.
806.7 General Design Standards. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements
imposed under State licensing procedures and those following in this Section. In cases of
conflict, the stricter rules shall apply.
806.8 Location and Size. All campgrounds shall be located on a well drained site properly graded
to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. Campgrounds shall be
located on a parcel not less than 2 acres in size.
806.9 Recreation Area. No less than 10% of the total developed area of any campground shall be
devoted to common recreational areas with facilities, such as playgrounds, trails, swimming
pools or community buildings on suitable land for the stated purpose. Areas designated as
vegetated buffers do not count toward the minimum recreation area.
806.10 Accessways. Campground accessways serving fewer than ten camp sites are exempt from
City of Ellsworth Chapter 56, Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards. All
accessways shall be constructed to allow safe vehicular access and to minimize erosion.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
7 | P a g e
806.11 Landscaping. Wooded areas and individual trees shall be preserved where practical.
Vegetative cover such as grass shall be provided for land area not paved, graveled or
occupied by a structure. Other planting shall be established to create an attractive setting for
campsites, promote privacy, minimize glare, and provide shade.
806.12 Buffer Strips. Campgrounds shall be designed to provide a vegetated buffer of at least 50
feet deep between the front boundary of the park and campsites and 25 feet deep between
campsites and the side and rear boundaries of the park.
806.13 Screening. Fuel tanks, bottled gas, dumpsters and other utility structures shall be placed in
such a way that they are screened and protected from roadways.
806.14 Utilities. All utilities shall be designed by a licensed civil engineer in the State of Maine to
applicable state and local codes, installed and maintained by the campground owner.
806.15 Water Supply. Water supply to campgrounds shall conform to the rules of the Department
of Human Services, relating to tent and recreational vehicle parks and wilderness
recreational parks. A Campground located within 200 feet of a public water main shall
provide a water system connected into the public system.
806.16 Fire Protection. Water supplies for firefighting shall comply Chapter 4 Fire Prevention and
Protection Ordinance Section 7.
806.17 Toilet Facilities. Campgrounds serving primitive campsites (those without self-contained
camper units with sanitary hook-ups) shall have adequate toilet facilities in compliance with
applicable State plumbing Codes.
806.18 Wastewater Disposal. Sewage disposal plans shall be designed by a licensed civil engineer
in full compliance with the requirements of the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal
Rules. A campground located within 500 feet of a public sewer system shall connect into the
public system, per Ellsworth Chapter 5 Sewer Ordinance.
806.19 Stormwater. A campground shall provide a surface water drainage system conforming to
applicable provisions of City of Ellsworth Code of Ordinance, Article 10 Stormwater
Management Design and Construction Standards.
806.20 Campfires. Open fires shall be permitted only in areas designated on the plan of said park
as cooking areas. Facilities for such fires must meet the approval of the City Fire Chief with
respect to their location and construction.
806.21 Rubbish Disposal. Adequate containers with tight fitting covers shall be provided by the
campground operator or other means approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
8 | P a g e
The State of Maine prohibits the installation of new
aboveground oil storage tanks (AST) facilities, such as motor
fuel storage facilitates and bulk fuel plants, in areas where an
installation is likely to pose a threat to drinking water. The
State specifically prohibits: new ASTs within the source
protection area of a public drinking water well, or within 1000
feet of the public water well (whichever is greater) and new
ASTs within 300 feet of a private well (except for a private
water supply well located on the same property as a facility
and serving only that facility); and new ASTs within a
significant sand and gravel aquifer mapped by the Maine
Geological Survey. Both AST and underground storage tank
(UST) facilities have to comply with the same siting
requirements. These siting restrictions also apply to new
automotive graveyards, automobile body and maintenance
repair shops, dry cleaners using perchloroethylene, metal
finishing or plating facilities and commercial hazardous waste
facilities located in wellhead protection zones.
807 SITING FACILITIES POSING RISKS TO
DRINKING WATER
Siting of aboveground and underground oil
storage tanks and other facilities that pose a
significant risk to drinking water shall comply
with 38 MRSA §1391 through §1399 - An Act
to Prevent Contamination of Drinking Water
Supplies and Maine DEP Chapter 692 (Siting
of Oil Storage Facilities) and Chapter 700
(Siting of Facilities that Poses a Significant
Threat to Drinking Water).
808 SEWER AND WATER CONNECTIONS
808.1 Sewer. Comply with Chapter 5 Sewer Ordinance.
808.2 Water. After the effective date of adoption of this ordinance, any property which is
developed for commercial, institutional or industrial use or any existing commercial,
institutional or industrial building which is enlarged more than fifty percent (50%) and
which contains any plumbing fixtures, as that term is defined in the Maine State Plumbing
Rules, is required to connect all such fixtures to the public supply, provided that said public
supply is located within 500 feet of the developed property. All properties which connect to
a public system pursuant to this section shall within thirty (30) days of said connection be
disconnected from any private system, and no subsequent connection to a private system
shall be made.
809 ESSENTIAL SERVICES FACILITIES
809.1 Setbacks: Minimum building setback is 50 feet.
809.2 Outdoor storage. Prohibited in the Downtown (D) and Neighborhood (N) zoning districts.
809.3 Landscaping Buffer. The lot is suitably landscaped to provide an adequate buffer and
soften the appearance. The landscaped buffer shall be 160 plant units per 100 linear feet of
frontage; one shade tree equals five plant units, one evergreen or ornamental tree equals five
plant units, and each shrub equals one plant unit. The landscape buffer may be comprised in
all or in part of natural vegetation. This section applies to all zoning districts with the
exception of the Industrial (I) zoning district.
810 OPIOID TREATMENT PROGRAM (i.e. METHADONE CLINICS)
810.1 Applicability. Any opioid treatment program (OTP) registered under 21 U.S.C. 823(g) shall
comply with following requirements:
A. Approved by the Planning Board as a Conditional Use regardless of size;
B. Be part of an acute care hospital’s main campus (hospital based clinic);
C. Be only one OTP per acute care hospital;
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
9 | P a g e
D. Be restricted to a maximum of 30 patients - active case load at any one time for the entire
OTP; and
E. OTP cannot operate in part of in whole out of a mobile unit.
811 HEIGHT LIMITS
The height limits required by this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries,
cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, conveyors,
derricks, radio and television towers, and similar structures not intended for human
occupancy.
812 EXTERIOR LIGHTING
812.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to provide for outdoor lighting that will:
Allow appropriate outdoor lighting levels for nighttime safety, security, productivity, and
enjoyment of property; and
Control glare, promote dark sky initiatives, and reduce light trespass by limiting outdoor
lighting that is misdirected, excessive or unnecessary.
812.2 Applicability.
A. All new outdoor lighting fixtures shall meet the requirements of this Article with the
exception of maintenance work.
B. Some types of outdoor lighting are exempt from meeting the requirements of this Article
per section 812.7.
812.3 Lighting Plan Submittal Contents. When outdoor lighting is part of an application to the
Ellsworth Planning Board or part of a project located within the Business and Technology
Park Zone the applicant shall submit a Lighting Plan for all proposed outdoor lighting to
include the following items:
A. General information including: title block; north arrow; area in square footage specified
for each lot, structure and large feature; property lines; scale; topography; and types of
abutting uses.
The location of all existing and proposed outdoor lighting fixtures.
The location of all proposed outdoor lighting fixtures in relation to other existing or
proposed site features to include, but not limited to, parking lots, walkways, buildings
and structures, signs, trees and shrubbery.
Lighting details for each style of lighting fixture including full model number, reflectors,
poles, lamp type, optics selected and mounting shown on the side of the Lighting Plan or
submitted as “marked up cut sheets.”
A photometric plan that indicates the initial light intensity in foot-candles every 5 feet
minimum for the site property out to 10 feet beyond the property line for operational
hours and in contour lines showing the contribution of light fixtures. Also submit a table
of foot-candle data to include minimum, maximum, and averages for the calculated areas
as indentified in Table 812.5 Maintained Illumination Levels Measured in Foot Candles
at Grade.
Other information, as deemed necessary by the Administrator.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
10 | P a g e
Foot-candle: A measure of light
falling on a surface. One footcandle
is equal to the amount of
light generated by one candle
shining on one square foot surface
located one foot away. Foot-candle
measurements shall be made with
a photometric light meter three
feet above the ground.
812.4 Required Number of Submittal Copies:
A. CEO-Approved project. The applicant shall submit two copies of all material to the
Code Enforcement Office.
B. For Planning Board-approved project. The applicant shall submit 13 copies of all
material to the City Planner or designee.
812.5 Lighting Standards
A. Light Nuisance. All outdoor lighting shall be located, shielded, and maintained so as
not to constitute a hazard or nuisance to the traveling public or neighbors. Glare shall be
avoided and light trespass minimized to less than 0.1 foot-candles.
B. Contrast. Employ evenly distributed transitional light levels which are consistent with
the surrounding area to minimize contrast between lit areas and dark surroundings.
C. Fixture Cut-Off. Full cut-off lighting fixtures are required for all outdoor walkways,
parking lots, canopy and building/wall mounted lighting, and
all lighting fixtures located within those portions of
structures which contain exterior walls that are not fully
enclosed between the floor and ceiling. Full cut-off lighting
fixtures emit no light at or above the horizontal plane as
measured at the light source. Fixtures meeting the full cutoff
requirement, as defined by the Illumination Engineering
Society (IES), shall be indicated on the cut sheet or lighting
plan submitted.
D. Maintained Illumination Levels. In order to minimize glare, potential hazardous
conditions, provide for security and safety outdoor lighting illumination levels shall
meet the requirements set forth in Table 812.5 for any use permitted in this Article.
Table 812.5
Maintained Illumination Measured in Foot-Candles
Areas/Uses-Activities Maximum
At Any Point*
Average Maximum At
Any Point*
Minimum
at Any Point*
Inside the
Urban Core
Area
Parking Lots 10 2 0.5
Active Building Entrance 20 15 10
Walkways/sidewalks on private land 10 2 0.5
Under Service Station Canopies 20 10 5
Vehicular Sale Display 20 10 5
Externally Illuminated Sign Surface 10 2 NA
Inside the
Growth Area
but outside
the Urban Core
Area
Parking Lots 5 1 0.2
Active Building Entrance 15 12 8
Walkways/sidewalks on private land 5 1 0.2
Under Service Station Canopies 15 8 3
Vehicular Sale Display 15 8 3
Externally Illuminated Sign Surface 5 1 NA
Inside the
Rural Area
but outside
the Growth
Area
Parking Lots 4 0.5 0.1
Active Building Entrance 12 8 5
Walkways/sidewalks on private land 4 0.5 0.1
Under Service Station Canopies 10 5 2
Vehicular Sale Display 10 5 2
Externally Illuminated Sign Surface 3 1 NA
*In instances, where it is difficult for a development to meet the Minimum at Any Point or the Average Maximum at Any Point standards, the following
illumination contrast ratios, in foot-candles, will be allowed: 1) the contrast ratio of the Maximum at Any Point to the Minimum at Any Point shall be 20:1
or less, and 2) the contrast ratio of the Maximum at Any Point to the Average Maximum at Any Point shall be 4:1 or less.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
11 | P a g e
812.6 HEIGHT LIMITS
A. Pole-Mounting Limit
Lighting mounted onto poles or any structures intended primarily for mounting of
lighting shall not exceed the following height as measured from the finish grade:
i. 35 feet for driveways, parking and transit areas.
ii. 20 feet for walkways, plazas, and other pedestrian areas.
iii. 15 feet for all other lighting.
B. Building/Structure-Mounted Limit
Light mounted onto buildings or other structures shall not exceed a mounting height
greater than 4 feet higher than the tallest part of the building or structure at the place
where the lighting is installed. With the following exceptions:
i. Lighting for facades may be mounted at any height equal to, or less than the total
height of the structure being illuminated.
ii. For buildings, canopies, or overhang located less than 40 feet from the property
line or the sidewalk or public right-of-way, outdoor lighting fixtures shall be
mounted to the vertical façade or underside of canopies at 16 feet or less.
812.7 EXEMPT LIGHTING. The following types of outdoor lighting are exempt from the
provisions of this Article.
A. Internally illuminated signs. However, it is required that all such signs should have
“dark” backgrounds (opaque or colored) and “light” lettering (white or lighter colored
than the background) so as to minimize glare or luminous overload.
Temporary lighting. Includes, but is not limited to, temporary lighting for theatrical,
television, and performance areas; temporary holiday lighting provided that individual
lamps are 10 watts or less; and temporary construction lighting used by governmentfunded
projects to perform emergency or construction repair work, or to perform
nighttime road construction on major thoroughfares. Temporary lighting per the National
Electric Code shall not be in place for greater than 90 days otherwise is to be considered
permanent and therefore meet the code requirements as set forth herein.
Safety. Exit signs, and lighting for egress pathway stairs and ramps.
Federal/State Required Lighting. Lighting required and regulated by the Federal Aviation
Administration, U. S. Coast Guard, or other federal or state agency.
Street and Sidewalk Lights. Street lights within the public right-of-way and bridges.
Single- and Two-Family Residential Properties. Obtrusive light (spill light) that creates
glare, annoyance or obstructs visual ability is prohibited. There shall be no light trespass
beyond the property line.
812.8 SPECIAL LIGHTING. Upon review and determination by the Administrator that the
proposed outdoor lighting will not create unwarranted glare, glow, or light trespass, outdoor
lighting not complying with the technical requirements of this Article may be installed for
the following applications:
A. Recreation. Sport fields, stadiums, and specialized theme parks.
Water Features. Lighting in swimming pools, fountains, and other water features.
Church and Government. Public monuments, public buildings, and houses of worship.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
12 | P a g e
Pole Mounting Height. Industrial areas where higher pole heights are required to avoid
interference of vehicle with the pole assembly.
National and State Flags. The type of lighting fixture to illuminate National and State flags
should be a narrow beam focused. Flag lighting within the Growth Area should be done
with spot lights greater than 70 watts but less than 250 watts and within the Rural Area
flag with a spot light greater than 40 watts but less than 100 watts.
F. Confinement of Light to Object. Outdoor lighting used to illuminate flags, statues,
signs or other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal or platform, spotlighting or
floodlighting used for architectural or landscape purposes, must use fully shielded or
directionally shielded lighting fixtures that are aimed and controlled so that the directed
light is substantially confined to the object intended to be illuminated.
812.9 PROHIBITED LIGHTING
A. Mercury-Vapor Fixture and Lamps. The installation of any mercury-vapor fixture or
lamp for use as outdoor lighting is prohibited.
Laser Source Light. The operation of laser source light or any similar high-intensity light
for outdoor advertising is prohibited.
Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited.
813 BUFFERS, SCREENING, AND LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
813.1 Purpose.
A. Protect existing trees, natural areas and features.
B. Support visual screening and creation of privacy.
813.2 Applicability. In general this section applies to any of the following activities:
A. The construction or erection of any new building or structure for which a development
approval (building permit, Planning Board approval, etc.) is required.
B. The enlargement of the exterior dimensions of an existing building or structure for which
a development approval is required.
C. The construction of a new parking lot or expansion of an existing parking lot.
D. Unless otherwise stipulated the landscaping standards are not cumulative. For example,
if both the yard buffer and parking buffer apply then the more stringent of the two shall
apply.
813.3 Expansion. When a building, structure, or parking lot is enlarged, the buffer and landscape
requirements apply on an incremental basis. This means that landscaping is required in the
same proportion that the enlarged building area or off-street parking area has to the existing
development (e.g., a 10% increase requires 10% of the required landscaping).
813.4 Exemptions. Unless otherwise specified, this section does not apply to the following uses:
A. Single family attached or detached dwelling units.
B. Agricultural and forestry uses taking place in the Industrial (I), Rural (R), and Drinking
Water (DW) zoning districts.
C. Commercial and industrial uses that abut other similar uses, respectively.
D. Contiguous commercial or industrial parcels or land areas under common ownership.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
13 | P a g e
813.5 Acceptable Landscape Materials.
A. Plant materials shall comply with the minimum size requirements at the time of
installation. Plant height shall be measured from the average grade level of the
immediate planting area to the top horizontal plane of the shrub at planting.
B. Planting areas should consist of permeable surface areas only.
C. Each tree or shrub shall be planted at least 30 inches from the edge of any paved or
impervious surface.
813.6 Minimum Planting Specifications Unless Otherwise Specified.
813.7 Design. Plant materials may be arranged in a way to simulate natural growth pattern rather
than spaced at regular intervals.
813.8 Fire Suppression.
A. Landscaping, including but not limited to fences, screenings berms, trees, shrubs, and
other plantings shall not visually or physically obstruct emergency equipment and
personnel access to any sprinkler and standpipe connections and control valves, public
and private fire hydrants and Knox Boxes.
B. Landscaping shall be kept of to a minimum of 10 feet from compressed gas containers,
cylinders, tanks, and systems.
813.9 Permitted Uses Within the Buffers. No active recreation area, storage of materials, parking
or structure, except for necessary utility boxes and equipment, shall be located within the
side and rear buffer yards. The buffer yard may be included in the required setback. For the
purpose of this article berms are not structures.
813.10 Maintenance. Landscaping shall be maintained intensively for a minimum of two years to
ensure the survival and establishment of all plant materials. The applicant will continue to
maintain all landscaping in accordance with the approved plan for the life of the project.
Dead and dying plantings shall be replaced as needed.
813.11 Waivers. The administrator may reduce or waive the standards, require keeping an existing
stand of trees and/or require a fence, wall, or berm or any combination thereof, if the
administrator finds that there would be no adverse impacts upon the neighboring properties
resulting from the reduction of substitution.
813.12 Line of Sight. Landscaping shall not obstruct drivers’ line of sight.
Table 813.6 Minimum Planting Specifications
Landscape Features Minimum Caliper/Height at the Time of Planting
Deciduous Trees ? Single- trunk trees: minimum of 1.5 inches measured at 6 inches above grade.
? Multi-trunk: minimum of 6 feet in height at the time of planting.
Coniferous trees Minimum of 6 feet in height at the time of planting.
Shrubs 1 foot
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
14 | P a g e
813.13 LOT LANDSCAPING STANDARD - DT AND U ZONING DISTRICTS
A. Applicability. This section applies to all commercial, industrial, and multi-family
buildings and structures within the Downtown (DT) and the Urban (U) zoning districts.
Lot landscaping should provide screening to mechanical equipment and stormwater
relief, and complement streetscape design.
B. Exempt from this Standard.
i. Buildings fronting on Main Street between the Union River and High Street.
ii. If the total footprint of the building is less than 1,000 square feet.
iii. If the front setback is less than 20 feet for buildings in the Downtown (DT)
zoning district.
iv. If the front setback is less than 30 feet for buildings in the Urban (U) zoning
district.
C. Standard.
i. The percentage of required landscaping area is calculated based on the size of the
lot or parcel.
ii. Downtown (DT) zoning district – if the front setback is more than 20 feet then
the developer shall provide a minimum of 15% of landscaping area and/or low
impact development cover excluding green roofs.
iii. Urban (U) zoning district – if the front setback is more than 30 feet then the
developer shall provide a minimum of 20% of landscaping area and/or low impact
development cover excluding green roofs.
813.14 PARKING AREA BUFFER – ROAD, RESIDENTIAL USE AND LOADING AREAS
A. Applicability.
i. For any parking lot located within the front yard and having 20 parking spaces or
more.
ii. For any parking lot abutting an existing residential use and having 20 parking
spaces of more.
iii. For any area used exclusively for the display of 20 or more motor vehicles for
sale as part of an automobile dealership having a side or rear property line
directly abutting an existing residential use.
iv. For any type of vehicle fleet, automobile service establishment, vehicle storage,
etc., having the ability to accommodate 20 cars or more and directly abutting an
existing residential use.
v. Loading areas abutting a road or an existing residential use.
B. Exemptions.
i. Downtown (DT) zoning district.
ii. For uses within the Industrial (I) zoning district except when having a side or rear
property line directly abutting an existing residential use.
iii. For any area used exclusively for the display of motor vehicles for sale as part of
an automobile dealership fronting the road.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
15 | P a g e
C. Standard. Between the street and existing residential uses and parking areas meeting the
applicability threshold, the applicant shall have the following options:
i. A 10-foot-wide minimum landscaped strip between a street and the parking lot,
planted with a minimum of three trees and 25 shrubs for every 100 feet of road
frontage, excluding driveway openings;
ii. A berm that is at least two-and–a-half feet higher than the finished elevation of
the parking lot with a maximum of a 3:1 slope planted with a minimum of 15
shrubs for every 100 linear feet of frontage; or
iii. If existing woodlands are available, the applicant can preserve a 20-foot wide
strip in lieu of the landscaping requirement along the frontage.
813.15 INTERIOR PARKING LOT.
A. Applicability. To provide visual breaks, shade, and stormwater management (low
impact design) to parking lots with more than 25 parking spaces, as well as assist in
defining circulation.
B. Standard.
i. Interior islands shall contain shade trees based on a minimum ratio 1 tree and 3
shrubs for every 5,000 square feet of parking area. A minimum of 100 square
feet of planting area shall be provided per every tree and three shrubs.
ii. Parking lot island curbing shall have cuts to facilitate stormwater infiltration.
iii. These landscape islands should be used to assist in defining circulation routes
and separating traffic on site for safety as well as for aesthetic purposes.
813.16 REAR AND SIDE BUFFER – BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL
USES.
A. Applicability Rear and Side Buffers. To provide landscaped and screening separation
between existing residential and non-residential uses along the side or rear lot lines.
B. Standard.
i. Minimum buffer width of 10 feet.
ii. Minimum of 8 trees per 100 linear feet of buffer.
iii Minimum of 13 shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer
813.17 ROAD BUFFER – MANUFACTURING, INDUSTRIAL, AND HEAVY
COMMERCIAL.
A. Applicability. To provide landscaped and screening separation between the road and
heavy manufacturing, industrial, and heavy commercial uses as deemed needed by the
Administrator for uses such as, but not limited to the manufacturing of asphalt,
petroleum or lubricants; chemical products or hazardous substances; glass, clay, cement,
concrete or gypsum products; rubber or plastic; leather, textiles or fabric; timber of wood
products; fueling and maintenance facilities; road salt storage and loading area, large
vehicle fleet storage; auto salvage or recycling; electricity generation; hazardous waste
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
16 | P a g e
treatment, storage or disposal; landfill; recycling facility; sewage treatment works;
warehousing and mineral Extraction.
B. Standard. The developer can choose to use plantings, fences/wall, berms or a
combination thereof.
i. Plantings.
a. Minimum buffer width of 30 feet.
b. Minimum of 12 trees per 100 linear feet of buffer.
c. Minimum of 13 shrubs per 100 linear feet of buffer.
ii. Fences and Walls.
a. Fences or walls may only be used outside the Ellsworth Urban Core Area.
b. Fences or walls shall be 6 feet high when used to meet the buffer yard
requirements.
c. No fence or wall is required if an existing fence or wall on an abutting
property meets the requirements of this section.
d. The fence or wall shall be solid and 100% opaque. Corrugated and
galvanized steel or metal sheets are not permitted.
e. Walls may be concrete, concrete blocks, masonry, stone or a combination of
these materials. The support posts shall be placed on and faced toward the
inside of the developing property so that the surface of the wall or fence is
smooth on the abutting property side.
iii. Berms.
a. Berms shall have a slope not greater than the slope created in 3 horizontal
feet with 1-foot vertical rise (3:1 slope).
b. The berm shall be no greater than 6 feet in height above natural grade.
c. Berms shall be constructed solely of soil, and shall not contain concrete,
brick, tires, or other similar materials.
d. To provide visual relief, any berms exceeding 10 feet in length shall be
curvilinear and shall vary in height.
e. For every 100 linear feet, there shall be planted at least three trees and 30
shrubs. Required trees and shrubs may be exchanged for one another with
one tree equalling five shrubs.
f. The surface of the berm that is not planted with trees and shrubs shall be
covered with grass, perennial ground cover, vines, and woody and
herbaceous perennial, with mulch.
813.18 SCREENING OF TRASH RECEPTACLES.
Trash receptacles should be enclosed on all four sides by a continuous visual screen that
matches or complements the principal use and surroundings. The screening shall be a
minimum of 6 feet or the height of the receptacle, whichever is greater.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
17 | P a g e
814 PUBLIC AND QUASI-GOVERNMENTAL TRAILER-ABLE BOAT LAUNCHING
FACILITIES FOR THE DRINKING WATER ZONING DISTRICT.
814.1 All public and quasi-governmental trailer-able boat launching facilities providing access to
Branch Lake shall comply with the following requirements:
A. The facility shall be gated and locked during off-hours.
B. The facility shall be supervised by an attendant during hours of operation.
C. The facility shall be equipped with a boat wash-down facility for the sole purpose of
washing down boats.
D. The facility attendant shall conduct a boat inspection on all watercraft prior to entering
Branch Lake.
E. A boat inspection includes: a) a visual inspection of a boat, motor vehicle, trailer,
marine engine, live well, bilge, bait bucket and all other related equipment to ensure that
no aquatic invasive plants or animals are introduced into Branch Lake and b) a boat
wash down.
815 STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING
815.1 Purpose. The Assessor shall establish and maintain a street naming and property numbering
system. This is intended to minimize problems of identification for emergency management
services and other public services and shall be subject to the requirements set forth in this
section.
A. All streets and properties shall bear a distinctive name and number in accordance
with and as designated upon a Street Name and Property Number Designation Map
on file with the City's Assessing Office. The Assessor or designee shall establish,
maintain and keep current said map.
B. The Assessor shall assign all such names and numbers as are necessary to maintain
the system.
C. In naming streets, the Assessor should avoid the use of the following:
i. Duplicate and similar-sounding names.
ii. Alphabetical letters.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
18 | P a g e
D. The Assessor shall assign numbers that are consistent with the United States Postal
Services practices (i.e., even numbers on the left and odd numbers on the right).
E. Numbers shall be affixed to the principal structures.
F. Numbers shall be located on structures so as to be readily visible from and oriented
toward the street from which the address is taken.
G. For principal structures more than 50 feet from the street or otherwise not readily
visible from the street due to trees, fences or other similar obstructions, there shall be
placed and maintained a secure post at the structure's entrance upon which shall be
affixed the designated number. Said post must also be readily visible but must not
be placed in the right-of-way, and said post must be at least 4 feet in height. In lieu
of said post, the number may be affixed to a mailbox.
H. For multi-family or apartment complexes, the number shall be consistent with and
displayed as outlined in sections E through G above. Each individual unit will be
identified by a sub letter (i.e., Apartment A).
I. Numbers shall be no less than 3 inches in height. Standard numbers shall be
provided by the City upon the request of the homeowner.
J. No person shall erect any street name sign or affix any street number different than
those approved by the Assessor's Office.
816 WASTE MATERIAL ACCUMULATIONS REGULATED.
Deposits or accumulations of rubbish, junk, junk automobiles and parts thereof, discarded
articles of any kind, household, industrial or commercial wastes shall not be made in any
zoning district except at a dumping place or places designated as such by the City Council,
provided, however, that nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit the
establishment or operation of commercial junk yards and automobile graveyards as
permitted under the terms of this ordinance.
817 MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
817.1 Purpose and Applicability. This Section is to establish standards for medical marijuana
dispensaries and to regulate the cultivation and retailing of medical marijuana in a manner
that protects the health, safety and welfare of the residents, merchants, and customers.
817.2 Authority. This section has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 22,
Chapter 558-C § 2421-2429 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.), Tile 30-A
§3001, and the Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana Program (10-144
CMR Chapter 122).
817.3 Administration. This Section shall be administered according to all administrative and legal
provisions of this ordinance with the following exception:
A. For the establishment of a new dispensary, the re-location of an existing Ellsworth
dispensary to a new location within the City of Ellsworth, or a change from cultivation
facility to retail facility or vice versa, the project shall be reviewed by the Planning
Board as a major use site development plan regardless of threshold factors such as but
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
19 | P a g e
not limited to size or change of use that would ordinarily bring the review to the Code
Enforcement level.
Approval of subsequent project phases by the Administrator shall only be given upon
satisfactory completion of all approvals/permits pertaining to previous phases having
been met.
817.4 Limit on Number of Dispensaries. There shall only be one dispensary within the City of
Ellsworth and it shall operate from only one physical location.
817.5 Not-for-profit Corporation. A dispensary must operate on a not-for-profit basis.
817.6 Location.
A. A dispensary shall not locate within 500 feet of the property line of the following preexisting
uses located within or outside the City of Ellsworth:
i. Public or private schools;
ii. Public facilities such as playgrounds, pools, parks, recreation facilities, and
libraries;
iii. Substance abuse rehabilitation centers, correctional facilities, and homeless
shelters;
iv. Places of worship; and
v. Day care.
B. A dispensary may be located in a multi-occupant building unless one or more of the
units are housing units.
C. It is prohibited to co-locate an office that can issue a physician’s written certification
from the same premise as a dispensary.
D. A dispensary shall not adversely affect health and safety of the nearby residents or
businesses by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic,
vibration or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes,
products or wastes.
E. A dispensary shall not have on-site display of marijuana plants.
F. Only medical marijuana retail facilities shall sell paraphernalia used for the use or
consumption of medical marijuana to registered patients or registered primary
caregivers, as defined in the Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana
Program (10-144 CMR Chapter 122).
G. There shall be no window display.
H. A dispensary shall be operated from a permanent location and shall not be permitted to
operate from a moveable, mobile, or transitory location.
817.7 Zone. A dispensary is allowed only within the Urban (U), Industrial (I), and Commercial
(C), zoning districts. A dispensary is strictly prohibited from all other zoning districts.
817.8 Cultivation. All cultivation of marijuana shall take place in a non-transparent secured
building.
817.9 Parking. Dispensaries shall be prohibited from having off-site parking or satellite parking.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
20 | P a g e
818. MEDICAL MARIJUANA PRIMARY CAREGIVER OPERATIONS
818.1 Applicability.
A. Medical marijuana primary caregiver operations (cultivation, production, dispensing, and
all related activities) outside the primary residence of the primary caregiver and
collectives are prohibited in all zoning districts.
B. Medical marijuana primary caregiver operations (cultivation, production, dispensing, and
all related activities) at the primary residence of the primary caregiver are allowed in all
zoning districts and shall comply with the Home Occupations section below.
818.2 Authority. This section and the terms used are in accordance with the provisions of and as
defined in Title 22, Chapter 558-C § 2421-2429 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated
(M.R.S.A.), Tile 30-A §3001, and the Rules Governing the Maine Medical Use of Marijuana
Program (10-144 CMR Chapter 122).
819 HOME OCCUPATIONS
819.1 Purpose and Findings.
A. Established criteria for operation of home occupations in dwelling units;
B. Ensures that such home occupations are compatible with adjacent and nearby residential
properties and uses; and
C. Allows residents of Ellsworth to use their residences as places to enhance or fulfill
personal economic goals.
819.2 Applicability.
A. Applies to any occupations, profession, or business activity customarily conducted
entirely within a dwelling unit and carried on by a member of the family residing in the
dwelling unit, and which occupation or profession is clearly incidental and subordinate
to the use of the dwelling unit for dwelling purposes and does not change the character
of the dwelling unit. A home occupation is an accessory use to a dwelling unit.
B. No home occupation, except as otherwise provided in this section, may be initiated,
established, or maintained in the unit except in conformance with the regulations and
performance standards set forth in this section. A home occupation shall be incidental
and secondary to the use of a dwelling unit for residential purposes.
819.3 Exempt Home Occupations.
The activities listed below are not subject to this section, provided that all persons engaged
in such activities reside on the premises:
A. Artists, sculptors, and composers not selling their artistic product to the public on the
premises;
B. Craft work, such as, but not limited to, jewelry-making and pottery, with no sales
permitted on the premises;
C. Home offices with no client visits to the home permitted; and
D. Telephone answering and message services.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
21 | P a g e
819.4 Permitted Home Occupations in the Downtown, Industrial, Urban Neighborhood, and
Commercial Zoning Districts.
The following home occupations are permitted subject to the performance standards
established in table 818.7 Home Occupation Performance Standards by Zoning Districts:
A. Accounting, tax preparations, bookkeeping, and payroll services.
B. Baking and cooking.
C. Catering.
D. Child Care.
E. Computer repair, systems design, and related services.
F. Drafting services.
G. Engineering, architecture, and landscape architecture.
H. Financial planning and investment services.
I. Fine arts studios.
J. Hair salon, barbering, hairdressing, and other personal care services.
K. Legal services.
L. Musical instruction.
M. Offices for professional, scientific, or technical services or administrative services.
N. Photographic services.
O. Professional services including the practice of law.
P. Real estate services and appraisal.
Q. Teaching of crafts.
R. Tutoring.
819.5 Permitted Home Occupations in the Drinking Water and Rural zoning Districts.
The following home occupations are permitted subject to the performance standards
established in table 818.6 Home Occupation Performance Standards by Zoning Districts:
A. Accounting, tax preparations, bookkeeping, and payroll services.
B. Baking and cooking.
C. Catering.
D. Child Care.
E. Computer repair, systems design, and related services.
F. Drafting services.
G. Engineering, architecture, and landscape architecture.
H. Financial planning and investment services.
I. Fine arts studios.
J. Hair salon, barbering, hairdressing, and other personal care services.
K. Legal services.
L. Musical instruction.
M. Offices for professional, scientific, or technical services or administrative services.
N. Photographic services.
O. Professional services including the practice of law.
P. Real estate services and appraisal.
Q. Teaching of crafts.
R. Tutoring.
S. Medical/dental offices.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
22 | P a g e
In some cases, a homeoccupation
may have to comply
with the Ellsworth Code of
Ordinances Chapter 4, Fire
Protection and Prevention. For
more information, please
contact the Ellsworth Fire
Inspector at 669-6612.
T. Motor vehicle and engine repair.
U. Furniture refinishing.
V. Recording Studios.
W. Animal grooming.
X. Machine shop/metal working.
Y. Retail sales.
Z. Contractor and Trade shops.
819.6 Permitted Home Occupations in All Zoning Districts.
The following home occupations are permitted, subject to the performance standards
established in table 819.7 Home Occupation Performance Standards, in all Zoning Districts:
A. Medical marijuana primary caregiver operations (production, cultivation, dispensing,
and all related activities).
819.7 Performance Standards.
All permitted home occupations shall comply with the criteria
of Table 819.7 Home Occupation Performance Standards.
Table 819.7 Applicable Home Occupation Performance Standards by Zoning Districts and for Medical Marijuana (MJ)
Primary Caregiver Operations*
Performance Standards DW
and
R
All Other
zoning
districts
MJ
Primary
Caregiver
Operations
The use shall be clearly incidental and secondary to residential occupancy. ? ? ?
The use shall be conducted entirely within the interior of the residence. ? ? NA
Not more than 6 clients per day. Hours for visits shall be between 8:00 AM and 8:00 PM. ? ? ?
Not more than 25% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling structure shall be utilized
for the home occupation.
? ? ?
Music, art, craft, or similar lessons are permitted (12 or few clients per day). ? ? NA
Child care (maximum of 6 children) is permitted. ? ? NA
Storage of goods and materials shall be inside and shall not include flammable, combustible, or
explosive materials.
? ? ?
Off-street parking shall be provided. ? ? ?
Outside storage of heavy equipment or material shall be prohibited. ? ?
Mechanized equipment shall be used only in a completely enclosed building. ? ?
Electronically amplified sounds shall not be audible from adjacent properties or public streets. ? ? ?
No generation of dust, odors, noise, vibration, or electrical interference or fluctuation shall be
perceptible beyond the property line.
? ? ?
Deliveries and pickups shall be those normally associated with residential services, shall not
block traffic circulation, and shall occur between 8:00AM and 8:00 PM.
? ? ?
*Medical marijuana primary caregiver operations are allowed, as home occupations, in all zoning districts.
819.8 Outdoor Storage
A. Storage shall be limited to materials related to the business.
B. Materials shall not be stacked to a height exceeding 4 feet and shall not be visible from
the public right-of-way or adjacent lot or parcel occupied by a residence. Any screening
required to comply with this subsection shall use wood or masonry fencing or a
vegetative hedge;
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
23 | P a g e
C. The storage shall not create any smoke, odors, dust, or noise at a level discernible at any
of its lot lines; and
D. The minimum lot size for outdoor storage shall be 2 acres. In no event shall a home
occupation be established on a lot that is nonconforming as to the minimum lot size.
819.9 Accessory Buildings. Where a home occupation is conducted in an accessory building, such
accessory building shall not exceed the square footage of the footprint of the dwelling.
819.10 Employees. The family member conducting the home occupation may employ at the
dwelling a maximum of two nonresident employees to assist in the home occupation. There
shall be a maximum of 5 workers including family members.
819.11 Unsafe Home Occupations. If any home occupation has become dangerous or unsafe;
presents a safety hazard to the public, pedestrians on public sidewalks, or motorists on a
public right-of-way; or presents a safety hazard to adjacent or nearby properties, residents,
or businesses, the Code Enforcement Office shall issue an order to the dwelling owner
and/or tenant on the property on which the home occupation is being undertaken, directing
that the home occupation immediately be made safe or terminated. In the event of a failure
to do so by the owner and/or tenant, after notice and a reasonable period of time, the Code
Enforcement Officer may take any and all available enforcement actions to render the home
occupation and dwelling safe. Costs incurred by the Code Enforcement Officer, if forced to
take enforcement actions, shall be borne by the property owner and shall be treated as a
zoning violation. Safety concerns pertaining to medical marijuana caregiver operations are
outside the jurisdiction of the Ellsworth Code Enforcement officer and shall be reported to
the Ellsworth Police Department and/or the Maine Department of Health and Human
Services, Maine Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
820 MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS
820.1 Purpose. This Section is intended to promote public health, safety and welfare; to establish
standards for Mobile Home Park construction and maintenance; to create construction
standards and other regulations of Emergency Mobile Home Parks; and to provide a
wholesome community environment. This section is supplementary to the Ellsworth
Subdivision Ordinance.
820.2 Applicability. This Section shall apply to all Mobile Home Parks in the City of Ellsworth,
Maine. The term “Park” when used herein refers to Mobile Home Parks, as defined. The
term “Site” when used herein refers to a Mobile Home Site, as defined.
820.3 Zoning Districts. Mobile Home Parks are allowed only in the Rural (R) zoning districts.
Emergency Mobile Home Parks are allowed within any Land Use District other than
districts within the Shoreland Zone.
820.4 Authority. This Section is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4358 Regulation of
Mobile Home, et. Seq.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
24 | P a g e
820.5 Supplementary Document. Except as stipulated in this Section, Mobile Home Parks must
meet all of the applicable requirements for a residential subdivision, and must conform to all
applicable state laws and city ordinances. Where the provisions of this Section conflict with
specific provisions of the Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance provisions of this Section
prevail. In particular, Subdivision “Lot” design requirements do not directly apply as Mobile
Home “Site” design requirements, which are specified herein and Mobile Home Parks are
not reviewed as “cluster” subdivisions.
820.6 Administration. This Section shall be administered according to all applicable procedures,
penalties, remedies and legal provisions stated in the Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance and
the supplementary provisions stated in this Section.
820.7 Planning Board Review. Proposed Mobile Home Parks, expansions of the number of home
sites within a Park or any proposal classified by the Code Enforcement Officer as a major
use site development must first be reviewed and approved by the Ellsworth Planning Board
in accordance with this Section, the Subdivision Ordinance and any other applicable City
ordinances.
820.8 Submittal. A signed Land Development Permit application to construct a Mobile Home
Park shall be submitted to the City Planner with the fee and applicable documentation
required by the Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance. Plans for review shall conform to
applicable requirements of the Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance. Number of copies shall
conform to Article 6 Site Development Review Section 602.7.
820.9 Fee. To defray administrative expenses, plans shall be accompanied by a fee in the form of a
check payable to the City of Ellsworth. Mobile Home Sites shall be considered subdivision
lots for calculating these fees per the Ellsworth Subdivision Ordinance. No fee is required
for an Emergency Mobile Home Park.
820.10 The Final Plan shall be certified by a design professional registered in the State of Maine
and shall comply with all applicable City Ordinances. The approved, signed park plan must
be filed with the City and recorded at the Registry of Deeds within 90 days of signing. It
must include notes or conditions of approval as well as a description of the type of
ownership and provisions for management and maintenance of the Park.
820.11 Building Permits. Following Planning Board approval, building, plumbing and electrical
permits may be issued by the Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer.
820.12 Occupancy Permit. No Mobile Home Park hereafter constructed or expanded shall be used
or occupied until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer certifying that the Park complies with this Section.
820.13 Conversion. No Mobile Home Park may be converted to another use without the approval
of the Planning Board.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
25 | P a g e
820.14 Mobile Home Park Management.
A. Compliance. A Mobile Home Park shall conform to City ordinances and to the rules and
regulations of the State of Maine Department of Health and Human Services relating to
mobile homes.
B. Responsibility. The Mobile Home Park management shall inform park occupants about
DHHS rules and clearly indicate the occupants’ responsibilities under them.
C. Registration. Mobile Home Park management shall maintain a register of Park
occupants containing names, site numbers and E-911 street numbers. The register shall
be available for inspection by Federal, State and City authorities upon request during
normal business hours.
D. Utilities. Park management shall supply utility connections to mobile home sites. Homes
shall be hooked up by professionals with proper City permitting.
820.15 Mobile Home Park General Design Standards.
A. Applicability. The construction or expansion of a Mobile Home Park and its facilities
shall conform to the design standards of this section and other applicable regulations.
B. State Regulations. A Mobile Home Park shall conform to 30-A M.R.S.A., Section 4358
Regulation of mobile homes.
C. Park Boundaries. A Park shall consist of a single parcel of land meeting the minimum
lot size requirements in the Rural (R) zoning district and all standards set forth in this
section.
D. Site Layout. Each mobile home shall be placed on its own site with accessways and
other amenities shown on the approved Mobile Home Park Plan meeting all standards to
follow in this section. Mobile home sites shall be oriented in regard to natural features
where practical.
E. Site Identification. Each mobile home site shall prominently display a street number
supplied by the City’s E-911 Coordinator.
F. Density. Mobile Home Park shall be allowed to exceed the maximum Net Residential
Density permitted in its zoning district per Article 3 Zoning Districts as long as the
provisions of this Section are met.
G. Landscaping. Wooded areas and individual trees shall be preserved where practical.
Vegetative cover such as grass shall be provided for land area not paved, graveled or
occupied by a structure. Other planting shall be established to create an attractive setting
for mobile home, promote privacy, minimize glare, and provide shade.
H. Buffering. Vegetative screen shall be used to create a dense visual barrier around the
park perimeter and around areas such as refuse storage enclosures and nonresidential
areas. Screens should be coniferous trees or shrubs such as white cedar, balsam fir and
spruce, since these provide a year-round buffer. If conditions are not suitable for planting
coniferous screens, solid fencing not less than 6 feet high may be used.
I. Buffer Strip. A fifty-foot wide vegetated buffer strip (minimum) shall be provided
along all property boundaries that abut residential land with a zoned density of less than
half of the proposed Mobile Home Park density. No structures, buildings or utilities may
be placed in the buffer strip, except that utilities may cross a buffer strip to provide
services to a Mobile Home Park.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
26 | P a g e
J. Open Space. Mobile Home Parks shall provide a suitable, accessible common space for
recreation equal to 10% of the total space for individual sites. The area required for a
common wastewater disposal system may be counted only of it will be suitably
landscaped for recreational purposes.
K. Infrastructure. See 820.18 Mobile Home Park Infrastructure Standards.
820.16 Mobile Home Site Standards
A. Dimensions. Mobile Home Sites shall meet the minimum requirements as described in
Table 820.16A Mobile Home Site Standards.
820.16A Mobile Home Site Standards
Type of Mobile Home Site Minimum Area* Minimum Width
Site contains no well or septic system 6,500 square feet 50 feet
Site contains drinking water well 12,000 square feet 75 feet
Site contains septic system 20,000 square feet 100 feet
Note: To be included in a Mobile Home Park, a Mobile Home Site shall be served by either a centralized domestic water
system or a centralized sewer system or by both.
*Land within wetlands, flood plains or easements shall not count toward the Minimum Area of a Mobile Home Site.
B. Site coverage. Enclosed buildings on a site shall not exceed 30% of the site area.
C. Depth. A home site shall be deep enough to provide for minimum structure setbacks and
for minimum area requirements in this Section.
D. Structure Setbacks. Minimum setback distances for structures within Mobile Home
Parks shall comply with the requirements in Table 820.16B Mobile Home Park Structure
Setbacks.
820.17 Mobile Home and Accessory Structure Standards.
A. Building Permits. A building permit is required prior to construction or home
installation in a Mobile Home Park. Plumbing or electrical permits are also needed. A
written permit is also required for removing an installed mobile home from a Mobile
Home Park.
B. Tax Certificates. A mobile home shall not be removed from a site until a written
certificate is obtained from the tax collector of the City of Ellsworth identifying the
mobile home and stating that all property taxes applicable to the mobile home, including
those for the current tax year, have been paid or that the mobile home is exempt from
such taxation.
C. Home Standards. At a minimum, homes shall conform to the Mobile Home Standards
of the State of Maine. Mobile homes shall have a minimum living space of 500 square
feet.
D. Home Pads. A mobile home shall be set upon a mobile home pad consisting of at least a
12 inch thickness of gravel base material. Concrete or other durable pads approved by
820.16 B Mobile Home Park Structure Setbacks
Location Structure Setback Minimum Distance
Park accessway right-of-way line 20 feet (front yard setback)
Side or rear Mobile Home Site line 15 feet (side or rear yard setback)
Mobile Home Park boundary line or street right-of-way
line (same as required for the Rural (R) zoning district)
40 feet (front yard setback)
15 feet (side yard setback)
30 feet (rear yard setback)
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
27 | P a g e
the Planning Board may be used. The width and length of the mobile home pad shall at
least match the dimensions of the mobile home placed upon it.
E. Skirting. The vertical space from the mobile home pad to the mobile home frame shall
be enclosed with a durable material.
F. Accessory structures such as a garage shall be allowed upon mobile home sites
provided the structure meets the provisions of these ordinances and all other applicable
regulations.
G. Utility Buildings. Each occupied mobile home site shall be provided with an accessory
building with a minimum size of 64 square feet.
H. Screening. Fuel tanks, bottled gas, dumpsters and other utility structures shall be placed
in such a way that they are screened and protected from roadways.
I. Ruins. Ruins caused by fire or other causes are not allowed within a Mobile Home
Park. If ruins are created, such ruins shall be removed within 60 consecutive calendar
days from the time of their creation.
820.18 Mobile Home Park Infrastructure Standards.
A. Accessways.
i. Responsibility. Accessways within the Park shall be constructed, maintained and
serviced by the Mobile Home Park management, including snow removal.
ii. Design Standards. Accessways serving home sites within the Park shall, at a
minimum, conform to Site Road provisions of City of Ellsworth Chapter 56,
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards. Accessways serving other
uses shall conform to the appropriate Street Type classification in Article 9.
iii. Connections. Any park, proposed to generate average daily traffic of 200 trips
per day or more must have at least two emergency access connections to public
streets.
B. Lighting. Streets and intersections shall be illuminated consistent with section 812
Exterior Lighting Standards exterior lighting standards.
C. Electric Supply
i. Design. A Mobile Home Park shall contain an electrical system designed by an
Electrical Engineer registered in the State of Maine. The system shall be installed
and maintained in accordance with applicable State and City regulations. Electric
substations, transformers, transmission lines, distribution line and meters shall be
located or screened in such manner that they are not unsightly or hazardous.
ii. Distribution. Electrical distribution lines within the Mobile Home Park may be
installed overhead or underground. All underground lines shall be protected by a
rigid conduit or encased in concrete.
iii. Services. Electric service lines to each mobile home, accessory buildings, and
Mobile Home Park service buildings shall be underground. The service lines
shall be enclosed in a rigid conduit or encased in concrete.
D. Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting installed on a mobile home or mobile home site
shall be installed such that it is not directed toward surrounding property, streets or other
mobile home sites or the sky. It shall be consistent with section 812 Exterior Lighting
Standards.
E. Fire Protection. Water supplies for firefighting shall comply with Chapter 4 Fire
Prevention and Protection Ordinance.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
28 | P a g e
F. Parking. At least two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each mobile home
site at a distance less than 100 feet from the home it serves. Off-street parking spaces
shall be constructed with a minimum thickness of six inches of gravel base material.
Such parking space shall have a minimum dimension of 9 feet width by 20 feet length.
G. Refuse.
i. The park management shall provide occupied mobile home sites with a
conveniently located, watertight, vermin-resistant enclosure for refuse storage.
ii. Storage of refuse shall be enclosed to prohibit access by animals and to minimize
health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accidents, wild fire,
obnoxious odors or air pollution.
iii. Collection of refuse at regular intervals shall be the responsibility of the park
management and shall be according to State of Maine and City regulations.
H. Signs. Signs shall be consistent with the City of Ellsworth Sign Ordinance.
I. Stormwater. A Mobile Home Park shall provide a surface water drainage system
conforming to applicable provisions of Article 10 Stormwater Design and Construction
Standards.
J. Wastewater Disposal.
i. Wastewater disposal systems shall comply with the Maine State Plumbing Code
and be designed and installed under the direction of a Maine licensed
professional.
ii. A Mobile Home Park located within 500 feet of a public sewer system shall
provide an internal sewer system connected into the public system, per the
Ellsworth Code of Ordinance Chapter 5 Sewer Ordinance. Any and all expenses
incurred will be borne by the developer.
iii. Where public sewer is not available, a sanitary sewer system designed by an
engineer or septic systems designed by a Licensed Site Evaluator shall be
provided.
iv. Wastewater disposal systems serving the Mobile Home Park shall be constructed
and maintained under the responsibility of the park management.
K. Water Supply.
i. Each mobile home shall be provided with an adequate, safe, potable water supply
of at least of 90 gallons per day per bedroom.
ii. Water supply systems shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
State of Maine Plumbing Code.
iii. The Administrator may require a hydrogeologic assessment in cases where site
considerations or development design indicate potential of adverse impacts on
ground water quality or supply.
iv. A Mobile Home Park located within 200 feet of a public water main shall
provide a water system connected into the public system. Any and all expenses
incurred will be borne by the developer.
820.19 Emergency Mobile Home Parks.
A. Purpose. Emergency Mobile Home Parks may be constructed for mass
emergency housing in the event of a natural or man-made disaster.
B. Permitting. An Emergency Mobile Home Park construction permit shall be
issued for one year and may be extended for terms of six months as needed. The
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
29 | P a g e
Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for granting or denying
the permit.
C. Plan Submittal. A plan drawing showing the Emergency Mobile Home Park
shall be submitted to the Ellsworth Planning Board within 60 calendar days after
issuance of the Emergency Mobile Home Park Construction Permit.
D. Standards. Maximum effort must be made to adhere to all Design Standards of
this Section and all City Ordinances. However, since time is important in
establishing an Emergency Mobile Home Park, facilities may be installed in a
temporary manner provided that the public health and safety is not imperiled.
E. Location. Emergency Mobile Home Parks are allowed within any zoning
district other than districts within the Shoreland Zone (Article 4).
F. Temporary Use. An Emergency Mobile Home Park shall not be converted to a
permanent Mobile Home Park unless all provisions of this ordinance are met.
821 YARD SALES
For purposes of this section, a yard sale means a public sale at a dwelling at which personal items
belonging to the residents of the dwelling are sold. Yard sale includes garage sales, porch sales, tag
slaes, and the like. Items purchased elsewhere expressly for resale at a yard sale are prohibited.
Commercial outdoor sales activities are prohibited. Yard sales exceeding three consecutive days or
held more frequently than three times in a calendar year will be considered a commercial use and
require a Site Development Plan review.
822. VISIBILITY TRIANGLE
822.1 Visibility Triangle. In all zoning districts, with the exception of Downtown, no obstruction
taller than 3 feet which obscure the view of automobile drivers shall be placed on any corner
lot within a visibility triangle area as defined below in section 822.2.
822.2 Measuring the Visibility Triangle. The visibility Triangle is a triangular area of land on a
lot formed by drawing from the edge of the travel way one line perpendicular to and one line
parallel to the property line or accessway for a specified length and one line diagonally
joining the other two lines per the illustration below using as an example the intersection of
a residential street with a commercial road. The specified length of the perpendicular and
parallel lines is dependent on the types of intersecting accessways as shown in Table 822.2
below.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 8 Performance Standards
30 | P a g e
Table 822.2 Length of Visibility Triangle Perpendicular and Parallel lines in feet per intersecting Accessway Types
(per Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards)
Transit and Regional
Rural
Retail
Mixed Use & In town
Commercial
Alley
Residential
Private Residential
Site
Commercial driveway
Residential driveway
Transit and Regional 25* 25* 25* 25* 25* 10 25* 10 10 10 10
Rural 25* 25* 25* 25* 25* 10 25* 10 10 10 10
Retail 25* 25* 25* 25* 25* 10 25* 10 10 10 10
Mixed Use &In-town 25* 25* 25* 25* 25* 10 25* 10 10 10 10
Commercial 25* 25* 25* 25* 25* 10 25* 10 10 10 10
Alley 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Residential 25* 25* 25* 25* 25* 10 25* 10 10 10 10
Private Residential 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Site Road 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Commercial Driveway 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
Residential Driveway 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10
*In the Urban, Industrial, Business Park, and Commercial zoning districts, that
measurement is 15 feet.
822.3 Exception. In certain situations such as, but not limited to, a signalized intersection or if the
slope allows for adequate visibility, the administrator may allow an obstruction taller than
three feet to be located within the visibility triangle if it is demonstrated that safety is not
impacted.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9
Street Design and Construction Standards
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 9 STREET DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
901 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
901.1 Purpose. This Article is to promote public health, safety and welfare by
establishing design and construction standards for roads and accessways for
developments within the City of Ellsworth.
901.2 Applicability. This Article shall apply to:
A. Developments that generate new trips that utilize roadways and intersections
affecting directly or indirectly one or more traffic signals, and
B. The construction and reconstruction of all streets and accessways except that
this Article does not apply to the following, as defined, Commercial
Driveways and Residential Driveways except as specifically noted in sections
902.7, 908.1.K, 910.2 A & B, 910.3 A & B, 915, and 916.2 of this Article;
Commercial farming activities as defined by M.R.S.A. 17 §2805; and Timber
Harvesting as defined in M.R.S.A. 12 under the Forest Practices Act.
C. State-owned roads are exempt from this Article.
901.3 Interpretation. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the
construction of accessways which meet higher standards or use improved methods
or materials of equivalent or higher quality.
902 PLAN SUBMISSIONS
902.1 Submittal Contents. Streets shall be presented on site plans showing, at a
minimum:
A. A location map.
B. The location, width, typical cross-section, horizontal and vertical alignments
(plan & profile) of all proposed streets, accessways, sidewalks, and bikeways.
C. The location of all existing streets and accessways within 600 feet, walkways
and sidewalks within 200 feet, and bikeways within 500 feet of the proposed
street or accessway.
D. The location of any pedestrian ways, easements, rights-of-way, and other
areas to be reserved for or dedicated to public use and/or ownership. For any
proposed easement or right-of way, the developer shall submit the proposed
easement language with a signed statement certifying that the easement will
be executed upon approval of the development. In the case of any streets or
other ways dedicated to public ownership, the developer shall submit a signed
statement that s/he will maintain such streets or ways year-round until they are
accepted by the City.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
3 | P a g e
E. A note describing the property owner association for any accessway serving more
than one property owner that is to remain temporarily or permanently in private
ownership.
903 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
903.1 Permit and Notification. Prior to start of the construction or reconstruction of a
road, a Road Permit is needed with the following exceptions:
A. Construction and reconstruction of a public street by the City of Ellsworth.
B. Road work conducted in response to an emergency when there is a risk of
significant property damage or there is an imminent threat to the health, safety
or welfare of the citizens. Work conducted under such circumstances shall be
reported to the Code Enforcement Officer within 48 hours of its occurrence.
903.2 Additional Permits. Any permit required by this Article shall be in addition to
any other permit required by law or ordinance.
903.3 Fee. Road Permit fees shall be set by the City Council in the Permit Fee schedule.
903.4 Inspection. To ensure that all requirements of this Article are met during
construction and reconstruction of a road, the developer shall contact the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to the following stages of improvement so an
inspection can be conducted:
A. Preparation and clearing of
right-of-way;
B. Sub-base course;
C. Aggregate base course;
D. Storm water provisions
constructed; and
E. Completed project.
903.5 Inspector. The inspections will be conducted by the Code Enforcement Officer
and Highway Foreman and/or a professional retained by the City. If the City
retains a professional to inspect the improvements, the applicant shall be assessed
a fee to cover the cost of such inspections.
903.6 Sign-off. The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve each of the improvement
inspection stages before the developer may continue with the work.
903.7 Modification during Construction. If at any time before or during construction
of the road it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer
and Highway Foreman that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable
to make minor modifications to the location or design of the road, the Code
Enforcement Officer may allow such changes provided that the modifications are
within the spirit and intent of the approval(s) under which it was granted. The
Code Enforcement Officer shall issue any authorization under this section in
writing and shall provide a copy to the approving authority.
903.8 Noncompliance. If it is found upon inspection of the road improvements that they
have not been constructed in accordance with approved plans and specifications,
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
4 | P a g e
the inspector shall so report to the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall then notify the applicant and if necessary, the bonding
company, and take all necessary steps to preserve the City’s rights under the
guarantee, security or bond. If, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer,
the improvements are not corrected in a timely manner, the City may use any
Financial Security provided by the applicant to correct the improvements to the
satisfaction of the City.
904 WAIVERS AND ALTERNATIVE DESIGNS
904.1 The Code Enforcement Officer is not authorized to modify the standards of this
ordinance. The CEO may grant design waivers only as expressly permitted in this
Article.
904.2 The Planning Board may waive portions of the standards of this Article only as
expressly permitted in this Article.
A. The Planning Board may consider waivers if they will not result in a more
adverse impact on public safety than the existing conditions.
B. The Planning Board shall state the reasons for any waiver or alternative design
in its decision.
C. Alternative design standards proposed by applicants must be compliant with
sound engineering practice, as reflected in publications by the Maine
Department of Transportation, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Official
(AASHTO), and/or The Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE).
D. The Planning Board may grant necessary waivers of particular design
standards for road construction or reconstruction where any of the following
conditions exist within the project limits:
i. Right-of-way width is insufficient to reconstruct the road to meet
standards;
ii. Physical limitations, such as encroaching buildings or steep grades
make construction within the appropriate design standards impractical;
iii. Traffic volumes are less than 400 average daily traffic (ADT).
iv. The road serves a Special Use, as defined.
904.3 The City Council. The City Council has the authority to waive the design
standards of this Article by using the following procedure:
A. Written Recommendation. The City Council shall consider written input
from the Administrator, the Ellsworth Road Commissioner, and the Highway
Foreman as applicable.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
5 | P a g e
B. Public Hearing. The Council shall hold a public hearing.
C. Determination. The City Council shall make a determination that a departure
from the design standards of this Article is in conformity with the spirit and
the intent of this Article, related to applicable City adopted Plans, based on the
particular set of circumstances, and with section 904.
904.4 Public Safety. No waivers or departures from the standards of this Article shall
be approved if such modifications will have more adverse impact on public safety
than the existing conditions.
904.5 Final Plan Record. All waiver and/or alternative design decisions shall be
recorded on the final road plan, site plan and/or subdivision plan.
905 MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND RECONSTRUCTION OF STREETS
905.1 Private Ways. Maintenance for any private accessway serving more than one
property owner shall be managed by written property owner association by-laws.
Copies of by-laws shall be submitted with road permit applications when
applicable.
905.2 Street Work by the City. The repair or reconstruction by the City of an existing
city-owned street should meet or exceed (1) the current road design standards; or
(2) the road standards to which the street was last constructed or reconstructed.
905.3 Repair Work by a Developer. The repair by a developer of an existing Cityowned
street shall meet or exceed (1) the current road design standards; or (2) the
road standards to which the street was last constructed or reconstructed.
905.4 Reconstruction of a City-owned Street by a Developer. Reconstruction of a
City-owned street by a developer must be approved by the City Council, as
follows:
A. Scoping Process. When a development is expected to generate more than 250
ADT, the City Planner, in consultation with the Ellsworth Police Chief and
Code Enforcement Officer, shall meet with the developer to determine the
scope of the potential traffic impact area to be studied. The area to be studied
may include the first major intersection and road segments in between in each
direction from the development direct accessway(s) where it is determined
that there are potential safety, capacity or other traffic-related issues. The
proposed off-site improvements shall meet, to the greatest extent possible, all
applicable road construction standards of this Article that can take place
within the existing right-of-way.
B. Planning Board. In the approval process, the Planning Board shall state an
opinion as to whether the proposed off-site road improvements have a more
adverse impact on public safety than the existing conditions or shall cause
unreasonable traffic congestion or unsafe condition to the improved street,
abutting existing street or to the proposed street. The Planning Board shall
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
6 | P a g e
present in writing its findings and recommendations to the City Council.
If the Planning Board finds that a proposed road does not meet the design
standards of this Article and does not grant a waiver, it may approve an
application upon the condition that the road design must be approved by the
City Council before any construction may begin.
C. City Council Approval. In making its decision, the City Council shall
consider the particular set of circumstances as presented to the Planning
Board, the findings and recommendations of the Planning Board, and follow
the process established in section 904.3.
906 STREET TYPES AND GENERAL DESIGN PURPOSES
Using the functional classification and criteria presented in Table 906, all new roads and roads
proposed for reconstruction shall be assigned a Street Type by the City Planner upon
consultation with the Code Enforcement Officer and the Police Chief.
Table 906 STREET TYPES AND GENERAL DESIGN PURPOSES
Name Purpose and Special Criteria Examples
1. Transit
Roads*
To provide long-distance continuous routes between Ellsworth and
the surrounding service centers such as Bangor/Brewer, Bucksport,
and Bar Harbor. These State-owned roads are designed to move large
number of vehicles at high speeds.
Bucksport Rd from the City
line to Christian Ridge Rd.
Bangor Rd from the City line
to the Union River Bridge.
2. Regional
Roads*
To collect traffic from rural areas and surrounding communities and
deliver it to the City center and the arterial network. The priority for
these roads is vehicle mobility at moderate speed with some
pedestrian/ bikeways, especially within the Growth Area.
North St, Surry Rd, Bayside
Rd, North Bend Rd, and
Mariaville Rd.
Main Street from the
Fairground Rd to the City line.
3. Rural
Roads*
To collect traffic from rural neighborhoods and deliver it to the City
Center and/or to the larger collector and arterial road network. The
priority for this type of road is to preserve and enhance the existing
rural character of the areas it serves with some pedestrian amenities,
especially within the Growth Area.
Buttermilk Rd, Red Bridge Rd,
Winkumpaugh Rd, Happytown
Rd, Gary Moore Rd and
Nicolin Rd.
Union St from McDonald Ave
to the City line.
4. Retail
Streets*
To serve Ellsworth’s retail and service areas. This type of commercial
arterial has many intersections and driveways needed to access
businesses. The design of these roads considers mobility and access,
as well as to provide for other modes of transportation. Pedestrian
access is considered secondary to vehicular mobility/access to
adjacent businesses.
High St, Myrick St, Downeast
Hwy, Douglas Hwy, and High
St.
State St from Central St to the
Fork in the Rd.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
7 | P a g e
Table 906 STREET TYPES AND GENERAL DESIGN PURPOSES
Name Purpose and Special Criteria Examples
5. Mixed-Use
and In
Town
Streets*
To connect Ellsworth’s retail, service areas and neighborhoods, as
well as provide pedestrian-friendly access to these areas. These
streets are typically located in mixed-use, commercial, downtown,
retail and residential areas with pedestrian activity. These streets may
have on-street parking depending on the type and intensity of
adjacent commercial land uses. These streets emphasize a variety of
travel choices including pedestrian and bicycle.
Oak St, Water St, Foster St
Beechland Rd, Christian Ridge
Rd, , Washington St, Birch
Ave, Park St, Spruce St, Deane
St, Franklin St, Elm St, and
Hancock St.
Bucksport Rd from Christian
Ridge Rd to the Surry Rd.
Main St from Grant St to the
Fairground Rd.
6. Commercial
Streets*
To provide vehicle and heavy truck access to targeted commercial
and industrial areas
Commerce St, Vittum Rd,
Industrial Rd.
7. Alleys To provide a secondary means of access to lots.
Designed for 0 to 50 ADT. Pavement may be waived.
Store Street.
8. Residential
Streets
To provide an acceptable, if not optimal environment for a residential
neighborhood. Such roadway shall be designed to carry no more
traffic than is generated on the street itself. The road shall be designed
to carry less than 1,000 ADT.
Designed for 0 to 999 ADT. Pavement may be waived if in the Rural
Area and less than 100 ADT.
Altons Avenue
9. Private
Residential
Street
To provide for very low volume of traffic at low speed and to provide
the safest and most desirable environment for a residential
neighborhood. Such roadway shall be designed to carry no more
traffic than is generated on the street itself. Streets designated private
residential street must serve less than 50 ADT. Roads constructed
under these standards shall remain privately-owned and maintained
unless the road is improved to standards and accepted by the City
Council.
0 to 50 ADT. Pavement may be waived. These must remain private
unless upgraded to higher standards.
Overlook Way
10. Site
Roads
10.1. Internal: To provide site circulation within a parking lot
serving a building, a development site under one ownership, a
consolidated development, or a phased development generating more
than 100 peak hour trips (PHT) and having more than 100 parking
spaces.
10.2. Cross-access: To provide connectivity between parking
lots.
10.3. Commercial Access: To provide access to a commercial
development not to exceed 100 PHT.
Parking lot of shopping mall or
other large place of business
Business to business.
Public way to business.
*Definition not dependent on ADT
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
8 | P a g e
907 STREET DESIGN STANDARDS (See also Section 916 Accessway Construction
Standards)
907.1 General Provisions.
A. Minimum Standards. The design standards are considered minimum
standards and shall control the roadway, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, drainage
systems, culverts, and other appurtenances except as otherwise specified.
B. Alternative Design Standards. Proposed street plans may use road design
standards other than presented in Table 908 Design Standards if the road will
serve infill residential development within the Ellsworth designated Urban
Compact area or cluster residential development within the Growth Area
serviced by City water and sewer; and will generate a volume of traffic of less
than 400 average daily trips, with a maximum speed limit of 25 mile per hour.
The minimum right-of-way shall comply with the standard presented in Table
908 Design Standards. This alternative road design shall be approved by the
Planning Board and shall be designed by an Engineer per the standards
provided in the latest editions of the “Geometric Design of Highway and
Streets” and “Guidelines for Geometric Design of Very Low Volume Local
Roads” published by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
C. Additional Right-Of-Way Width at intersection approaches may be required
for such special elements as, but not limited to, raised median channelization
and turning lanes.
D. Apron. No connector and/or street apron shall extend into the street farther
than the base of the curb or beyond the gutter line.
E. The Centrally Managed Traffic Control Signal System (CMS) (Figure 1)
provisions found in this section and in sections 907.1. K and M, and 909.3.B.
and C shall apply to developments affecting one or more traffic signals, or
developments that generate new trips that utilize roadways and intersections
affecting directly or indirectly one or more of the traffic signals.
Figure 1
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
9 | P a g e
The City of Ellsworth CMS consists of, but is not limited to, the following traffic
signals:
1. State Street at High School
2. State Street and Oak Street
3. High Street and Main Street
4. Water Street and Main Street
5. High Street at Merrill Lane
6. High Street at north entrance to Maine Coast Mall
7. High Street at south entrance to Maine Coast Mall
8. Route 3 at Myrick Street
9. Myrick Street at Home Depot
10. Myrick Street at Route 1
11. Route 3 at Beechland Road
12. Route 3, south of Beechland Road
The goals of the CMS are to reduce delays and manage travel times for
vehicles traveling through these intersections by optimizing progression of
traffic (minimize stops) on the artery roadways (State Street, High Street,
Water Street, Route 1, Route 3, and Myrick Street) and minimizing
congestion. Any proposed traffic signals or changes to the CMS shall be
reviewed by the City of Ellsworth Traffic Engineer. Review cost shall be
borne by the applicant. The City Engineer shall submit a written report to the
City Planner for final approval by the Administrator.
F. Capacity. Streets and accessways which can be expected to carry traffic to
and from neighboring streets and developments, shall have traffic carrying
capacity and be suitably improved to accommodate the amount and types of
traffic generated by them. A traffic impact analysis of the proposed project on
the capacity, level of service and safety of adjacent streets prepared by an
Engineer shall be submitted. The analysis shall include anticipated trip
generation, current and impacted Level of Service, sight distance relative to
posted speed, crash history and linear distance from adjacent driveways and
accessways on the same road. The Administrator may waive this requirement
for development generating less than 50 ADT, and for Residential or Private
Residential Streets if, in the Administrator’s opinion, the impact will be small
enough to warrant such a waiver.
G. Centerline. The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the rightof-
way unless the Administrator determines there is a logical reason for it to
be shifted.
H. Corner Easements may be required to provide and maintain the safety sight
distance.
I. Driveways Exempt. Per 901.2 Commercial and residential driveways are
exempt from complying with this article unless specified otherwise.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
10 | P a g e
J. Emergency Access. The Ellsworth Fire Department shall be consulted for
written approval of proposed perimeter access. Such access shall comply with
Chapter 4 Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance.
K. Level of Service.
i. No Development shall cause a reduction in Level of Service, as
defined in Table 908.1 Level of Service Definition by more than one
grade level and in no case shall the Level of Service be reduced to the
level of “D” or below.
ii. Any proposed changes resulting from the application of the LOS
requirements to the CMS such as but not limited to, changes in cycle
lengths and offsets, Time-of-Day schedules, phasing, splits, clearance
intervals, and other programming or equipment shall comply with the
review process in section 907.1.E and be consistent with the goals of
the CMS per section 907.1.E. In some cases the LOS on the side
streets may be programmed to be less than LOS “D” to maintain the
overall goals of the CMS, as recommended by the City Traffic
Engineer.
L. Multiple frontages. Where a lot has frontage on two or more accessways
including Residential and Commercial Driveways, the primary access to the
lot shall be provided from the accessway where there is less traffic congestion
or fewer potential hazards to traffic and pedestrians.
Table 908.1 Level of Service Definitions
LOS A: Free flowing traffic. Drivers, passengers and pedestrians have high level of
comfort and convenience. Each individual is unaffected by other users and is able to
maneuver about safely.
LOS B: Stable flow. Other users are noticeable because there is some affect on behavior.
Less freedom to maneuver than in level A.
LOS C: Still in the range of stable flow, but actions of others may significantly affect the
individual. Safe speeds are determined by factoring in the behavior of others.
Maneuvering about is more difficult and the levels of comfort and convenience decline.
LOS D: High density traffic but still with a stable flow. Maneuverability and speed are
restricted by other traffic. Users experience low levels of comfort and convenience.
Pedestrians have difficulty at time with crossing.
LOS E: Operations are at or near capacity level and often unstable. All speeds are
greatly reduced. Maneuverability is significantly hampered. Levels of comfort,
convenience and safety are dangerously low and frustration runs high.
LOS F: Forced or breakdown flow occur because the system is over capacity. Lines
queue up and move in a stop-and-go waves that are highly unstable. This can be
considered a failing grade for the intersection or road segment. Service breaks down and
gridlock can occur.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
11 | P a g e
Note: The 95th
percentile queue
is the queue
length (in
vehicles) that has
only a 5-percent
probability of
being exceeded
during the
analysis time
period.
M. Queuing. Intersections shall be of a design and have
sufficient capacity to provide for necessary queuing.
i. Sufficient vehicle storage length shall be based on
a determination of the 95th percentile queue (in
vehicles), as calculated by the latest
Synchro/SimTraffic traffic modeling software
used by the MDOT. In determining required
vehicle storage lengths for turning lanes,
consideration shall also be made for the average
(50th percentile queue) for the adjacent through
lane in order to assist in maintaining mobility on the through lane.
Where feasible, the storage length for turning lanes shall meet the
greater of the calculated 95th percentile queue length or the average -
50th percentile queue length, of the adjacent through lane.
ii. Queuing at traffic control signals located within the CMS shall be
designed to minimize congestion on the artery roadways to maintain
progression and minimize stops.
N. Reserved area. When a proposed street or accessway borders an existing
narrow street (not meeting the width requirements of the standards for streets
in these regulations), or when an adopted city plan indicates plans for
realignment for widening of a street that will require use of some of the
abutting land, the plan shall indicate the reserved area and the subject land
deeded to the City of Ellsworth or to the State of Maine.
O. Traffic management. Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic
and pedestrians and/or to avoid traffic congestion, provision shall be made for
turning elements such as, but not limited to, lanes, traffic directional islands,
frontage roads, and traffic controls within public streets.
P. Traffic Counts. Developers may request traffic counts for the signalized
intersections from the City Planner or designee. A fee will be charged to the
developer based on the number of time periods requested. The fee scheduled
is set by the Council.
907.2 Construction Materials/Paving.
A. Accessway Paving. All accessway entering a paved street shall be paved at
least within the street right-of-way and preferably to 30 feet beyond the street
right-of-way.
B. Curbing. All new accessway entering a curbed street shall be curbed on both
sides to a distance of at least 30 feet from the street right-of-way, with
materials matching the street curbing. Sloped curbing is required around all
raised channelization islands or medians.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
12 | P a g e
C. Curbing Within the Urban Core Area.
i. Curbing and gutters are required where subsurface drainage systems
are present and recommended along accessways with traffic volumes
greater than 100 ADT or high demand of on-street parking.
ii. Curbing shall be granite in high use areas and concrete in all other
places.
D. Paving. All new roads shall be paved with the exception of the two conditions
presented below:
i. The Planning Board may waive the paving requirement for Private
Residential Roads and Alleys if the applicant can demonstrate that
potential erosion issues have been adequately addressed; or
ii. The Planning Board may waive paving requirement if the street or
accessway is located in the Rural Area and traffic counts are
determined to be less than 100 ADT, and if the proposed road grade
will not result in the loss of existing road base or surface, or cause an
adverse environmental impact because of erosion, dust, phosphorus
loading, sediments or other factors to sensitive areas such as water
bodies or significant natural areas.
NOTE: Unpaved roads shall under no circumstance be accepted by the City of Ellsworth
as a public road.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
13 | P a g e
908 Street Design Standards.
TABLE 908 Street Design Standards
Street
Designation ?
Transit and
Regional
Rural
Retail
Mixed Use &
In-town
Commercial
Alley
Residential
Private
Residential
Site Road
Street Type (#): 1 & 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Functional Class Arterial/
Collector
Collector Collector Collector Local Local Local Local Local
Estimated Ultimate Volume
(ADT)
DOT NA NA NA NA < 50 > 50 = 50 NA
Maximum design speed
(MPH)
DOT 45 35 30 35 10 30 15 20
Minimum Right-of-way
Width (ft)
60 60 50 50 60 20 50 40 NA
Minimum Travel Way
Width (ft)
DOT 22 22 22 24 10 20 18 22
Minimum width of
shoulders (ft)
DOT 4 4 4 5 NA 3 2 3
Min. Centerline Radius (ft) DOT ENG 510 200 510 NA 150 75 100
Minimum Tangent Between
Curves of Reverse
Alignment (ft)
DOT ENG
or 400
ENG
or 300
100
100 NA
50
NA
NA
Min. Angle of Street
Intersections (degrees)
DOT 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60
Minimum Curb/ Entrance
Radius (ft)
DOT 40 40 40 60 20 40 20 35
Minimum ROW Radii at
Intersections (ft)
20 20 20 20 40 NA 20 NA 20
Minimum Grade (%) DOT 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5
Maximum Grade (%)
(may be exceeded for 100’
or less)
DOT 11 12 12 12 15 12 14 12
Max. Grade within 50’ of
Intersection (%)*
DOT 3* 3* 3* 3* 3* 3* 3* 3*
Crown % (Paved) DOT 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 2
Crown % (Gravel w/o
superelevation)
NA 4 NA NA NA 4 4 4 NA
Key to Table:
DOT: Overseen by Maine Department of Transportation.
ENG: Must be designed by Professional Engineer
N: Not Required
NA: Not Applicable
R: 3* Max. Grade within 50’ of intersection up to 6% may be allowed if road geometric design is properly
adjusted to enhance safety. Must be designed by a Professional Engineer if > 3%.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
14 | P a g e
909 STREET SYSTEM DESIGN STANDARDS
909.1 Connectivity. The design of developments requiring Planning Board Approval
shall strive to achieve connectivity with other compatible developments to
logically extend the street system into surrounding areas. Property owners
providing for future connectivity shall record:
A. An easement allowing access to and from the adjacent development.
B. The design of the street shall conform to the standards of this Article. The
design shall ensure efficient and safe vehicular operation and pedestrian
movements for internal circulation and for traffic mobility on the adjacent
roadway.
C. All street stubs shall be provided with temporary turn-around or cul-de-sacs
unless specifically exempted by the Planning Board, and the restoration and
extension of the street shall be the responsibility of any future developer or
abutting landowner.
D. The Planning Board may waive the requirement for connectivity following
recommendation by the City Planner. This recommendation shall be made in
consultation with the Ellsworth Police Chief and Code Enforcement Officer.
909.2 Dead-end/Turnaround.
A. All streets shall provide adequate vehicle turnaround.
B. Any dead-end street of more than 300 feet in length shall include a vehicle
turnaround consisting of a cul-de-sac, a T or a Y ending. At the terminus, a
cul-de-sac shall have no less than 120 feet outside diameter of the traveled
way. If the T or Y configuration is used, there shall be a minimum length of
70 feet on each leg of the T or Y at the terminus. The 70-foot distance is
measured from the centerline of the closed street that is dead-ending. An
adequate easement in line with the street to provide continuation of the street
where future development is possible should be provided.
909.3 Traffic Control Devices.
A. Signs. Appropriate traffic control signage shall be placed within the site and at
intersections, on pavement, on medians and on channelization islands.
B. New Traffic Signal. All new traffic signals shall be equipped with emergency
vehicle preemption equipment, traffic counter apparatus, and battery back-up
systems, as well as meet the equipment general specifications sheet as
provided by the City Engineer.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
15 | P a g e
C. Upgraded Traffic Signal. All traffic signals being upgraded as part of a
Maine DOT permit or Planning Board approval shall be equipped with
emergency vehicle preemption equipment, traffic counter apparatus, and
battery back-up systems, as well as meet the equipment general specifications
sheet as provided by the City Engineer.
D. Connection to the CMS. New, existing, or upgraded traffic signals shall be
inter-connected and be coordinated, as deemed necessary by the City of
Ellsworth Traffic Engineer.
910 ACCESS MANAGEMENT
910.1 Safety Sight Distance.
A. General. Accessways onto City streets shall be designed in profile and
location to provide the required safety sight distance measured in each
direction.
B. Measuring. Sight distances shall be measured from the driver's seat of a
passenger vehicle standing on that portion of the exit with the front of the
vehicle a minimum of 10 feet behind the curb line or edge of shoulder, with
the height of the eye 3½ feet, to the top of an object 4½ feet above the
pavement.
C. Sight Distance. A sight distance of 10 feet for each mile per hour of posted
speed limit shall be maintained or provided. For example, a 50 mile per hour
posted road will require 500 feet of sight distance.
D. Waiver. The Planning Board may lower the safety sight distance if an
Engineer can provide adequate documentation that a shorter sight distance
will provide adequate safety and following recommendation by the City
Planner, in consultation with the Ellsworth Police Chief and the Ellsworth
Code Enforcement Officer.
910.2 Functional Area of Intersection
A. New accessways including Commercial Driveway and Residential Driveways
shall not be permitted within the functional area of an intersection unless:
i. No other reasonable access to the property is available, and
ii. The accessway does not create a safety or operational problem, and
iii. The applicant agrees in writing to close the accessway if and when
alternative accessway becomes available that is more consistent with the
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
16 | P a g e
standards of this article.
B. Where no alternatives exist, construction of an accessway including a
Commercial Driveway and a Residential Driveway may be allowed as far as
possible from the functional area of the road intersection as a non-conforming
accessway. Property access will be restricted to the road with the expected lowest
traffic and/or lowest functional classification and shall be closed within six
months of when any conforming access becomes available.
C. Accessways shall be at least as wide as required by this ordinance for their entire
length.
910.3 Alignment/Offset/Spacing.
A. Adjacent Properties under the same ownership shall be considered as a
single property for application of accessway spacing, including the spacing of
Commercial and Residential Driveways.
B. Multiple Accessways. One accessway including Commercial and Residential
Driveways per development is preferred. Application for multiple accessways
for a single development shall conform to the spacing standards of this
Article. Multiple accessways may be allowed if one or more of the following
criteria are met:
i. Separation of standard vehicles from heavy trucks or emergency
vehicles;
ii. Two one-way accessways that, in combination, serve ingress and
egress to the development;
iii. Multiple accessways enhance the safety of the abutting roadway and
improve on-site traffic circulation.
C. Alignment. To reduce turning movement conflicts, accessways on undivided
streets should be aligned with those accessways across the road. If this is not
possible, separation between accessways shall provide for maximum safety
and mobility.
910.4 Cross and Shared Access.
A. Commercial Developments shall provide for cross access and/or shared
access to connect adjacent properties in order to reduce curb cuts and to
preserve the capacity and safety of the road system.
B. Deeded Access. Property owners establishing shared and/or cross access shall
record:
i. An easement allowing cross access to and from the adjacent
properties;
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
17 | P a g e
ii. A joint maintenance agreement defining maintenance responsibilities
of property owners of the shared accessway and cross access system.
C. Temporary Access. Property owners that provide shared accessways and/or
cross access may be granted a temporary approval, where necessary, to
provide reasonable access until such time as permanent shared access and/or
cross access are provided with adjacent properties. Within six months after
construction of a joint use or cross access, property owners utilizing such
accessway shall close and remove any existing temporary accessway provided
for in the interim.
D. Future Cross Access. Developments may be required to construct a paved
stub-out to the property line in anticipation of a future accessway. The design
of the cross access corridor or joint access shall conform to the standards of
this Article. The design shall ensure efficient and safe vehicular operation and
pedestrian movements for internal circulation and for traffic mobility on the
adjacent roadway.
E. Maintenance. Private cross and shared accessways are not intended to be
publicly maintained.
F. Parking reduction. Properties that provide for shared access to commercial
lots shall benefit from a 5% reduction in parking spaces and properties that
provide cross access (connectivity) shall also benefit from a 5% reduction in
parking spaces. The total combined reduction in parking spaces shall not
exceed 7% and must be recommended to the Planning Board by the City
Planner.
G. Service roads. Subdivisions with frontage on a State Routes 1, 1A, and 3 may
be required to be designed with access to the lots from a service road.
H. Waivers. The Planning Board may waive the requirement for cross and/or
share access following recommendation by the City Planner. This
recommendation shall be made in consultation with the Ellsworth Police Chief
and the Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer.
911 LANDSCAPING AND STREETSCAPE.
A. Developments requiring Planning Board Approval and located with the City
Urban Core Area shall provide for consistent streetscape and landscaping
design.
B. Developments requiring Planning Board Approval located on High Street
shall provide for design consistent with the High Street Beautification Study.
C. Cul-de-sacs located in a wooded area prior to development shall maintain a
stand of trees at the center of the cul-de-sac if such trees are healthy and have
a diameter at breast height of 8 inch. In the event the trees have been
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
18 | P a g e
harvested, the proposed development plan should include landscaping of the
center of the cul-de-sac.
912 SIDEWALKS AND BIKEWAYS
For developments requiring Planning Board Approval, reasonable and safe provision shall be
made to create pedestrian and/or bicycle connections between points intended for, and suitable
for such uses. Provisions including, but not limited to sidewalks, curb ramps, pedestrian
crossings and/or bikeways shall be within the development boundary and/or abutting street
rights-of-way, and as required below:
A. Development whose location can clearly further the implementation of
Ellsworth pedestrian and/or bicycle facilities per the Ellsworth Downtown
Plan - Bicycle-Ped section shall do so by providing for sidewalk and/or
bikeway facilities.
B. Sidewalks and/or bikeways shall be constructed if the development is located
within 200 feet of an existing sidewalk or bikeway, in the Ellsworth
Downtown Area, or abutting a Street Type # 4 or #5, or when necessary to
provide direct or indirect access to public facilities, and retail and financial
services.
C. Sidewalks and/or bikeways easement(s) shall be provided if the development
is located within the Ellsworth Urban Core and/or within 500 feet of an
existing pedestrian and/or bikeway facility.
D. Easement provided for pedestrian and bicycle facilities shall be recorded with
the Hancock County Registry of Deeds.
E. Minimum sidewalk width is 5 feet.
F. The Planning Board may waive part or all of the requirements of this section
if there is justification to do so. Financial hardship shall not be considered a
justification. See Section 904 Waivers.
913 STREET LIGHTING FOR ROADWAYS AND SIDEWALKS
Reserved.
914 STREET NAMING AND PROPERTY NUMBERING
Reserved.
915 ACCESSWAYS IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
A. Regulation of accessways in the Shoreland Zone pertains to all accessways
including Residential Driveways and Commercial Driveways.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
19 | P a g e
B. New permanent accessways shall be set back at least 100 feet from the normal
high-water line of great ponds and the Union River and 75 feet from the
normal high-water line of the Union River Estuary and other water bodies and
wetlands unless no reasonable alternative exists as demonstrated by the
applicant. If no reasonable alternative exists, the accessway shall be set back
as far as possible, but no less than 50 feet on slopes up to ten 10%. Where
slopes exceed 10%, setback shall be increased by 25 feet for each 10%
increase in slope. This paragraph shall not apply to approaches to water
crossings nor to accessways that provide access to permitted structures and
facilities located nearer to the shoreline due to an operational necessity.
C. New accessways are prohibited in the Resource Protection District except to
provide access to permitted uses within the District, or as approved by the
Planning Board upon a finding that no reasonable alternative route or location
is available outside the District, in which case the accessway shall be set back
as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body, tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
D. Existing State and City streets may be expanded within the legal road right-ofway
regardless of their setbacks from a water body.
916 ACCESSWAY CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
(See also Table 908 Design Standards)
The following standards shall apply to the construction and repair of accessways and related
features such as drainage systems and culverts.
916.1 General Construction Standards for Streets.
A. Streets shall be crowned or graded to provide surface drainage.
B. All plans for new or modified streets shall include an erosion and
sedimentation control plan for describing temporary and permanent erosion
control measured to be provided. Temporary and permanent maintenance
requirements shall be provided in the plan. Final design plans shall reference
the erosion and sedimentation plan by note.
C. In order to prevent road surface drainage from directly entering water bodies,
roads shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to empty into an
unscarified buffer strip at least 50 feet in width between the outflow point of
the ditch or culvert and the normal high-water line of a water body. Where
slopes exceed 10%, the buffer strip shall be increased 25 feet for each 10%
increase in slope.
D. Buffer strips less than prescribed above may be approved upon a clear
showing by the applicant that an exception is necessary and that appropriate
techniques will be used to avoid sedimentation of the water body. Such
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
20 | P a g e
techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts
placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body.
E. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts, and other water control
installations associated with roads shall be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
F. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips, and water turnouts shall
be installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer
strips before the flow in the road or ditches gains sufficient volume or head to
erode the road or ditch.
G. Prior to final completion and acceptance of a road, or the issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy, the Engineer shall provide to the Code Enforcement
Officer a letter stating that the site work was evaluated and was built,
according to approved plans to the maximum extent possible and will likely
function as intended.
H. The Code Enforcement Officer may request as built-plans.
I. The laying of the pavement course, where required by this ordinance, for
residential developments is optional until one these conditions are met: 1) at
least 30% or three of the residential lots are occupied, whichever is greater, or
2) three years has passed since the first Certificate of Occupancy was issued.
916.2 General Construction Standards for Residential and Commercial Driveways.
A. Commercial and Residential Driveways shall be crowned or graded to provide
surface drainage.
B. Commercial and Residential Driveways shall include an erosion and
sedimentation control plan describing temporary and permanent erosion
control measured to be provided.
C. In order to prevent accessway surface drainage from directly entering water
bodies, Commercial and Residential Driveways shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained to empty into an unscarified buffer strip at least
50 feet in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the
normal high-water line of a water body. Where slopes exceed 10%, the buffer
strip shall be increased 25 feet for each 10% increase in slope.
D. Buffer strips less than prescribed above may be approved upon a clear
showing by the applicant that an exception is necessary and that appropriate
techniques will be used to avoid sedimentation of the water body. Such
techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts
placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
21 | P a g e
E. Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts, and other water control
installations associated with roads shall be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
F. Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips, and water turnouts shall
be installed in a manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer
strips before the flow in the accessway or ditches gains sufficient volume or
head to erode the Commercial Driveway, Residential Driveway, or ditch.
916.3 Minimum Thickness of Material After Compaction.
TABLE 916.3A STREET MATERIALS
Road Type
Material
Transit and
Regional
Rural,
Mixed Use/ In-town, and
Retail
Commercial
and Site
Road
Residential
Street
Private and Alley
When it is anticipated that a road will carry significant truck traffic or heavy axel loads, an
engineer shall design a thicker structure than these minimum standards.
Aggregate Sub-base
Course
*ENG 18” 18” 16” 12”
Layers of Sub-base shall be placed in 2 equal thickness lifts & compacted.
Aggregate Base Course *ENG 3” 3” 3” 3”
Gravel Surface Course NA 3” (where allowed) NA 3” 3”
*ENG: Shall be designed by an Engineer
Gravel Course Road: Where a gravel surface course is allowed by other portions of this Article, the above “Gravel Surface Course”
may be used instead of hot bituminous pavement.
TABLE 916.3B HOT BITUMINOUS PAVEMENT*
Road Type
Material
Transit and
Regional
Rural, Mixed
Use/ In-town,
and Retail
Commercial and
Site Road
Residential Street, Private**, and
Alley**
When it is anticipated that a road will carry significant truck traffic or heavy axel loads, an
engineer shall design a thicker structure than these minimum standards.
Total Thickness **ENG 3 ¼” 3 3/4” 3 ¼”
Wearing Course **ENG 1” 1 ¼” 1”
Base Course **ENG 2 ¼” 2 ½” 2 ¼”
*For waiver and alternative provisions refer to 907.2.D and 916.5.F.iii.
**ENG: Shall be designed by an Engineer
916.4 Preparation and Construction.
A. Marking. Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the centerline
and sidelines of the new street shall be staked or flagged at 50 foot intervals.
B. Clearing. Before grading is started, the entire area to be improved within the
right-of-way shall be cleared of all tree stumps, roots, branches, ledge, large
boulders, and other objectionable material.
C. Grubbing. All organic materials shall be removed to a depth of 2 feet below
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
22 | P a g e
the sub grade of the roadway. Rocks and boulders visible at sub-grade shall
also be removed to a depth of 2 feet below the sub grade of the roadway. On
soils which have been identified as not suitable for roadways, the subsoil shall
be removed from the street site to a depth of at least 2 feet below the sub
grade and replaced with material meeting the specifications for gravel
aggregate sub-base course.
D. Side Slopes. Except in a ledge cut, side slopes shall be no steeper than a slope
of 3 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical, and shall be graded, loamed, limed,
fertilized, and seeded according to the specifications of the erosion and
sedimentation control plan. Unsuccessful seeding must be redone to grow a
catch of grass. Where a cut results in exposed ledge, a side-slope no steeper
than 4 feet vertical to 1 foot horizontal is permitted.
E. Underground Utilities, when proposed shall be installed prior to paving to
avoid cuts in the pavement. Building sewers and water service connections
shall be installed to the edge of the right-of-way prior to paving.
F. Cleanup. Following street construction, a thorough cleanup of stumps and
other debris from the entire street right-of-way shall be made. If on-site
disposal of the stumps and debris is proposed, the site shall be indicated on the
plan, and be suitably covered with fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and
seeded.
916.5 Bases and Pavement
A. The Aggregate Sub-base Course shall be mix of sand and gravel made of
hard durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls or clay and
other deleterious substances. Aggregates for sub-base shall not contain
particles of rock which will not pass the 6-inch square mesh sieve. The
gradation of the part that passes a 3-inch square mesh sieve shall meet the
grading requirements in Table 916.5A.
B. The Aggregate Base Course shall be mix of sand and gravel made of hard
durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls or clay and other
deleterious substances. Aggregates for sub-base shall not contain particles of
rock which will not pass the 2-inch square mesh sieve. The gradation of the
part that passes a 3-inch square mesh sieve shall meet the grading
requirements in Table 916.5B.
C. Gravel Surface Course shall be a mix of sand and gravel made of hard
durable particles free from vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other
deleterious substances. The gradation of the part that passes the 2 inch square
sieve shall meet the grading requirements in Table 916.5C.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
23 | P a g e
D. Recycled Asphalt Pavement (RAP). RAP may be used in lieu of a gravel
surface course if approved by the Administrator. RAP shall be ground, hot
mix asphalt, properly compacted and be a minimum thickness of 3 inches.
E. Pavement Joints. Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing
pavement shall be cut along a smooth line and form a neat, even vertical joint.
Joints shall be tack coated prior to placement of adjoining pavement.
F. Pavements.
i. Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the
Maine Department of Transportation specifications for Hot Mix
Asphalt, 19.0 mm Superpave or equivalent if wearing course is
required or Hot Mix Asphalt, 12.5 mm fine Superpave or equivalent if
only one course required.
ii. Minimum standards for the wearing layer of pavement shall be the
Maine Department of Transportation specifications for Hot Mix
Asphalt, 9.5 mm Superpave or equivalent.
iii. Alternatives to the above standards may be approved by the Planning
Board if the applicant can demonstrate their long term durability and
appropriate application. The intent of this modification is to allow the
use of alternative surface covers such as permeable concrete,
permeable hot mix asphalt, or other treatments which are intended to
reduce the impervious impact on a site. The intent is to encourage the
use of Low Impact Development and materials.
Table 916.5A Aggregate Sub-base Course
Sieve Designation % By Weight Passing Square Mesh
Sieves
6” square mesh 100%
1/4 inch 25-70%
#40 0-30%
#200 0-7%
Table 916.5B Aggregate Base Course
Sieve Designation % By Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves
2” square mesh 100%
1/2 inch 35-75%
1/4 inch 25-60%
#40 0-25%
#200 0-5%
Table 916.5C Surface Course Gravel
Sieve Designation % By Weight Passing Square Mesh Sieves
2” square mesh 95 - 100%
1/2 inch 30-65%
#200 7-12%
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
24 | P a g e
G. Sidewalk Material. Concrete sidewalks are preferable. The Planning Board
may consider allowing bituminous sidewalks in low use areas. Minimum
sidewalks design standards:
i. Concrete Sidewalks:
a. The sand or crushed aggregate base shall be no less than 6 inches
thick.
b. The concrete shall be reinforced with 6 inch square, number 10
wire mesh (or equivalent) and shall be no less than 4 inches thick.
Concrete shall have a compressive strength of at least 4000 psi.
ii. Bituminous Sidewalks:
a. The crushed aggregate base course shall be no less than 8 inches
thick.
b. The hot mix bituminous travel way surface course shall be no less
than 2 inches after compaction.
c. Paved sidewalks shall be Hot Mix Asphalt, 12.5 mm or 9.5 mm
Superpave or equivalent.
916.6 Curbs and Gutters.
A. Granite Curbing shall be installed on a thoroughly compacted gravel base of 6
inches minimum thickness. Granite Curb shall be set in concrete.
B. Concrete Curbing may be used in place of granite curbing in locations not directly
adjacent to, or meeting existing granite curbing and where approved by the Planning
Board. Concrete curbing shall be poured in place or pre-cast members. Pre-cast
members shall be installed on a thoroughly compacted gravel base of 6 inches
minimum thickness and the base shall be set with in-place concrete.
C. Bituminous Curbing, where allowed, shall be installed on the base course of the
travel way. The specified travel way width above shall be measured between the
curbs.
917 STREET ACCEPTANCE AS PUBLIC WAYS
917.1 Intent. This section establishes guidelines and procedures to be followed by the
City Council for the acceptance of properly constructed streets for maintenance
by the City of Ellsworth. Streets being considered for acceptance must be
connected to a public way and be paved.
917.2 Application. A request for street acceptance shall be made to the City Manager
and include the information listed below. The City Manager and/or the City
Council reserves the right to request additional information, as deemed
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
25 | P a g e
appropriate, including, but not limited to, professional/peer review, street
construction costs, and financial security.
A. Request. A written request from the developer/owner or the abutters to place
the street acceptance request on the City Council Agenda.
B. Petition. A petition signed by a simple majority of the property owners who
have the legal right to use the road supporting or acknowledging the request.
C. Deed. A copy of the deed(s) with accurate legal description of the subject
road.
D. Engineering Report. An engineer’s report assuring that the street is built to
the standards in effect at the time of construction or Planning Board approval,
or description of deficiencies, proposed improvements and standards.
E. Construction Plan. A time schedule and financing plan for any needed
construction.
F. Financial Security. The City Council may assess a construction cost or
financial security for final construction tasks such as, but not limited to, final
course pavement.
G. As Built Drawings. Prior to final acceptance of a street as a public way, the
City Council may require detailed "as built" construction drawings showing a
plan view, profile, typical cross-section of the street and existing streets within
200 feet of any proposed intersections, as well as all utilities and
infrastructure. “As built” construction drawings shall be prepared by an
engineer.
H. Code Enforcement Officer Report. The City of Ellsworth Code
Enforcement Officer, in conjunction with the City Highway Foreman, shall
inspect the road to record its condition, verify the engineer’s report, and
submit a written report to the City Manager. Inspection by the Code
Enforcement Officer and Highway Foreman should take place between May 1
and November 1.
I. Utilities. If there are any underground utilities, the servicing utility shall
certify in writing that they have been installed in a manner acceptable to the
utility.
J. Professional/Peer Review Cost. When required, the applicants shall pay any
professional/peer review costs to the City who in turn will pay the consultant.
917.3 Decision Criteria.
A. City Council Review. The City Council shall consider all applicable
information prior to making a decision, including City street standards,
applicant submittals, professional/peer review reports, public benefit criteria,
occupation rates and City economic factors.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
26 | P a g e
B. Economic Factors. Given the number of unaccepted streets in Ellsworth and
associated maintenance cost in connection with their acceptance, the City
Council will make any final acceptance decision dependent on the availability
of fiscal resources, budgetary constraints, and other criteria as established in
this policy.
C. Pre-agreement. In consideration of economic factors, developers who intend
to build a street and desire to ask the City Council to take ownership of the
road may submit a Letter of Intent to the City Planner. The letter shall include
the road type, location, uses that it will serve, and a construction schedule.
The City Council may consider the Letter of Intent at their next regular
Council Meeting and whether to take ownership of the road once it has been
constructed and to the standards of this Article. The City Council may include
a time limit for the adoption of any street.
D. Street Standards. Streets shall meet the following design and Construction
Standards.
i. For streets approved after May 7, 2009, the City Council will ensure
strict compliance with the design standards of this Article.
ii. For streets approved between August 20, 2007 and May 7, 2009, the
City Council will ensure strict compliance with the design standards of
Chapter 35 (repealed on May 7, 2009) in effect at the time of Planning
Board Approval.
iii. For streets approved between July 19, 1999 and August 19, 2007, the
City Council shall aim to have the streets meet the design standards of
Chapter 35 in effect at the time of Planning Board approval. In certain
exceptional circumstances the City Council may consider alternative
standards.
iv. For streets built prior to the adoption of Chapter 35 (September 19,
1977) and before July 18, 1999, the council may consider alternative
standards.
In cases where the creation of a street is not linked to a Planning Board
approval, other means will be used to best establish the creation of the road
such as but not limited to deeds.
E. Alternative Street Standards. In the event the City Council agrees to
consider alternative design standards, it will use the standards published by
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) – most recent version. When AASHTO standards are applied, the
design of the street shall, in the opinion of the City Council, provide adequate
access to public service vehicles (i.e. fire, plow and garbage trucks, school
buses, etc.) and shall not pose a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of Ellsworth. The City Council may assess a construction cost fee
and/or financial security for any part of the road.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
27 | P a g e
F. Growth Area Streets. The City Council shall accept Growth Area streets,
meeting standards as public ways if they serve commercial or mix-use
developments and improve mobility, safety, stormwater runoff, or exemplify
smart growth principles as presented in the International City/County
Management Association (ICMA) Getting to Smart Growth and Getting to
Smart Growth II publications.
G. Occupation. The City Council shall accept streets meeting standards as public
ways when occupied as follows:
i. Growth Area Streets having at least three lots with occupied dwelling
units; having at least 30% of all its residential lots with occupied
dwelling units; and having an average road frontage not to exceed 250
feet per lot.
ii. Rural Area Streets having at least three lots with occupied dwelling
units; having at least 60% of all its residential lots with occupied
dwelling units; and having an average road frontage not to exceed 400
feet per lot.
NOTE: Properties abutting the intersection of the street under consideration
for acceptance and an existing publicly maintained street do not count toward
the occupied legal lot threshold calculations.
H. Public Benefit. The City Council may accept streets meeting standards as
public ways when the occupation threshold calculations above are not met if
the acceptance of the road will clearly improve mobility, safety, stormwater
runoff, or the development exemplifies smart growth principles as presented
in the International City/County Management Association (ICMA) Getting to
Smart Growth and Getting to Smart Growth II.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
28 | P a g e
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 9 Street Design and Construction Standards
29 | P a g e
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10
Stormwater Management
Design and Construction Standards
Amended November 19, 2012
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
2 | P a g e
1001 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
1001.1 Purpose. The purpose of this article is to better manage land development in
order to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of Ellsworth by establishing requirements and procedures
to control the adverse impacts associated with stormwater runoff.
1001.2 Applicability. This Article shall apply to all minor and major use site
development plan projects and to subdivisions. See Section 1003.3 for specific
applicability thresholds regarding Flooding and Quality Control Standards.
1001.3 Interpretation. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prevent the
construction of stormwater management infrastructure which meet higher
standards or use improved methods or materials of equivalents or higher quality.
1002 PLAN SUBMITTALS
1002.1 Documents. The stormwater management system shall be presented in a narrative
and on site plans showing at a minimum:
A. A narrative describing the details of how the stormwater will be managed.
B. The contour lines shown on the plan shall be at an interval of no more than 2
feet.
C. For the Basic Standards, refer to the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection Chapter 500, Section 8.C and provide submittal for both the
erosion and sedimentation control plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
D. For the General Standards, refer to the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection Chapter 500, Section 8.D with the exception of Section 8.D.(5) and
as further specified in this Article.
E. For the Phosphorus Standards, refer to the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection Chapter 500, Section 8.D with the exception of
Section 8.D.(3) and as further specified in this Article. Note that the
Phosphorus Standards can be substituted for the General Standards, per
Chapter 500, by recommendation of the City Planner.
F. For the Flooding Standards, provide:
i. Pre- and post-development sub-catchments, time of concentration
lines, general water flow lines and ground cover.
ii. Show all existing and proposed culverts, swales, catch basins,
detention or retention area and conveyance devices.
iii. Site specific temporary and permanent Best Management Practices
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
3 | P a g e
(BMP’s) to be used for the project.
G. A stormwater management system maintenance plan and referring note stated
on the plan, as well as a Copy of the Declaration and Covenants for any
homeowners association charged with the long-term maintenance of the
stormwater system.
H. Any related State and Federal permits or permit application.
I. A copy of the Notice of Intent for Construction Activity filled out and
submitted to the MDEP.
1002.2 Required Submittal Copies.
A. CEO-approved project: The applicant shall submit two copies of all material
to the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Planning Board-approved project: The applicant shall submit copies of the
following material to the Administrator per Article 6 Site Development Plan
Section 602.7 unless otherwise specified:
i. The stormwater management system plan and narrative per this
Article.
ii. Pre- and post-development conditions and drainage diagrams.
iii. Documentation of application for all related State and/or Federal
permits.
iv. A summary of the stormwater design calculations.
v. Three (3) copies of the stormwater calculations and any State or
Federal approvals.
vi. The City Planner reserves the right to request more copies as the need
may arise.
1003 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS
1003.1 Stormwater Management. Adequate provision shall be made for disposal of all
stormwater generated, and any drained groundwater through a management
system of swales, culverts, under-drains, buffers, storm drains, etc. The
stormwater management system shall be designed to conduct stormwater flows to
existing drainageways. The intent of this article is for stormwater management
systems to provide pollutant removal; cooling; channel protection; and flood
control.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
4 | P a g e
Where a street or site is traversed by a stream, river, or surface water
drainageway, or where the Administrator determines that surface water runoff to
be created should be controlled, there shall be provided easements or drainage
rights-of-way with swales, culverts, catch basins or other means of channeling
surface water.
1003.2 Professional Design. Stormwater management plans and systems shall be
designed by an engineer registered in the State of Maine.
1003.3 Design Criteria and Applicability Thresholds.
A. Design Criteria: All stormwater management systems required by this
Article shall be designed consistent with the following documents, as
applicable. The DEP applicability thresholds are not the thresholds of this
ordinance:
i. M.R.S.A 38 § 420-C and 420-D;
ii. The most recent version of the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Rules
(Chapters 500 and 502) and with the following MDEP volumes:
a. Volume I: Stormwater Management Manual,
b. Volume II: Phosphorus Control in Lake Watershed: A
Technical Guide to Evaluating New Development; and
c. Volume III: BMPs Technical Design Manual.
Wherever regulations specified in this Article differ from the above-listed
documents, the standards of the more restrictive applicable standard shall
prevail.
B. Flooding Control Standard.
i. Applicability.
a. The Ellsworth Flooding
Control Standard (described
below) applies to all projects
that result in 20,000 s. f. or more of impervious surface, as
defined herein, on a parcel of land.
b. The Administrator may apply this Flooding Standard to smaller
projects where stormwater generated appears to present a threat
to neighboring property or water courses. In this decision, the
The objective of the Ellsworth
Flooding Control Standard is to
limit flooding of neighboring
properties and water courses to
pre-development levels.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
5 | P a g e
Administrator shall consider the project’s proximity to property
lines, topography and downstream conditions and whether it
would pose any health or safety threats regarding neighboring
properties, roads or drainageways.
ii. Standard – Requirement. The Ellsworth Flooding Control
Standard shall be met and requires post-development runoff
locations and types to provide the same or less of an impact as
those existing in the pre-development condition. Post-development
discharge points from a property shall be in the same general
location and be of the same type (i.e.: sheet flow, shallow
concentrated, etc) as the pre-development discharge locations and
types or create an improvement to existing conditions. The
Flooding Standard requires a stormwater management plan
designed to limit peak flow to predevelopment levels for 2.7 inch
and 5.4 inch, 24-hour duration, storm events.
Where an accessway is to be built or upgraded, and may become a
public way, the crossing of the stream by the accessway shall be
designed to accommodate a 7.1-inch storm event.
iii. Exception to the Standard – Requirement. If all downstream
drainageways have the capacity and stability to receive the
project’s runoff plus any off-site runoff also passing through the
system, and drainage easement are secured and the Administrator
also makes determination that the areas expected to be flooded by
the 2.7 inch and 5.4 inch, 24-hour storm do not pose any health and
safety issues such as, but not limited to, the flooding of primary
access roads to the project and public roads or an undue burden
(i.e. significant difficulty or expense) to property owners likely to
suffer specific harm.
C. Quality Control Standards:
i. Applicability Threshold. The Ellsworth Quality Control Standards
(described in D and E below), apply to all development and
redevelopment projects that are:
a. In the Shoreland Zone, or;
b. Discharging within the direct watershed of Card Brook, or:
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
6 | P a g e
c. Associated with High Pollutant
Land Uses as defined herein, or;
d. Resulting in a parcel of land having
10% or more of impervious area as
defined herein.
ii. Excluded Areas. Impervious and other
areas of land surface that are not
changed during the course of a
development or redevelopment project
may be excluded from any quality controls required for the project.
iii. BMP’s. Basic Quality Control Standards (described in MDEP
documents above) apply to all projects regardless of exemptions
described below:
Exemptions.
The following exemptions from Ellsworth Quality Control Standards
may be claimed, where applicable. Exempted area shall not include
development associated with High Pollutant Land Uses, be within the
Shoreland Zone with the exception of the General Development
District, or be within the direct watershed of Card Brook.
a. 10% Exemption. Up to 10% of any parcel may be exempted from
the Ellsworth Quality Control Standards. All previously developed
impervious surfaces with untreated stormwater count toward the
10%. After this exemption is claimed, the remainder of the lot may
not use the exemption, even if it is divided from the developed
parcel. Land subdivision projects may only apply the exemption to
lands that will be held in common such as roadways and
conservation areas.
b. Extended 10% Exemption. Where on-site treatment is not
practical or desired, additional development area may be exempted
from the Ellsworth Quality Control Standards similar to the 10%
exemption where appropriate development rights are secured and
recorded via permanent easement for lands within the same stream
watershed at a 9:1 ratio of lands conserved from pervious
development to lands with pervious development exempted from
the Ellsworth Quality Control Standards.
Where on-site quality treatment and conservation easements are
not practical or desired, the developer may pay a fee in lieu of
constructing the required quality controls. The fee payment shall
be made to the Ellsworth Fund for Improvements to Water Quality
The objective of the Ellsworth Quality Control
Standard is to limit degradation of water
quality in lakes and streams through treating
runoff from Shoreland Zone areas, high
pollutant uses and impervious surfaces
exceeding 10% of the area of each watershed.
The 10% untreated area is allocated by parcel
or parcels involved in an applicable project.
Studies have shown that watersheds with 10%
to 15% impervious cover tend to have
impaired water quality.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
7 | P a g e
to be used for within the same stream watershed, or within an
impaired stream watershed. The fee is based on 105% of the
estimated cost of constructing quality controls on-site and excludes
the costs associated with designing such a system. The developer
shall submit to the City calculations determining the proposed fee
amount. The cost to the City to hire an engineer to review of the
proposed fee amount shall be entirely the responsibility of the
developer.
c. 100% Redevelopment Exemption. Projects in the Ellsworth
Urban Core and within the direct watershed of the Union River
Estuary (below the Leonard Lake Dam), as shown on the map
entitled “City of Ellsworth Urban Core in the Direct Watershed of
the Union River Estuary,” may exempt up to 100% of the existing
impervious area with untreated stormwater that is being
redeveloped from the Ellsworth Quality Control Standards.
d. 50% Redevelopment Exemption: Projects outside of areas
eligible for the 100% exemption above may exempt up to 50% of
the existing impervious area with untreated stormwater that is
being redeveloped from the Ellsworth Quality Control Standards.
D. Union River/Leonard Lake Water Quality Control: Projects located
outside the watershed of a Great Pond or within the watershed of Leonard
Lake as shown on the Official City of Ellsworth Watershed Map, shall
comply with the most recent version of the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Rules General
Standards, in addition to Basic Standards and the Ellsworth Flooding
Control Standards where applicable.
E. Lake and Stream Water Quality Control: Projects located within the
watershed of a Great Pond and outside the watershed of Leonard Lake as
shown on the Official City of Ellsworth Watershed Map, shall comply with
the most recent version of the Maine Department of Environmental
Protection Stormwater management Rules Phosphorus Standards in addition
to Basic Standards and the Ellsworth Flooding Control Standards where
applicable.
The Planning Board shall not, as part of the required phosphorus control
plan, allow an increase in phosphorus loading beyond the level allowed by
the Maine Department of Environmental Protection. Furthermore, no
phosphorus mitigation credits or compensation are allowed unless the
project triggers the Stormwater Law or Site Law.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
8 | P a g e
1003.4 Drainage easements for existing water courses or proposed drainageways shall
be provided at least 30 feet wide, conforming substantially to the lines of existing
natural drainage.
1003.5 Upstream drainage. The stormwater management system shall be designed to
accommodate upstream drainage, taking into account existing conditions and
approved planned developments not yet built and shall include a surplus design
capacity factor of 25% if the potential exists for an increase in upstream runoff.
1003.6 Downstream Capacity. The storm drainage shall not overload existing or
planned storm drainage systems downstream.
1003.7 Catch basins shall be installed where necessary and located at the curb line of
accessways or as required elsewhere.
1003.8 Subsurface drainage. Where soils require a subsurface drainage system, the
drains shall be installed and maintained along with the stormwater drainage
system.
1003.9 Outlets shall be stabilized against soil erosion by using the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection Maine Erosion and Sediment Control BMPs (latest
edition) such as stone riprap or other suitable materials to reduce stormwater
velocity. Outlets shall not be located closer than 20 feet of a property line.
1003.10 Landscaped Buffer: Detention or retention areas created for the stormwater
management system shall be landscaped and buffered from adjacent properties if
the total area (including the inside of the embankments) is greater than 10,000
square feet.
1003.11 Level Spreader: Level spreaders are not permissible if the receiving land of the
diffused stormwater has a grade of 2% or greater.
1003.12 Erosion Control: An erosion and sedimentation plan shall be submitted as part of
any Stormwater Management Plan and for all projects. The procedures outlined in
the plan shall be implemented during the site preparation, construction and cleanup
stages of the project. The applicant/owner shall be responsible for
implementing the plan.
1003.13 Safety Standards: Public safety shall be accounted for when designing and
maintaining stormwater ponds, facilities, BMPs, culverts and other related
facilities as follows:
A. Safety shelf and Side Slopes. There shall be a safety shelf around the
perimeter of the detention pond to reduce the risk of someone falling into the
pond. The safety shelf requirement may be waived if slopes are
4:1(horizontal:vertical) or gentler.
B. Dams and Embankments. If there are, or there exist the potential for
development of, home and businesses in the downstream “dam break”
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
9 | P a g e
floodplain, then the dams and embankments shall be designed to withstand
overtopping during floods larger than they were designed to detain (6-inch
rain over 24 hours).
C. Outlets. When feasible, outlets shall be placed away from areas of heavy
public use. Outlets are screened so that the public will not be drawn to it.
Thick shrubs, grading techniques, and aesthetic fencing or railing can also be
used.
D. Fencing. Fencing of ponds is not generally desirable, but may be required by
the Administrator. A preferred method is to manage the contours of the pond
to eliminate drop offs and other safety hazards.
E. Spill Ways. The principal spillway opening shall not permit access by small
children, and end walls above pipe outfalls greater than 48 inches in diameter
shall be fenced to prevent a hazard.
1003.14 State Permitting. All projects shall meet the requirements of Maine Department
of Environmental Protection permitting.
1003.15 Inspection. Prior to final completion and acceptance of the site work portion of a
project, or the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the Design Engineer of the
stormwater management system shall provide to the Code Enforcement officer a
letter stating that they have examined the site and are satisfied that the site and
storm-water system are built according to approved plans and will function as
intended. The Code Enforcement Officer may require as built-plans where
changes have been made from original designs.
1004 CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND STANDARDS
1004.1 General. All Construction shall be done in a workmanlike manner and be free
from defects and deficiencies. The Code Enforcement officer shall examine the
workmanship and have the authority to require removal or replacement of
materials not considered satisfactory.
1004.2 Stormwater Management Best Management Practices (BMP’s) shall be
designed, built and maintained as specified in the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection Maine Erosion and Sediment Control BMPs (latest
edition).
1004.3 Drain Inlet Alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment
unless specific approval of a curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the City
Highway Foreman.
1004.4 Changes in Alignment. Catch Basins shall be provided at all changes in vertical
or horizontal alignment and at all junctions. On straight runs, catch basins shall be
placed at a maximum of 400-foot intervals.
1004.5 Manholes. Manholes shall be a precast concrete truncated cone section
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
10 | P a g e
construction meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C 478 or precast
concrete manhole block construction meeting the requirements of ASTM
Designation C 139, radial type. Manhole sections shall have lapped joint
construction and support H-20 loading (unless higher loading required for specific
application). Bases may be cast in place 3,000 psi 28 day strength concrete or
may be of precast, reinforced concrete, placed on a compacted foundation of
uniform density. Metal frames and traps shall be set in a full mortar bed with
frames and covers meeting the requirements of ASTM A48 Class 30 for gray iron
castings. Covers shall be non-rocking, 24-inch diameter and have 3-inch lettering
indicating the use (i.e. DRAIN). Frames and Grates shall be of heavy duty
construction weighing not less than 300 pounds and machined on both vertical
and horizontal seating surfaces.
1004.6 Precast Concrete Catch Basins. ASTM C 913, precast, reinforced concrete;
designed according to ASTM C 890 for A-16 (AASHTO HS20-44), heavy-traffic,
structural loading, with provision for Bell-and-spigot or tongue-and-groove joints
formed on machine rings to ensure accurate joint surfaces.
1004.7 Joint Sealants. ASTM C 990, bitumen or butyl rubber.
1004.8 Grade Rings. Include 2 or 3 reinforced-concrete rings, of 6-inch to 9-inch total
thickness that match 24-inch diameter frame and grate.
1004.9 Maximum Trench Width at the pipe crown shall be the outside diameter of the
pipe plus 2 feet.
1004.10 Pipe Connectors. ASTM C 923, resilient, of size required, for each pipe
connecting to base section.
1004.11 Pipe Sizing. The minimum pipe size for any culvert or storm drainage pipe shall
be 15 inches. Smaller pipes may be incorporated into a storm-water management
plan if required for detention or retention requirements. If smaller pipes are used
the developer shall provide a maintenance plan and schedule that will allow the
pipes to provide adequate flow.
1004.12 Pipe (culvert) Bedding and Backfill. Pipes
shall be bedded and backfilled in a fine
granular material, containing no stones larger
than 3 inches, lumps of clay, or organic
matter, reaching a minimum of 6 inches
below the bottom of the pipe extending to 6
inches above the top of the pipe. Bedding
material shall be graded per Table 1004.12.
1004.13 Reinforced Concrete Pipe. Reinforced concrete pipe shall meet the requirements
of ASTM Designation C-76 (AASHTO M 170). Pipe classes shall be required to
meet the soil and traffic loads with a safety factor of 1.2 on the .01-inch crack
strength with a Class B bedding. Joints shall be of the rubber gasket type meeting
ASTM Designation C 443-70. Perforated concrete pipe shall conform to the
requirements of AASHTO M 175 for the appropriate diameter. Elliptical pipe
Table 1004.12 Culvert Backfill Material
Sieve
Designation
% By Weight Passing
Square Mesh Sieves
3-inch square
mesh
100%
1/4 inch 25-70%
#40 0-30%
#200 0-7%
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
11 | P a g e
shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M207M/M207. Pipe arch shall
conform to the requirements of AASHTO M206M/206.
1004.14 Corrugated Metal Pipe. Aluminum coated corrugated steel pipe and special
fittings such as elbows, tees, and wyes shall conform to the requirements of the
Maine Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, Subsection 707.10
(Type 2), Aluminum Coated (Type 2) Corrugated Steel Pipe. Pipe gauge shall be
as required to meet the soil and traffic loads with a deflection of not more than
5%. Fittings shall be fabricated to types required and according to same standards
as pipe. Connecting bands shall be standard couplings made for corrugated-steel
pipe to form soil-tight joints.
1004.15 Corrugated Plastic Pipe. Pipe culverts and storm drains so designated shall
conform to the requirements of Maine Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications, Subsection 603 and 706.06 (special provisions). Corrugated
Polyethylene pipe will meet the requirements of AASHTO M294 (ASTM F2648
may also be used with regard to pipe materials for all Polyethylene pipe) type S,
Dual Wall. Corrugated Polyethylene pipe (and fittings) for Underdrain shall
conform to AASHTO M252, slot perforated, for 6-inch diameter and to
AASHTO M294 for 12-inch to 30-inch. Pipe to be used for Underdrain Type C
shall be perforated in accordance with the applicable requirements of AASHTO
M36/M36M Type III, Class I perforations. Pipe shall be corrugated with an
integrally formed smooth waterway and be non-perforated or perforated as
indicated on the drawings. Installation shall include all necessary boots, gaskets
and adapters required to provide a soil-tight connection at all manholes, joints and
fittings. Pipe shall have integral bell-and-spigot joint meeting the requirements of
ASTM F 477 or approved equal.
1004.16 Cast Iron Catch Basin Frames and Covers shall be cast of material conforming
to the requirements of ASTM A48 Grade 30 and be of uniform quality, free from
blowholes, porosity, hard spots, shrinkage distortion or other defects. They shall
be smooth and well-cleaned by shotblasting or other approved method. They
shall be of heavy duty construction weighing not less than 400 pounds and
machined on both vertical and horizontal seating surfaces. Frames shall be 4-
flange unless inlet curb inlet is specified, in which case they shall be 3-flange.
Grates shall be non-rocking and be of appropriate entry configuration for the
intended location.
1004.17 System Cleaning. Upon completion of system construction, each catch basin or
manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulation of silt, debris or foreign matter and
shall be kept clean until final acceptance.
1004.18 Alternative Catch Basins and Manholes. Alternative materials for catch basins
and manholes may be submitted for approval to the Administrator. Such
submittals shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis and may require an
independent professional review to determine applicability and long term
durability.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 10 Stormwater Management Design and Construction Standards
12 | P a g e
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11
Parking Standards
Amended August 20, 2012
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 11 PARKING STANDARDS
1100 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
1100.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to ensure a minimum level of off-street parking
to avoid congestion on surrounding streets while avoiding excessive parking and
driving up the cost of development. This article also regulates loading space, traffic
circulation, and pedestrian access.
1100.2 Applicability. This Article shall apply to new and existing development as follows:
A. Single and Two-Family Dwellings are exempt from this Article with the exception
of mobile homes in mobile home parks per Article 8 Performance Standards 819.18.
B. Existing Developments are exempt from this Article unless the development is
physically expanded or changed resulting in more intensive parking needs per
Section 1105.1 or unless the existing parking supply is reduced per section E below.
C. Development Expansion. When a development, with a non-compliant number of
parking spaces is expanded, additional parking spaces shall be provided only for the
area of expansion in conformance with Table 1105.1, except as specifically noted
in Section 1102.1 for Downtown Parking.
D. Change of Use Requiring More Parking Spaces. When the use of a development
is changed to another use that requires more parking spaces or, if the development is
vacant, the use that existed immediately prior to such vacancy, parking spaces shall
be provided for the proposed use in the amount necessary to conform to this Article,
except as specifically noted in Section 1102.1 for Downtown Parking.
E. Change of Use Requiring Fewer Parking Spaces. When the use of a development
is changed to another use that requires fewer parking spaces per Section 1106, the
proposed change of use is a permissible change to a non-conforming parking
situation provided that parking space requirements will be met to the greatest extent
possible.
F. Parking Lot Expansion. If an off-street parking lot is being expanded, only the
new portion of the parking lot must conform to this Article unless there are safety
issues related to, queuing, egress/ingress, internal vehicular circulation, and loading.
In such case, the Administrator may require that part of or the entire existing
parking lot be brought into compliance with this Article.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
3 | P a g e
1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1101.1 Prohibited Use of Parking. Parking that is required for a specific use shall not be
dedicated to other uses, including commercial parking or be utilized for non-parking
uses.
1101.2 Ingress and Egress. All access to parking lots and loading areas from an accessway
shall be designed to ensure the smooth and safe circulation of vehicles to and from the
accessway, per Article 9 - Street Design and Construction Standards section 901..
1101.3 Backing Out of Vehicles into Road. In general, parking and loading areas shall be
provided in a manner that does not require the backing out of vehicles onto a road.
1101.4 Off-site Parking Lots.
A. Satellite Parking. If required parking cannot be entirely located on the same lot as
the use which it serves, then parking may be located within reasonable walking
distance of the entrance to the use as satellite parking. The acceptable walking
distance between the satellite parking and the use it serves depends on the type of
land use and the type of users. The Administrator shall determine whether the
satellite parking is convenient, safe, and accessible at the location proposed, based
on the quality of the pedestrian environment including, but not limited to, sidewalks,
crosswalks, topography, lighting, line of site (longer distance are acceptable if
people can see their destination), and pedestrian barriers found along the way such
as, but not limited to, crossing busy traffic.
.
B. Valet parking or other comparable service shall be provided for satellite parking
located beyond what the Administrator determines to be a reasonable walking
distance.
1101.5 Parking Lot Location. In pedestrian-oriented areas, highly visible areas, and/or in the
Commerce Park (CP) of the City of Ellsworth, developers shall strive to locate parking
away from the front yard of the use it serves. These areas are: 1) Ellsworth Downtown
Area, 2) along high traffic areas in the Urban Core such as, but not limited, to Stateowned
roads and the Beechland Road, 3) along State-owned roads within the Growth
Area, and 4) the BTP.
1101.6 Lease Records. Parking not in the same ownership for the use which it serves shall be
under a written use agreement. To avoid the possibility of owner “double leasing”
spaces, lease records and agreements shall be provided to the City Planner or designee.
To allow for coordination between leases, all leases shall have an opt-out provision on
December 31 of each year.
1101.7 Structured Parking. All garages or other structured space allocated for the parking of
vehicles may be considered part of the required parking.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
4 | P a g e
1101.8 Layout and Design. Parking shall be arranged and marked to provide for orderly and
safe loading/unloading and parking. For parking located within the Ellsworth Urban
Core Area, individual parking spaces shall be clearly defined and directional arrows and
traffic signs shall be provided as necessary for traffic control.
1101.9 Recreational Vehicle and Oversize Parking. The Administrator may require that
some developments provide designated parking spaces for R.V. campers and other
oversized passenger vehicles. These spaces cannot be substituted for regular or
passenger car spaces.
1101.10 Handicapped Parking. All handicap parking spaces must be provided in accordance
with the most current state and federal regulations.
1101.11 Snow Storage. The parking lot design shall provide an adequately sized location for
snow storage.
1101.12 Parking Lot Setback. RESERVED
1102 DOWNTOWN PROVISIONS
The City of Ellsworth parking provisions for the Downtown Areas aim to support the vitality and
appearance of the Ellsworth Downtown. They are prescribed according to three sub-areas known as
Downtown A, B and C per the City of Ellsworth Downtown Parking Sectors Map. Development shall
provide parking, to a minimum, per the requirements of the Downtown sub-area it is in, even if such
parking is provided in a different area than the use it serves.
1102.1 Downtown A.
A. Area. Downtown A consists of a portion of Main Street and the abutting areas
typified by parking constraints consistent with the distinctive historic construction
patterns with structures built to, or very close to, property lines. This type of intense
lot coverage makes the addition of on-site parking difficult and may have a negative
impact on the historic character of the neighborhood.
B. Requirements.
i. A change of use taking place within the confines of a building shall not
require more parking than required for the use existing immediately prior to
such change unless there is a cumulative addition of GFA such as, but not
limited to, an entry way, shed, or the use of a rooftop and/or there are 10 or
more employees added on the day shift.
ii. The creation of additional GFA will require parking to be created at a flat rate
of 3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA, 1 space per dwelling unit,
and 0.8 parking spaces for every additional employee over 9 new employees
on the day shift.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
5 | P a g e
iii. A change of use without the creation of additional square footage but
resulting in the creation of 10 or more jobs will require 0.8 parking spaces for
every additional employee over 9 new employees on the day shift.
C. Parking Reduction per section 1105, shall not apply for Downtown A.
D. Private Parking, Provided as Free Public Parking, shall supply parking
consistent with Section 1102.1.B.i and Section 1102.1.B.ii with the exception that
the flat rate will be reduced to 2 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of GFA.
E. Satellite Parking serving Downtown A, shall be located within reasonable walking
distance of the use it is serving, per Section 1101.4.A and be well signed per Section
F below.
F. Signing of Free Public Parking. Way-finding signs, consistent with municipal
signage design, should clearly indicate where free public parking is available. The
signs should be placed in key locations such as, but not limited to, at the business, at
the street access point, and inside the lot.
G. Loss of On-site Parking Spaces in Downtown A, to a structure expansion for
example, shall be re-created at a 1:1 ratio (cannot benefit from any of the above
parking reduction provisions) and shall be within reasonable walking distance of
Downtown A, per Section 1101.4.A.
H. Parking Earmarked for Dwelling Units must be posted as reserved.
I. Leasing of Parking existing at the time of the adoption of this Article is prohibited
in Downtown A.
J. Commercial Parking Lots are prohibited in Downtown A.
1102.2 Downtown B.
A. Area. Downtown B encompasses the area located around Downtown A. For the
most part this area is typified by sufficient onsite parking.
B. New Use or a Change of Use shall be subject to the parking requirements in
Section 1105.
C. Private Parking, Provided as Free Public Parking, shall supply parking
consistent with Section 1105 with a 25% benefit reduction.
D. Satellite Parking serving Downtown B, shall be located within reasonable walking
distance of the use it is serving, per Section 1101.4.A and be well signed per Section
E below.
E. Signing of Free Public Parking. Way-finding signs, consistent with municipal
signage design, should clearly indicate where free public parking is available. The
signs should be placed in key locations such as, but not limited to, at the business, at
the street access point, and inside the lot.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
6 | P a g e
F. Parking Earmarked for Dwelling Units must be posted as reserved.
G. Leasing of Parking existing at the time of the adoption of this Article is allowed.
H. Commercial Parking Lots are allowed.
I. Existing Parking (in existence at the time of the adoption of this Article) can
benefit from the above parking reduction provisions.
1102.3 Downtown C.
A. Area. Downtown C encompasses the area outside Downtown A and B and it is
typified by having, in general, adequate parking.
B. New Use or a Change of Use shall be subject to the parking requirements in
Section 1105.1.
C. Private Parking, Provided as Free Public Parking, shall supply parking
consistent with Section 1105 with a 20% benefit reduction.
D. Satellite Parking serving Downtown C, shall be located within reasonable walking
distance of the use it is serving, per Section 1101.4.A and be well signed per Section
E below.
E. Signing of Free Public Parking. Way-finding signs, consistent with municipal
signage design, should clearly indicate where free public parking is available. The
signs should be placed in key locations such as, but not limited to, at the business, at
the street access point, and inside the lot.
F. Parking Earmarked for Dwelling Units must be posted as reserved.
G. Leasing of Parking existing at the time of the adoption of this Article is allowed.
H. Commercial Parking Lots are allowed.
I. Existing Parking (in existence at the time of the adoption of this Article) can
benefit from the above parking reduction provisions.
1103 ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
1103.1 Interconnection. Developers shall strive to interconnect adjacent commercial uses
unless it is determined by the administrator that it is unsafe, that physical barriers exist,
or that it will result in an adverse traffic impact. Developments that provide for shared
access to commercial uses shall benefit from a 5% reduction in parking and
developments that provide cross access between commercial uses shall benefit 5%
reduction in parking. The total maximum combined reduction in parking shall not
exceed 7%. The administrator shall determine that the reduction(s) will not result in
insufficient parking.
1103.2 Access. Each parking lot shall be connected to a street or right-of-way via an accessway
meeting Article 9 - Street Design and Construction Standards.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
7 | P a g e
1103.3 Walkways. Safe pedestrian routes shall be provided in off-street parking lots.
1103.4 Separation of Street from Parking Spaces. Accesses, walkways, sidewalks and other
public rights-of-way shall be protected from vehicular overhang by wheel stops, curbs,
or other method approved by the Administrator.
1104 PARKING SPACE
DIMENSIONS
Parking shall be designed in conformance
with the dimensions presented in adjacent
Table 1104 Off-Parking Standards and the
illustration below.
Table 1104 Off-street Parking Standards
Parking Angle Stall Width Stall
Depth*
One-Way
Aisle Width
Two-Way
Aisle Width
0° (parallel) 9.0’ 23.0’ 12.0’ 20.0’
45° 10.0’ 18.5’ 16.0’ 22.0’
60° 10.0’ 18.5’ 18.0’ 22.0’
75° 10.0’ 18.5’ 18.0’ 22.0’
90° 9.0’ 18.5’ 20.0’ 24.0’
* If a parking lot is designed with a 6-inch curb, then the minimum stall depth
may be reduced by 1.5 feet for angled parking and 2 feet for 90° parking, as long
as it complies with 1104.4 Separation of Street from Parking Space above.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
8 | P a g e
1105 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
1105.1 Minimum Amount. The minimum amount of required off-street parking spaces shall
be determined in accordance with Table 1105.1 Parking Requirements.:
Table 1105.1 PARKING REQUIREMENTS
LAND USE NUMBER OF SPACES
RESIDENTIAL/LODGING
Hotel place of lodging that provide sleeping accommodations and
supporting facilities such as restaurants, cocktails lounges, limited
recreational facilities (pool and fitness room) and/or retail and service shops,
and meeting and banquet rooms able to accommodate a maximum of 200
people.
Hotel with meeting space and banquet rooms able to accommodate more
than 200 people.
1.31 spaces/room, plus 0.2 employee
spaces/ sleeping room
1.31 spaces/room, plus 0.2 employee
spaces/ sleeping room, plus 15
spaces/1,000 SF GFA for all meeting
space /banquet/convention space.
Business Hotel – place of lodging aimed toward the business traveler. These
hotels provide sleeping accommodations and other limited facilities, such as
a breakfast buffet bar and afternoon beverage bar (no lunch or dinner is
server and no meeting facilities are provided). Each unit is a large single
room. Business hotels provide very few or none of the supporting facilities
provided at hotels; and Motel – place of lodging that provide
accommodations and often a restaurant. Motels generally offer free on-site
parking and provide little or no meeting space and few (if any supporting
facilities. Exterior corridors accessing rooms – immediately adjacent to a
parking lot – commonly characterize motels.
1 space/room, plus 0.2 employee spaces/
sleeping room
Bed &Breakfast and Inn 1 space/room, plus 2 spaces
Campsite 1 space/site
Condominiums 2 spaces/dwelling unit
Multi-Family – 3 or more units 1.5 spaces/dwelling
Mobile Home 2 spaces/dwelling unit
Boarding House 1 space/room, plus 2 spaces
Senior Housing , Congregate Facility, Nursing Home, and Assisted
Living Facility
1.2 spaces/unit
Homeless Shelter 1.5 spaces /1,000 SF GFA plus 2 spaces
for staff
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
9 | P a g e
1105.2 Uses Not Cited. If a development does not have a prescribed parking requirement, as
listed in Table 1105.1 Parking Requirements above, and it is determined by the
Administrator that the development cannot be fairly compared to a use in the above
Table 1105.1 continued - INSTITUTIONAL, SOCIAL &PUBLIC SERVICES/FACILITIES
Day Care 0.25 spaces/student
Elementary and Middle School 0.25 spaces/student
High School 0.85 space/employee, and 0.4 space per
student
Assembly, Theaters, Auditoriums 0.33 spaces/seat
Convention Center, Ballrooms, Banquet Center 0.33 spaces/seat, plus 1 space per
employee
Hospital: Any institution where medical or surgical care and overnight
accommodations are provided to non-ambulatory and ambulatory patients,
as part of a campus setting. The term hospital includes medical clinics
(facilities that provide diagnoses and outpatient care).
2 spaces/1,000SF GFA plus 1 space/
employee including visiting staff doctors
COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL USES
Industrial, manufacturing, warehousing, wholesale 0.83 spaces/employee on maximum
shift, plus 1 space per vehicle
customarily used in operation of the use
or stored on the premises.
Medical/Dental Clinic 2.2 spaces/exam room plus 1
space/employee
Automobile repair and gasoline stations 1 space/350 SF or 6 spaces minimum
Barber, beauty, nail and tanning shops 1.75 spaces/chair plus 1 space/employee
Animal Hospital 3 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Retail Store and Service Businesses 3.6 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Motor Vehicles, ATV, and Boat Sales 2 spaces/employee
Furniture and Carpet Stores 2.5 spaces/ 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Video Rental Store 2.5 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. GFA or 5 spaces
minimum, whatever is greater
Professional Office 3 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Convention Center 0.33 spaces/seat plus 0.8
space/employee
Bank 5 spaces/1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Restaurants, eating/drinking establishments 0.25 spaces/seat, plus 1 space per
employee
Fast Food restaurant 0.5 space/seat, plus 0.68
spaces/employee
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
10 | P a g e
table, then the parking requirement for the development shall be determined, by the
Administrator with guidance from the City Planner or designee. The applicant shall
provide adequate information by which the proposal can be reviewed, which includes
but may not necessarily be limited to the following: 1) types of uses; 2) number of
employees; 3) building design capacity; 4) square feet of sales area; 5) parking spaces
proposed on site; 6) parking spaces provided elsewhere; and 7) hours of operation.
1105.3 Unit of Measurement. The following measurement units shall be used when
determining the required number of parking space.
A. Gross Floor Area of buildings (GFA), as defined.
B. Bench Seating: In calculating bench seating for places of assembly, each 24 inches
of benches, pew or other such seating, shall be counted as one seat.
C. Stacking spaces: Each required drive-through waiting or stacking spaces shall be a
minimum of 24 feet long and 9 feet wide.
D. Fractional Spaces. When calculations for determining the required number of
parking spaced results in a fractional space, any fraction of less than one-half may
be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one space.
E. Employee Parking. Parking spaces required for employees shall be based on the
maximum number of employees on the premises at any one time. The overlap in
shift change is not taken into account.
1105.4 Adjustment and Reduction.
A. Parking Deferment. Where the Administrator finds that the required amount of
parking is excessive or there is uncertainty of how much space the use might
require, the Administrator may approve a reduction in parking spaces of up to 25%,
provided that the land area needed to meet the full requirement is retained. The site
plan shall note the area where parking is being deferred with a dotted lot layout. If
within a two-year period following issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy the
Administrator determines, based on observed usage that the deferred parking is
needed, then such parking shall be constructed by the applicant within 12 months of
being informed of such request in writing by the Administrator. The Administrator
may require the posting of a performance bond or other assurance to cover the
estimated construction cost of the deferred parking with a refund or a release in two
years if the additional parking is not found to be necessary.
B. Limits on Excessive Parking. In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement
which depreciate aesthetic standards and contribute to high rates of stormwater
runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space requirement by up to 25% shall only
be allowed with approval by the Administrator. In granting the additional parking
spaces, the Administrator shall determine that such parking is required, based on
documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day not a peak period
demand.
C. Overflow Parking. Any request to exceed the minimum parking space
requirements from 25.1% to 38% shall be considered overflow parking and shall
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
11 | P a g e
comply with the process established in Section B above and shall be constructed in a
manner that returns surface water to the ground (pervious surfacing).
D. Shared Parking Reduction. The Administrator may consider a reduction in the
number of parking required for a mixed-use building or when two or more uses
share parking because of dissimilar peak time parking demands, as calculated using
1105.4 Shared Parking Reduction Schedule. Parking reduction shall not apply to
uses in Downtown A or for mixed-uses that are expressly listed in 1105.1 Parking
Requirement Table.
A reduction in the number of parking spaces is computed by multiplying the
minimum amount of parking normally required for each land use by the appropriate
percentage as shown in section 1105.4 Shared Parking Reduction Schedule for each
of the five time periods shown. The number of parking spaces required is
determined by totaling the resulting numbers in each column; the column total that
generates the highest number of parking spaces then becomes the parking
requirement.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
12 | P a g e
Table 1105.4 Shared Parking Reduction Schedule
Type of Use
Total Required
Spaces w/out
Reduction
Parking Reduction
Weekday Weekend
Daytime
(6 am-6 pm)
Evening
(6 pmmidnight)
Daytime
(6 am-6
pm)
Evening
(6 ammidnight)
Nighttime
(Midnight-
6 am)
Office/Professional
Services
100% 10% 10% 5% 5%
Industrial
100% 10% 10% 5% 5%
Food Sales and
Service/Restaurant
50% 100% 100% 100% 10%
Retail
60% 90% 100% 70% 5%
Hotel, Motel, Inn 75% 100% 75% 100% 75%
Indoor/Legitimate
Theater, Comm. Rec.
establishment
40% 100% 80% 100% 10%
Meeting Center 50% 100% 100% 100% 10%
Multi-family dwellings 50% 100% 100% 100% 100%
Places of Worship 10% 10% 100% 5% 5%
Other 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
TOTAL
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
13 | P a g e
Example –Two buildings are sharing one parking lot. Building #1 consists of a 2,020 SF of
professional office space; 11,000 SF of retail; and a 62-seat restaurant with 6 staff. Building #2
consists of a 280-seat auditorium and a 300-seat church. This project would require 235 parking
spaces.
Table 1105.4.A Shared Parking Reduction Schedule - example
Type of Use
Total
Required
Spaces w/o
Reduction
Parking Reduction
Weekday Weekend
Daytime
(6 am-6 pm)
Evening
(6 pmmidnight)
Daytime
(6 am-6 pm)
Evening
(6 ammidnight)
Nighttime
(Midnight-6
am)
Office/Professional
Services
6 100% 10% 10% 5% 5%
6 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5
Industrial
0 100% 10% 10% 5% 5%
0 0 0 0 0
Food Sales and
Service/Restaurant
22 50% 100% 100% 100% 10%
11 22 22 22 2.2
Retail
40 60% 90% 100% 70% 5%
24 36 40 28 2
Hotel, Motel, Inn 0 75% 100% 75% 100% 75%
0 0 0 0 0
Indoor/Legit
Theater, Com Rec. 92 40% 100% 80% 100% 10%
36.8 92 73.6 92 9.2
Meeting Center 0 50% 100% 100% 100% 10%
0 0 0 0 0
Multi-family
dwellings 0 50% 100% 100% 100% 100%
0 0 0 0 0
Places of Worship 99 10% 10% 100% 5% 5%
9.9 9.9 99 4.95 4.95
Other 0 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
0 0 0 0 0
TOTAL 259 87.7 161 235.2 147 19
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
14 | P a g e
1106 LOADING SPACE
Loading facilities shall be located entirely on the same lot as the development it serves with the
exception of the Downtown Area where there are, in the judgment of the Administrator, practical
difficulties in satisfying the requirement for loading. Loading facilities or truck staging area shall
not be allowed in the front yard or side yard. In cases where such facilities must be placed in the
front yard or side yard, the use of a decorative concrete block screen wall, planting or mature
plants and other such landscaping elements shall be required for screening.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
15 | P a g e
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 11 Parking Standards
16 | P a g e
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12
Sign Standards
Amended March 17, 2014
Amended April 21, 2014
Note: When the Unified Development Ordinance was adopted on June 18,
2012 Article 12 was reserved as place holder – left blank. On March 17, 2014
Chapter 9 Sign Ordinance of the Ellsworth Code of Ordinances was repealed
and replaced with this Chapter.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12 Sign Standards
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 12 SIGN STANDARD
1201 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
1201.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by regulating existing and proposed advertising signs of all types; to reduce sign
obstruction that may contribute to traffic accidents; to reduce hazards that may be caused by
signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way; to improve pedestrian and traffic
safety; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this Article.
1201.2 Applicability. A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained only
in conformance with this Article.
1202 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1202.1 Sign Permit. Except as otherwise herein provided, no person shall erect, modify or move any
signs visible from a public access way without first applying for and obtaining a sign permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer.
1202.2 General Safety. No sign, whether new or existing, shall be permitted that causes a sight
distance, traffic, health or welfare hazard or results in a nuisance due to illumination,
placement, display, or manner of construction.
1203 APPEAL AND EXCEPTION.
1203.1 APPEAL. Unusual site conditions may warrant signs not allowed by this Article. Exception
may be granted by the Board of Appeals per Article 1 Purpose and Authority, Section 114
Appeals, 114.3 Sign Standards.
1204 FEE. The fee for a sign permit is $10.00.
1205 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
1205.1 Non-conforming Signs. Non-conforming signs damaged by any cause shall be
removed or made to conform to this Article unless the replacement or repair cost is equal to or
less than 50% of the replacement value at the time of the damage.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12 Sign Standards
3 | P a g e
1206 EXEMPT SIGNS.
The following signs may be installed without a sign permit, provided they meet the requirements listed
below. These signs shall not be included in the determination of type, number, or area of signs allowed
on a given property.
1206.1 Address Signs. Signs installed in compliance with Article 8 Performance Standards
Section 815 Street Naming and Property Numbering and with Chapter 4 Fire Prevention
Codes and Ordinances.
1206.2 Government Signs. Official federal, state or local government signs.
1206.3 No Trespassing Signs. Trespassing warnings posted in compliance with the
requirements of federal, state, and local laws.
1206.4 Traffic Safety Signs. Small incidental signs placed in parking lot and other private
traffic directional signs limited to guidance of pedestrian or vehicular traffic within the
premises on which they are located. Generally these signs do not exceed 3 feet in height
and 5 square feet in area.
1206.5 Vehicle Signs. Painted signs or decals affixed to the body of any vehicle, unless parked
for the primary purpose of displaying the sign.
1206.6 Memorial/Interpretative Markers. Memorial, interpretative signs or historical signs
or tablets displayed by a public or educational non-profit agency strictly for the purpose
of informing or educating the public.
1207 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
Temporary signs as listed below do not require a permit. Temporary signs shall not be placed in a
position that will obstruct or impair vision to traffic or in any manner create a hazard or disturbance to
the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
1207.1 Construction Signs. Construction signs not to exceed 32 square feet in aggregate may
be erected on the premise on which construction, alteration, or repair is taking place,
during the period of active continuous construction. Sign display is limited to the names
and logos of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors, lending
institutions, or similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the
project. Construction signs must be removed within ten business days of the completion
of construction.
1207.2 Real Estate Signs. A real estate sign advertises the lease or sale of land, space, or
structure. Real estate signs may be single- or double-faced and are limited to a
maximum of two 6 square feet signs for residential structures and a maximum aggregate
of 32 square feet for commercial properties. Real estate signs should preferably be
located on the property for sale/lease. All off-premise real estate signs shall be located
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12 Sign Standards
4 | P a g e
within a public right-of-way. Real estate signs must be removed within ten business
days of the date of sale or lease of the property.
1207.3 Political Signs. A political sign of 32 square feet maximum bearing political messages
relating to an election, primary or referendum may be erected within the public right-ofway
no sooner than six weeks prior to an election and must be removed no later than
one week following the date of the election.
1207.4 Special Events. Signs and banners for special events such as but not limited to sales,
promotions, holidays, auctions, and grand openings shall comply with the following
regulations.
A. Duration. The signage may not be placed more than 30 days prior to the initial date
of the special event, and must be removed within 10 days after the special event.
B. Attention Getting Devices. Attention-getting devices such as but not limited to
balloons, flags, pennants, streamers, and people carrying or wearing signs are
allowed in conjunction with a special event. Any attention-getting device may not
be placed within the right-of-way and shall not create a traffic hazard.
1207.5 Civic Event. A sign other than a special event sign, posted to advertise a civic event or
initiative sponsored by a not for profit or public agency, school, church, or other similar
noncommercial organization.
1207.6 Farm Products. A sign erected by a producer of agricultural products that are grown,
produced, and sold on the producer’s premise. The sign must be directional in nature
and may advertise only the agricultural product that is available for immediate
purchase. The sign shall be removed once the agricultural product advertised on the sign
is no longer available. A sign may not exceed 8 square feet in size and must be located
within 5 miles of where the product is sold. Landowner permission must be obtained. A
producer may not erect more than 4 signs.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12 Sign Standards
5 | P a g e
1208 SIGN MAINTENANCE AND UNSAFE, ABANDONED, AND OBSOLETE SIGNS.
1208.1 Maintenance. All signs must be maintained. The signs must be kept clean, neatly
painted and free from all hazards such as, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose
fastening, and must be maintained at all times in such condition so as not to be
detrimental to the public health or safety or detrimental to the physical appearance or
the character of the neighborhood, or constitute a distraction or obstruction that may
contribute to traffic accidents. Normal wear and tear of aged signs including the copy of
changeable display signs and banners shall be repaired when they detract from the
visible quality of the sign.
1208.2 Unsafe Sign. Any sign that, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, is unsafe
or not adequately secured, including but not limited to a sign where the display areas or
panels are visibly cracked or broken, where the support structure or frame members are
visibly corroded, bent broken, torn, or dented shall be deemed an unsafe sign. Such sign
conditions shall be corrected or removed, together with any supporting structure, by the
owner of the property on which the sign is located, within 90 days of written notice by
the Code Enforcement Officer. If an unsafe sign poses an immediate threat, the Code
Enforcement Officer can require immediate correction.
1208.3 Obsolete Sign. The frame and supporting structure of a sign that no longer advertises or
identifies a bona fide business conducted on the property or product sold may remain in
place except that all advertisement, displays, copy shall be removed within 60 days.
Such signs shall be maintained not to create an eyesore. For example, an obsolete wall
sign should be removed, and the wall area that was covered by the sign should be
repaired and painted.
1208.4 Abandoned Sign. A sign or sign structure on a site where all buildings have been
demolished or removed for more than 60 days shall be removed by the owner of the
property on which it is located or within 60-day written notice by the Code Enforcement
Officer.
1209 MAINE DOT OFFICIAL BUSINESS DIRECTION SIGNS. There is one area where offpremise
Official Business Direction Signs are prohibited:
1209.1 Main Street Area: Includes Main Street from the Union River to High Street and the first
50 feet of any street intersecting the aforementioned segment of Main Street.
1210 GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS.
1210.1 Setbacks.
A. Sign locations shall not interfere with sight distance or pedestrian and cyclist safety.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12 Sign Standards
6 | P a g e
B. Signs shall be setback at least 5 feet from any property line and a setback greater
than 5 feet may be required by the administrator to avoid interference with the line
of sight of vehicles and pedestrian circulation.
C. In the Downtown Zone, where buildings are built on the lot lines or thereabout, the
administrator may disregard the minimum 5 feet sign setback provided that the sign
location does not interfere with visibility required for safe vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, especially at street corners.
1210.2 ON- AND OFF-PREMISE SIGNS.
A. Distance. All signs (on- and off-premise) shall be located within 1,500 feet of the
principal building or facility where the business is carried on or practiced or within
1,500 feet of the point of interest. Storage areas, warehouses and other auxiliary
structures and fixtures shall not be deemed to be buildings where the business,
facility or point of interest is carried on or practiced.
B. Formal Easement and Owner Permission. The placement of any off-premise
signs requires a formal easement with the exception of portable signs, which only
require written owner permission.
C. Home Occupation and Subdivision Signs. Home occupation and subdivision signs
are not allowed off-premise.
1210.3 Home Occupation. One sign identifying the name, address, and profession of a homeoccupation
is allowed provided such sign does not exceed 12 square feet in area and 6
feet in height.
1210.4 Lighting Standards.
A. Lighting for sign shall not create a hazardous glare for pedestrian or vehicles either
in a public street or on any private premises.
B. The light source shall be shielded from view.
C. Signs using exposed neon or other gas tube illumination bent to form letters,
symbols, or other shapes do not need to be shielded.
D. Externally illuminated signs shall utilize focused light fixtures that do not allow
light or glare to shine above the horizontal plane of the top of the sign or onto any
public right-of-way or adjoining property.
E. Signs shall be designed so that illumination does not exceed 10 foot-candles
measured at a distance of 10 feet from the base of the sign. This standard may need
to be lowered to avoid light trespass.
1210.5 Clearance. Awning, marquee, projecting, suspended wall signs and other overhead
signs shall conform to the following requirements.
A. Vertical Clearance. The minimum clearance between the lowest point of a sign and
the grade immediately below shall be 8 feet for all or any portions within a public
right-of-way and walkway areas.
B. Horizontal Clearance. The minimum horizontal clearance between a sign and the
curb line shall be 2 feet.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12 Sign Standards
7 | P a g e
One important
consideration in
determining if a “feature”
- landscaping or
architectural - should be
excluded from the sign is
whether the feature or
element, without lettering
or logo, would otherwise
be constructed – as part of
the building or site
development if the answer
is “yes”,” then the areas of
the feature should be
excluded from being part
of the sign.
1210.6 Attachment and Anchor. Sign attached to masonry, concrete or steel shall be safely
and securely fastened by means of metal anchors, bolts or expansion and lag screws of
sufficient size and anchorage to safely support the loads applied. Nails shall not be used
to secure any projecting sign to any building or structure.
1211 DETERMINATION OF SIGN AREA, DIMENSIONS AND HEIGHT.
1211.1 Determination of Sign Area and Dimensions. In general, the sign area is calculated
by determining the number of square feet within which a sign face can be enclosed. The total
sign area is the sum of all individual sign areas.
A. Framed Wall Sign. For a wall sign which is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise
prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area and
dimension shall include the entire portion within such background or frame.
B. Un-framed Wall Sign. For a wall sign comprised of individual letters, figures or
elements on a wall or similar surface of the building or structure, the area and
dimensions of the sign shall encompass a regular geometric shape (rectangle, circle,
trapezoid, triangle, etc.), or a combination of regular geometric shapes, which form,
or approximate, the perimeter of all elements in the display, the frame, and any
applied background that is not part of the architecture of the building. When
separate elements are organized to form a single sign, but are separated by open
space, the sign area and dimensions shall be calculated by determining the
geometric form, or combination of forms, which comprises all of the
display areas, including the space between different elements. Minor
appendages to a particular shape shall not be included in the total area of a
sign.
C. Freestanding Sign. For a freestanding sign, the sign area shall include the
frame, if any, but shall not include.
i. A pole or other structural support unless such pole or other structural
support is internally illuminated or otherwise so designed to constitute
a display device, or a part of a display device.
ii. Architectural features that are either part of the building or part of a
freestanding structure, and not an integral part of the sign, and which may
consist of landscape, building, or structural forms complement the site in
general.
D. Sign Faces. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back so that both
faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and are part of the same
sign structure, the sign area shall be computed as the measurement of one of the two
faces. When the sign has more than two display surfaces, the area of the sign shall
be the area of largest display surfaces that are visible from a single direction.
1211.2 Determining Sign Height. The height of the sign shall be measured from the ground,
adjacent to the sign, to the top of the sign and support structures.
A. Freestanding Sign Height. The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured
from the base of the sign or supporting structure at its point of attachment to the
ground, to the highest point of the sign. A freestanding sign on a man-made base,
including a graded earth mount, shall be measured from the grade of the nearest
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 12 Sign Standards
8 | P a g e
pavement or top of any pavement curb. The word pavement also refers to other
pervious surfaces such as but not limited to compacted gravel. If the grade of the
site where the sign is located is significantly lower than the public accessway, the
Code Enforcement Officer may allow additional sign height (above the lower grade)
to assure that the sign has visibility equal to the other signs along the acessway.
B. Projecting Sign Clearance. Clearance from projecting signs shall be measured as
the smallest vertical distance between the finished grade and the lowest point of the
sign, including any framework or other embellishments.
1212.3 SPECIFIC STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICTS
Zoning
District
Maximum
Aggregate
Area of
Signs
Wall Sign Projecting Sign Freestanding Sign Portable Sign Changeable Display Sign Window Sign Home Occupation Sign Subdivision Sign
For development of less than
100,000 SF GFA
For development of
100,000 SF GFA or
more
For Park Zones
DT NA -The maximum sign area is 1.5 SF
per LF of building or tenant frontage
with an additional 32 SF for each
additional floor.
-The sign width cannot be greater
than 80% of the length of the tenant
space or the length of the building
frontage for single tenant building.
-The sign area may be increased by
25% when the building is set back at
least 200 feet from the public
accessway and may be further
increase by an additional 25% for
each additional 200 feet of setback
or fraction thereof, up to a maximum
increase of 100%.
-The sign cannot exceed the height
of the ridge of the roof except for flat
roof where it can extend no more
than 6 feet above the eave of the
roof.
-One sign per public entrance.
-The maximum sign area is
12 SF per public entrance.
-The minimum sign clearance
is 8 ft above the public rightof-
way or private walkway
areas.
-The maximum sign area is 64
SF per street frontage.
-The maximum sign area may be
split into more than one sign.
-The maximum sign height is 12
FT.
The maximum sign
area is 64 SF per Street
frontage.
-The maximum sign
area may be split into
more than one sign.
-The maximum sign
height is 12 FT.
NO -The maximum aggregate sign area
is 32 SF.
-The maximum sign area may be
split into more than one sign.
-The max sign size is 8 SF.
-The maximum sign height is 4FT.
-Signs may not be illuminated.
-Signs must be weighted down.
-Changeable display sign may be
utilized on any permitted sign.
-The changeable display shall not
change more than once every 5
minutes.
When the display changes, it must
change as rapidly as is
technologically practicable with
no phasing, rolling, scrolling,
flashing, or phasing.
-Required to have automatic
dimming capability that adjusts to
the brightness to the ambient light
at all times of the day and night.
-Window signs shall
not exceed 50% of the
total area of all
windows per facade.
-The maximum sign area is
12 SF.
The maximum sign height is
6 FT.
-A maximum of one sign per
home.
-The sign must be maintained
by the developer or the
homeowners association.
-The maximum sign area is
32 SF.
-The maximum sign height is
8 FT.
-One residential subdivision
sign is allowed at each major
street frontage of a
subdivision.
U NA -The maximum sign area is 2.0 SF
per LF of building or tenant frontage
with an additional 32 SF for each
additional floor.
-The sign width cannot be greater
than 80% of the length of the tenant
space or the length of the building
frontage for single tenant building.
-The sign area of any wall sign may
be increased by 25% when the
building is set back at least 200 feet
from the public accessway and may
be further increase by an additional
25% for each additional 200 feet of
setback or fraction thereof, up to a
maximum increase of 100%.
-The sign cannot exceed the height
of the ridge of the roof except for flat
roof where it can extend no more
than 6 feet above the eave of the
roof.
-The maximum sign area is 64
SF per Street frontage.
-The maximum sign area may be
split into more than one sign.
-The maximum sign height is 16
FT.
-The maximum sign
area for the
development is 200 SF
per street frontage with
a primary entrance and
the maximum sign
height is 25 FT.
-If the development
has several buildings
an additional 32 SF of
sign area is allowed for
each individual
building with a
maximum height of 10
feet.
-The maximum sign
area may be split into
more than one sign.
NO
C NA -The maximum sign area is 2.5 SF
per LF of building or tenant frontage
with an additional 32 SF for each
additional floor.
-The sign width cannot be greater
than 80% of the length of the tenant
space or the length of the building
frontage for single tenant building.
-The sign area of any wall sign may
be increased by 25% when the
building is set back at least 200 feet
from the public accessway and may
be further increase by an additional
25% for each addition 200 feet of
setback or fraction thereof, up to a
maximum increase of 100%.
-The sign cannot exceed the height
of the ridge of the roof except for flat
roof where it can extend no more
than 6 feet above the eve of the roof.
-The maximum sign area is 96
SF per Street frontage.
-The maximum sign area may be
split into more than one sign.
-The maximum sign height is 25
FT.
-The maximum sign
area is 300 SF per
street frontage where
there is a primary
entrance and the
maximum sign height
is 25 FT.
-If the development
has several buildings
an additional 32 SF of
sign area is allowed for
each individual
building with a
maximum height of 10
feet.
-The maximum sign
area may be split into
more than one sign.
NO
1212.3 SPECIFIC STANDARDS BY ZONING DISTRICTS continued
Zoning
District
Maximum
Aggregate
Area of Signs
Wall Sign Projecting Sign Freestanding Sign Portable Sign Changeable Display Sign Window Sign Home Occupation Sign Subdivision Sign
For development of less than
100,000 SF GFA
For development of
100,000 SF GFA or
more
For Park Zones
N 32 SF YES -One sign per public entrance.
-The maximum sign area is
12 SF per public entrance.
-The minimum sign clearance
is 8 ft above the public rightof-
way or private walkway
areas.
-The maximum sign height is 8
FT.
NO NO NO -Changeable display sign may be
utilized on any permitted sign.
-The changeable display shall not
change more than once every 5
minutes.
When the display changes, it must
change as rapidly as is
technologically practicable with
no phasing, rolling, scrolling,
flashing, or phasing.
-Required to have automatic
dimming capability that adjusts to
the brightness to the ambient light
at all times of the day and night.
-Window signs shall
not exceed 50% of the
total area of all
windows per facade.
-The maximum sign area is
12 SF.
The maximum sign height is
6 FT.
-A maximum of one sign per
home.
-The sign must be maintained
by the developer or the
homeowners association.
-The maximum sign area is
32 SF.
-The maximum sign height is
8 FT.
-One residential subdivision
sign is allowed at each major
street frontage of a
subdivision.
I 96 SF YES -The maximum sign height is 12
FT.
NO NO NO
BP 96 SF in
addition to
signs allowed
per the
Freestanding
Park Zone
standard.
YES -The maximum sign area is 64
SF.
-The maximum sign height is 12
FT.
NO -One per park zones.
-Requires formal
easement if offpremise
unless on
city-owned land.
-The maximum sign
area is 300 SF.
-The maximum sign
height is 25FT.
NO
R 64 SF YES The maximum sign height is 12
FT.
NO NA YES
DW 64SF YES The maximum sign height is 12
FT.
NO NA YES
CP 48 SF in
addition to
signs allowed
per the
Freestanding
Park Zone
standard.
YES The maximum sign height is 10
FT.
NO -One per park zones.
-Requires formal
easement if offpremise
unless on
city-owned land.
-The maximum sign
area is 300 SF.
-The maximum sign
height is 25FT.
NO
SF: square footage; GFA: gross floor area; LF linear footage; FT; feet; and NA: not applicable.

Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 13 Board of Appeals
1 | P a g e
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development ordinance
Article 13
Board of Appeals
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 13 Board of Appeals
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 13 BOARD OF APPEALS
1300 ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals (Board) as provided by Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Sections
2691 and 4353. The Board shall consist of 5 members and one associate member.
The members shall be appointed by the City Council. The members shall be appointed for terms
of 5 years each, such terms to be staggered so that the term of one member shall expire each
year.
The associate member shall act in place of any member who may be unable to act due to conflict
of interest, absence, physical incapacity, or any other reason. The City Council may dismiss a
member of the Board for cause before that member's term expires.
1301 JURISDICTION
The Board shall have the following powers:
A. Administrative Review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is
an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by, or failure to
act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board in the administration of
this ordinance.
B. Variance. To authorize in specific cases such variance from the terms of this
ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship. In the Shoreland Zone, variance shall be applied per Chapter
56, Article 4. Shoreland Zoning Regulations section 404 Shoreland Zoning Appeals.
In all other zones, a variance shall apply only to area, yard space, height, or setback
requirements, and in no case shall a variance apply to the use of land or structures. A
variance may be granted only if the Board finds that all of the following criteria are
met:
i. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
ii. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property
and not to the general conditions of the neighborhood;
iii. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood; and
iv. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior
owner.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 13 Board of Appeals
3 | P a g e
1302 POWER AND DUTIES
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
A. To interpret provisions of the ordinance which are called into question in any
matter before it;
B. To approve the issuance of a variance subject to conditions, where those
conditions are directly related to the present or future use or division of the
property;
C. To take and hear testimony, to swear witnesses and compel the presence of
witnesses by process; and
D. To establish such procedures for hearings before it, as are not inconsistent with
the procedures set forth in this ordinance and state law.
1303 GENERAL PROCEDURES
A. The Chairman shall be elected annually by the Zoning Board of Appeals from its
membership. The Chairman shall call meetings as required, or when requested to do
so by a majority of the members of the Board, by the City Council or by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Board and be
the official spokesman of the Board.
B. The secretary shall be elected annually by the Board from its membership. The
secretary shall maintain a permanent record of all Board meetings and all
correspondence of the Board. The secretary is responsible for maintaining those
records which are required as part of the various proceedings which may be brought
before the Board. All records to be maintained or prepared by the secretary are public
records. They shall be filed in the City clerk's office and may be inspected at
reasonable times.
C. A quorum of the Board is necessary to conduct an official Board meeting; a quorum
must consist of at least a majority of the Board's members.
D. The Board may receive any oral or documentary evidence but shall provide as a
matter of policy for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence. Every party has the right to present the party's case or defense by oral or
documentary evidence, to submit rebuttal evidence and to conduct any crossexamination
that is required for a full and true disclosure of the facts.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 13 Board of Appeals
4 | P a g e
E. The transcript of the testimony, if any, and exhibits, together with all papers and
requests filed at the proceeding, constitutes the record. All decisions become a part of
the record and must include a statement of findings and conclusions, as well as the
reasons or basis for the findings and conclusions upon all the material issues of fact,
law or discretion presented, and the appropriate order, relief or denial of relief.
Notice of any decision shall be mailed or hand-delivered to the petitioner, the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, as appropriate, and the City Council
within seven days of the Board's decision.
1304 PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
The following procedures shall apply to appeals for Administrative Review conducted before the
Zoning Board of Appeals:
A. An appeal may be taken to the Board by an aggrieved person from any decision of the
Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, as appropriate within 30 days of
the date of the decision appealed from. The Board may extend this time period only
upon a showing by the person seeking an appeal that there was good cause for the
failure to appeal within 30 days of the decision.
B. An appeal shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal with the Board, which
includes:
i. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, the locations of existing buildings,
and other physical features pertinent to the relief requested.
ii. A concise statement of the relief requested and why it should be granted.
C. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board, as appropriate, shall transmit all papers comprising the record of the decision
appealed from to the Board.
D. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within 30 days of its receipt of an
appeal request. At least 7 days prior to the date of hearing on such appeal, the Board
shall cause to be published in one issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the
City, notice which includes:
i. The name of the person(s) appealing;
ii. The location and description of the property involved;
iii. A brief description of the decision from which an appeal is taken; and
iv. The time and place of the hearing.
E. The Board shall, in addition to the notice set forth in subsection D above, give written
notice by regular mail or its equivalent to:
i. All abutting property owners (notice to abutting property owners shall be sent
to the owner's address contained in the records of the City Tax Assessor);
ii. The person(s) making the appeal; and
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 13 Board of Appeals
5 | P a g e
iii The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriate.
1305 VARIANCE PROCEDURES
The following procedures shall apply to applications for a variance:
A. An application for a variance may be made by any person with a possessory,
contractual, or other legal or equitable interest in the property.
B. An application for a variance shall be made by filing with the Zoning Board of
Appeals a written application for a variance, which shall include:
i. An original or copy of the deed, agreement, option or other instrument
showing the applicant's interest in the property;
ii. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, the locations of existing and
proposed buildings, and other physical features such as septic system
locations, well, etc.; and
iii. A concise statement of the nature of the variance sought.
C. The Board shall hold a public hearing on the variance request within 30 days of its
receipt of the request. At least seven days prior to the date of the hearing on the
variance, the Board shall cause to be published in one issue of the newspaper of
general circulation in the City, notice which includes:
i. The name of the person(s) seeking the variance;
ii. The location and description of the property involved;
iii. A brief description of the nature of the variance sought; and
iv. The time and place of the hearing.
D. The Board shall, in addition to the notice set forth in subsection C above, give written
notice by regular mail, or its equivalent to:
i. All abutting property owners (notice to abutting property owners shall be sent
to the owner's address contained in the records of the City Tax Assessor);
ii. The person(s) seeking the variance; and
iii. The City Planner and the Code Enforcement Officer.
E. Whenever the Board grants a variance under this ordinance, a certificate indicating
the name of the current property owner; identifying the property by reference to the
last recorded deed in its chain of title; indicating the fact that a variance, including
any conditions of variance, has been granted; and the date of granting shall be
prepared in recordable form and provided to the applicant for recording in the
Hancock County Registry of Deeds. Variances not recorded within 30 days of the
date of being provided to the applicant shall be invalid. No rights may accrue to the
variance recipient or his heirs, successors or assigns unless and until the recording is
made within 30 days.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 13 Board of Appeals
6 | P a g e
1306 PROCEDURES FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS
The following procedures shall be used in the conduct of public hearings conducted pursuant to
this Article:
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall establish procedures to maintain orderly
procedure and to allow each side to be heard. All questions and answers shall be
directed through the chairman, and all persons at the hearing shall abide by the order
of the chairman.
B. Any party may be represented by an agent or attorney. The participation of that agent
or attorney shall be governed by the procedures established by the Board.
C. Hearings shall not be continued except upon a showing of good cause.
1307 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD
A. A concurring vote of at least three members present and voting shall be necessary for
the Zoning Board of Appeals to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board, or to grant a
variance.
B. The applicant for the appeal or variance shall bear the burden of proof on all issues.
C. Administrative relief may be granted only where the Board finds that the decision of
the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board from which appeal is made was
clearly contrary to the specific provisions of this ordinance.
D. A variance may be granted only where the Board finds that the applicant has proven
each requirement by a preponderance of the evidence.
E. The Board shall decide all appeals or variance requests within 30 days after the close
of the public hearing.
F. The Board may reconsider any decision reached under this section within 30 days of
its prior decision. A vote to reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration
must occur and be completed within 30 days of the date of the vote on the original
decision. The Board may conduct additional hearings and receive additional evidence
and testimony as provided in this subsection.
1308 APPEALS TO THE SUPERIOR COURT
Any party may take an appeal, within 45 days after the decision is rendered, to the Superior
Court from any order, relief or denial by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be
made in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 13 Board of Appeals
7 | P a g e
1309 STAYS OF PROCEEDINGS
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action
from which appeal is taken unless the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with that Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, that by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate that a stay would cause immediate peril to life and property. If the Board
concurs with the opinion set forth in the certificate, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise
than by a court of record on application, on notice to the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board, as appropriate, from whom the appeal is taken. In the event such a certificate is filed with
the Board, the Board shall conduct a hearing on the property of a stay. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in 1303 General Procedures and Appeals
Procedures sections of this article.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 56
Unified Development ordinance
Article 14
Definitions
Amended August 20, 2012
Amended January14, 2013
Amended March 17, 2014
Amended May 21, 2018
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
2 | P a g e
ARTICLE 14 DEFINITIONS
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
Accessory Use or Structure: A subordinate use or structure customarily incidental and
subordinate to the principal use and located on the same lot. Accessory uses, in the aggregate,
shall not subordinate the principal use(s) on a lot. An accessory use located in an accessory
structure shall conform to the space standards of each zone.
Accessory, Dwelling: A separate residential dwelling unit, but not a mobile home, which is
located within a single-family dwelling unit or in a detached building and is clearly subordinate
to the primary use.
Accessway: Any public or private street, right-of way, or driveway used to enter or leave a
public or private street or adjacent land using an on-road vehicle. All streets are considered
accessways but not all accessways are considered streets. Within the Shoreland Zone, an
accessway also includes a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel,
asphalt, or other surfacing material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of
motorized vehicles, excluding a residential driveway less than 500 feet in length.
Adverse Impact: A negative consequence for the physical, social, or economic environment
resulting from an action or project.
Aggrieved Party: An owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the
granting or denial of a permit or variance under this ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for
which a permit or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have
suffered particularized injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agricultural Activity and Processing, Commercial: Farming, including plowing, tillage,
cropping, installation of best management practices, seeding, cultivating, or harvesting for the
production of food and fiber products (except commercial logging and timber harvesting
operations); grazing or raising of livestock (except in feedlot); aquaculture; sod productions;
orchards; tree farms; nurseries and green houses. It also includes activities involving a variety of
operations on crops or livestock, and on crops after harvest to prepare them for harvest or further
processing and packaging at a distance from the agricultural area. These uses include but are not
limited to slaughterhouse, mills, refineries, canneries, milk processing plants, cleaning, milling,
pulping, drying, roasting, storing, packing, selling and other similar activities.
Agricultural, Activity: Farming, including plowing, tillage, cropping, installation of best
management practices, seeding, cultivating, or harvesting for the production of food and fiber
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
3 | P a g e
products (except timber harvesting); grazing or raising of livestock (except in feedlot);
aquaculture; sod productions; orchards.
Agricultural, Feedlot: A lot, structure, building, or confined area used intensively for the keeping
of farm animals, including but not limited to, of bovine, equine, swine, or sheep species in close
quarter for the purpose of fattening for market or slaughter and where animal waste may
accumulate. Does not include a barn or similar structure.
Alteration: A change, addition, or modification requiring construction, including any change in
the location of structural members of buildings such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or
girders, but not including cosmetic or decorative changes.
Animal Hospital: A commercial establishment for the care and treatment, and boarding of
animals, including household pets.
Apartment, Accessory: A separate dwelling unit, which is located within, and subordinate to a
single family detached dwelling.
Application: The completed form or forms and all accompanying documents, exhibits, and fees
required of an applicant by the applicable department or board of the City from development
review, approval, or permitting process.
Arterial Road: Roads or streets which are expected to provide a high degree of mobility for the
longer trip length. They are to provide a relatively high operating speed and level of service.
Access to abutting property is not the major function and thus some degree of access control is
desirable to enhance mobility.
ASTM: International standards organization formerly known as the American Society for
Testing and Materials.
Automobile rental/leasing: Leasing or renting of automobiles, motorcycles, and light load
vehicles.
Automobile Repair: The use of a site for the repair of vehicles such as automobiles, trucks,
vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, or motorcycles or other similar motorized transportation
vehicles including the sale, installation, and servicing or equipment and parts. This use includes
muffler shops, repair garages, oil change and lubrication, painting, tire sales and installations,
wheel and brake shops, body and fender shops and similar repair and maintenance activities but
excludes dismantling or salvage.
Automobile Sales, Major: Any business establishment that sells or leases, and maintains an
inventory of more than 26 new or used vehicles for sale or long-term lease such as new or used
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
4 | P a g e
automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, or motorcycles or other similar
motorized transportation vehicles.
Automobile Sales, Minor: Any business establishment that sells or leases, and maintains an
inventory of 5 to 25 new or used vehicles for sale or long term lease such as automobiles, trucks,
vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, or motorcycles or other similar motorized transportation
vehicles.
Average Daily Traffic (ADT): Average Daily Traffic. See Trip Generation.
Bar and/or Cocktail Lounge: Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for
consumption on the premises and minors are excluded therefore by law. It shall not mean a
premise wherein such beverages are sold in conjunction with the sale of food for consumption on
the premises and the sale of such beverages comprises less than 25% of the gross receipts.
Basal Area: The area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and inclusive
of bark.
Basement: Any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having
more than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Bed and Breakfast: Any dwelling in which lodging is offered for compensation to persons
either individually or as a family with or without meals.
Best Management Practices (B.M.P.): Established guidelines for control and reducing point
and non-point source pollution.
Bikeways: A continuous unobstructed, reasonably direct route between two points that is
intended and suitable for bicycle use. Bikeways include, but are not limited, to bike paths, and
multi-use paths.
Boarding House, Congregate Housing, Assisted Living: Any dwelling in which three or more
rooms are offered for compensation to persons either individually or as families with or without
meals for more than three consecutive days.
Boat Launching Facility?: A facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of
watercraft, and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles
and trailers.
Buffer, Vegetated: A strip of land with natural or planted vegetation located between a structure
and a side a rear property line intended to separate and partially obstruct the view of two adjacent
land uses or properties from one another.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
5 | P a g e
Building Height, Non-residential: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the finished grade within 20 feet of a building to the eaves or start of a roofline. The highest
point of the roof is not included in the height limitations.
Building Height, Residential: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the
finished grade within 20 feet of a building to the highest point of the building. The highest point
shall not include attachments or structures such as transmission towers, windmills, chimney,
antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
Building: Any structure having a roof or partial roof supported by columns or walls and which is
used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property of any kind.
Bulk Materials: Uncontained solid matter such as powder, grain, stone, sand, etc.
Bulk Tank Facilities: Bulk storage tanks of flammable and combustible liquids, compressed
gases or liquefied petroleum gas (LP gas) for businesses use, wholesale, or wholesale
distributing.
Bureau: State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry.
Business and Trade School: A specialized instructional establishment that provides on-site
training of business, commercial, and /or trade skills such as accounting, driving, and auto repair.
This classification excludes establishments providing training in an activity that is not otherwise
permitted in the zone where it is to locate. Incidental instructional services in conjunction with
another primary use shall not be considered a business and trade school.
Campground: A business, public or private establishment operated as a recreational site for
tents, camper, trailer, and travel trailer or other forms of temporary living shelter that can
accommodate two or more parties.
Campsite: Private land for exclusive personal use, not associated with a business or a
campground, which is developed for repeated camping and which involves site improvements
that may include, but not limited to gravel pads, parking areas, fireplaces, or tent platform.
Canopy Trees: A deciduous tree whose mature height and branch structure provide foliage
primarily in the upper half of the tree.
Canopy: The more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Cardholder, Qualified Employee (medical marijuana): Cardholder means a principal officer,
board member or employee of a dispensary who has been issued and possesses a valid registry
identification card.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
6 | P a g e
Cemetery: A burial ground for the interment of the dead, includes crematoriums, and
mausoleums.
Change in Use: The change from an existing use to another use, including without limitation,
the addition of a new use to an existing use. Example: Residential to Business, Business to
Assembly.
Changeable Display Sign. A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols change either
automatically through electrical or electronic means, or manually through placement of letters or
symbols on a panel mounted in or on a track system.
Cluster Subdivision: A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally
required in the zoning district in which the development is located in return for the provision of
permanent open space owned in common by lot/unit owners, the City, or a land conservation
organization.
Code Enforcement Officer: A person appointed by the City Council to administer and enforce
this ordinance. Reference to the Code Enforcement Officer may include the Building Inspector,
Plumbing Inspector, Electrical Inspector, and the like, where applicable.
Collector Road: These roads serve a dual function in accommodating short trips and feeding
Arterial roads. They should provide some degree of mobility and also serve abutting property.
An intermediate design speed and level of service is appropriate.
Commercial Use: The use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation,"
defined below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying
and selling of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling
units.
Commercial: A land use which is primarily occupied or engaged in commerce or work intended
for commerce other than a home occupation.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the
required fee and all information required by these regulations for a Final Plan, or by a vote by the
Board to waive the submission of required information. The Board may issue a receipt to the
applicant upon its determination that an application is complete.
Comprehensive Plan or Policy Statement: Any part or element of the overall plan or policy for
development of the municipality as defined in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 4301.
Connector: An accessway whose primary function is to allow traffic access between adjacent
lots or developments without providing access to a public right-of-way.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
7 | P a g e
Conservation Plan: A customized document that outlines the use and best management
practices of the natural resources on public or private lands. Typically, the plan will include land
use maps, soil information, inventory of resources, engineering notes, and other supporting
information.
Contiguous Lots: Lots which adjoin at any line or point, or are separated at any point by a body
of water less than 15 feet wide.
Cross Access: An easement or accessway providing for vehicular access between two or more
sites.
Cross-sectional Area: The cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel is
determined by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average stream or
tributary stream channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is the straight line
distance from the normal high-water line on one side of the channel to the normal high-water line
on the opposite side of the channel. The average stream or tributary stream channel depth is the
average of the vertical distances from a straight line between the normal high-water lines of the
stream or tributary stream channel to the bottom of the channel.
Curb Cut: The providing of vehicular ingress or egress between property and abutting street.
Curb Ramp: A short ramp cutting through a curb or built up to it.
Custom Manufacturing: Establishments primarily engaged in the onsite production of goods by
hand manufacturing, within enclosed structures, involving the use of hand tools, or the use of
mechanical equipment commonly associated with residential or commercial uses, or a single
kiln.
Day Care: Any facility operated for the purpose of providing care, protection and guidance to
individuals during only part of a 24-hour day. This term includes nursery schools, pre-schools,
day care centers for individuals, and other similar uses but excludes educational facilities or any
facility offering care to individuals for a full 24-hour period.
DBH: The diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level
Deck: A level structure adjacent to a building elevated above the surface of the ground which has
a railing but no roof, awning, or other covering.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including buildings,
landscaping, parking lots, and streets.
Development: Uses including but not limited to the construction of a new building or other
structures on a lot or below the shoreline or in a wetland, the relocation of an existing building
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
8 | P a g e
on another lot, or the use of open land for a new use; any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to parking, temporary uses, clearing of land or
vegetation, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations; it
includes a building, a development site under the same ownership, a consolidated development,
and phased development.
Dimensional Requirements: Numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but
not limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability: Any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or
illness; and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a
substantial handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a
psychiatrist or psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory impairment which requires
special education, vocational rehabilitation or related services.
Dispensary: A Registered Dispensary or Dispensary means a not-for-profit entity registered
pursuant to 10-144 CMR Chapter 122 Section 6 consisting of a Medical Marijuana Cultivation
Facility, a Medical Marijuana Retail Facility, or a Medical Marijuana Combined Facility
(Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility and a Medical Marijuana Retail Facility as defined: 1)
Medical Marijuana Cultivation Facility (Cultivation Facility): A not-for-profit facility
limited to the acquisition and possession of medical marijuana; cultivation or growing of medical
marijuana; manufacturing of medical marijuana; delivering, transporting and transferring of
medical marijuana to a Medical Marijuana Retail facility; and 2) Medical Marijuana Retail
Facility (Retail Facility): A not-for-profit facility limited to acquisition and possession of
medical marijuana; the selling, supplying or dispensing of medical marijuana and of
paraphernalia or related supplies and educational materials to registered patients who have
designed the Medical Marijuana Retail Facility to dispense medical marijuana for their medical
use and to registered primary caregivers of those patients.
Disruption of Shoreline Integrity: The alteration of the physical shape, properties, or condition
of a shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A shoreline where
shoreline integrity has been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil, an
abnormal channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing waters, a profile and
character altered from natural conditions.
Disturbed Area: All land areas that are stripped, graded, grubbed, filled or excavated at any
time during the site preparation or removing vegetation for, or construction of, a project.
Downtown Area: Geographic area delineated by the City Council on November 17, 2008.
Drainageway: A natural or man-made channel or course within which surface discharge of
water may occur. Drainageways include, but are not limited to rivers, streams and brooks
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
9 | P a g e
(whether intermittent or perennial), swales ditches, pipes, culverts, and wetlands with localized
discharge of water.
Driveway, Commercial: Any accessway serving a commercial use generating less than 50
average daily traffic (ADT).
Driveway, Residential: A means of access from a public or private road which will serve no
more than two dwelling units. .
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used as a habitation which is separate from other such
rooms or suites of rooms, and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing, and
sanitary facilities; includes single-family houses, and the units in a duplex, apartment house,
multi-family dwellings, and residential condominiums. Dwelling units created after June 19,
1989, must contain a minimum of 500 square feet of living space.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: A building designed or intended to be used, or used exclusively for
residential occupancy by three or more families living independently of one another including
apartment buildings and condominiums, but excluding single-family and two-family dwellings.
Ellsworth has two types of multi-family dwelling: a) the 3- to 6-unit complex; and b) the 7-unit
and more.
Dwelling, Single - Family Detached: A building designed or intended to be used exclusively for
residential occupancy by one family only and containing only one dwelling unit.
Dwelling, Single Family Attached: A building designed or intended to be used exclusively for
residential occupancy by no more than two families and containing two separate dwelling units
in one structure.
Dwelling: Any building or structure or portion thereof containing one or more dwelling units,
but not including a motel, hotel, inn, or similar use.
Earth: Topsoil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, rock, or other minerals.
Educational Institution: Parochial, private, charitable or nonprofit schools, junior college, or
university other than business and trade schools, with or without living quarters, dining rooms,
restaurants, and other incidental facilities for students, teachers, and employees.
Emergency Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land used to accommodate several mobile homes
for a temporary period.
Emergency Operations: Operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare,
such as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
10 | P a g e
operations to rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or
injury.
Enclosure Ratio: The ratio of building height to the distance between building and the center of
the right-of-way. The front setback distance shall be measured from the front façade, including
any porch, stoop, or other area integral; to the building.
Engineer: Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the State of Maine.
Entrance: An accessway serving one of the following uses: retail, office, industrial, institutional,
or service business uses. (Am. 6/09/03)
Equipment Sales and Rental: Establishments primarily engaged in the sale or rental of large
tools, trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar industrial
equipment. Included in this type of use is the incidental storage, maintenance, and servicing of
such equipment.
Essential Services, Distribution: Small-scale facilities serving a local area, including power
lines, water and sewer lines, storm drainage facilities, transformers, pump stations and hydrants,
switching boxes, and other buildings normally, but not always, found in a street right-of-way to
serve adjacent properties.
Essential services, Facilities: A building or other structure used or intended to be used by public
or private utilities, including but not limited to gas tank and other storage facilities; water or
sewer storage facilities; compost facility; and electrical transmission and distributions
substations.
Essential Services, Transmission: Large-scale facilities serving the entire city or region such as
power transmission lines, natural gas transmission lines, water storage tanks and reservoirs,
major water transmission lines or sewer collectors and interceptors, solid waste disposal or
processing facilities, excluding landfill, sewage or wastewater treatment plants, and generating
facilities.
Expansion of a Structure: An increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of Use: The addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use of
more floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Façade: That portion of any exterior elevation on the building extending from grade to top pt the
parapet, wall, or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
11 | P a g e
Family: One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single non-profit housekeeping unit
whether or not related to each other by birth, marriage or adoption, but not to consist of more than
five unrelated persons.
Filling: Depositing or dumping any matter on or into the ground or water.
Financial Security: Any security used as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an
application are satisfactorily completed.
Floodway: the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation by more than one foot in height.
Floor Area?: the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior
walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and
decks.
Floor Area: The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior
walls, plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and
decks.
Foot-candle: A measure of light falling on a surface. One foot-candle is equal to the amount of
light generated by one candle shining on one square foot surface located one foot away. Footcandle
measurements shall be made with a photometric light meter three feet above the ground.
Forest Management Activities: timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement,
pruning, regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of
timber harvesting and the construction, creation or maintenance of accessways and land
management roads.
Forest Stand: A contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution,
composition, and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a
distinguishable unit.
Formal Easement. An interest in real property recorded at the Hancock County Registry of
Deeds dedicating a portion of land to be used specifically for a sign.
Foundation: The supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills
and post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of
concrete, block, brick or similar material.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
12 | P a g e
Freestanding. A sign that is attached to, erected on, or supported by some structure such as a
pole, mast, frame, or other structure that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building
or other structure whose principal function is something other than the support of a sign.
Frontage, Shore: The length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a
straight line between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Frontage, Street: The horizontal distance measured in a straight line between the intersections
of the side lot lines of a lot with the right-of-way of a street.
Functional Area (of an intersection): The area beyond the physical intersection of two
accessways that comprises decision and maneuvering distance, plus any required vehicle storage
length, and the area protected through corner clearance standards and access spacing standards.
Functionally Water-dependent Uses: those uses that require, for their primary purpose,
location on submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland
waters and that cannot be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited
to dams, commercial and recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat
storage buildings; finfish and shellfish processing; fish storage and retail and wholesale fish
marketing facilities; waterfront dock and port facilities; shipyards and boat building facilities;
marinas; navigation aids; basins and channels; retaining walls; industrial uses dependent upon
water-borne transportation or requiring large volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot
reasonably be located or operated at an inland site; and uses that primarily provide general public
access to coastal or inland waters.
Gas Station: A place where gasoline, motor oil, lubricants or other minor accessories are
retailed directly to the public on the premises in combination with the retailing of items typically
found in a convenience store.
Glare: Light exceeding an accustomed level resulting in annoyance, discomfort, or reduced
visibility.
Great Pond: Any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of
ten acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area
in excess of 30 acres. For the purposes of this Article, Ellsworth’s Great Ponds are: Branch Lake,
Graham Lake, Green Lake, Jesse Bog, Little Duck Pond, Little Rocky Pond, Lower Patten Pond,
Upper Patten Pond, Wormwood Pond, and Leonard Lake.
Gross Floor Area (GFA): the total interior floor area of a building or structure measured at the
inside face of the exterior walls, but excluding stairwells, elevator shafts, lobbies, and bathrooms
located for common or public usage of the total building rather than for tenant or internal usage,
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
13 | P a g e
and space occupied by mechanical equipment or space related to the operation and maintenance
of the building.
Ground Cover: Small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor.
Growth Area: Area of land defined in the Comprehensive Plan as the Growth Area.
Half Story: That portion of a building immediately beneath a sloping roof when there is less
than four feet vertically between the floor and the intersections of the bottoms of the rafters at the
plate with the interior faces of the walls. A half story may be as completely used for any purpose
as a full story.
Harvest Area: The area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the cutting of
trees, skidding, yarding, and associated accessways and land management roads construction
take place. The area affected by a harvest encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of
these activities, excepting unharvested areas greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a
harvest.
Height of a Structure: The vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction)
grade at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding
chimneys, steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
High and Moderate Value Waterfowl and Wading Bird Habitat: High and moderate value
waterfowl and wading bird habitats are significant wildlife habitats. Waterfowl are members of
the family Anatidae including but not limited to brant, wild ducks, geese, and swans. Wading
birds include but are not limited to herons, glossy ibis, bitterns, rails, coots, common moorhens,
and sandhill cranes. High and moderate value waterfowl and wading bird habitats are depicted
on a GIS data layer maintained by the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife
(IF&W) and available from either IF&W or the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
The IF&W rating procedure and list of waterfowl and wading bird species was created December
22, 1993, updated September 1, 2005, and is available at IF&W offices.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A map prepared by a certified Soil Scientist, identifying the soil
types down to 1/8 of an acre or less at a scale equivalent to the subdivision plan submitted. The
soils shall be identified in accordance with the National Cooperative Soil Survey. The map shall
show the location of all test pits used to identify the soils, and shall be accompanied by a log of
each sample point identifying the textural classification and the depth to seasonal high water
table or bedrock at that point. Single soil test pits and their evaluation for suitability for
subsurface wastewater disposal systems shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil
surveys.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
14 | P a g e
High Pollutant Land Uses: Land uses with high pollutant loads including, but not limited to,
the following categories and uses: 1) Manufacture involving: Asphalt, petroleum or lubricants;
chemical products or hazardous substances; food products; glass, clay, cement, concrete or
gypsum products; paper or paper products; rubber or plastic; leather, textiles or fabric; and
timber or wood products. 2) Transportation uses: air, land & water transportation facilities;
vehicles service, fueling and maintenance facilities; vehicle equipment and cleaning facilities;
vehicle fleet storage areas; road salt storage and loading areas (if exposed to rainfall); and
parking lots generating 400 ADT or greater. 3) Industrial/other commercial uses: auto salvage or
recycling; electricity generation; hazardous waste treatment, storage or disposal; landfill, land
application or dump operation; landscape nurseries; outdoor storage and loading areas; oil and
gas refining; printing and publishing; recycling facility; sewage treatment works; and
warehousing. 4) Mining/extraction of: coal, oil or gas; metals; and minerals.
Home Occupation: Any occupations, profession, or business activity customarily conducted
entirely within a dwelling unit and carried on by a member of the family residing on the dwelling
unit and carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit, and which
occupation or profession is clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the dwelling unit for
dwelling purposes and does not change the character of the dwelling unit. A home occupation is
an accessory use to a dwelling unit.
Homeless Shelter: A building or group of buildings, which offer overnight and/or longer-term
transitional lodging, consisting of separate units and/or dormitory style, multiple bed units.
Meals may be provided to occupants. All of the services may be given without charge and in no
case shall such a shelter be run on a for–profit basis.
Hotel/Motel: A business establishment having guest rooms consisting of a building or series of
building in which lodging is offered for compensation and where related ancillary uses shall be
allowed only if the use is expressly permitted in the subject zone.
Impervious surface/area: Low-permeability man-made material that prevents stormwater from
penetrating the ground, such as structures and areas covered with asphalt, concrete and
compacted gravel used for parking and roadways. A natural or man-made waterbody is not
considered an impervious area except for the purpose of stormwater calculations. (proposed in
the draft stormwater)
Increase in Nonconformity of a Structure, Shoreland: Any change in a structure or property
which causes further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such
as, but not limited to, reduction in shoreline setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or
increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the
dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance
of the existing structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is
no increase in nonconformity with the shoreline setback requirement if the expansion extends no
further into the required shoreline setback area than does any portion of the existing
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
15 | P a g e
nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the
expansion extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest
portion of the existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in
this allowance are expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Industrial Service: Establishment providing industrial services to individuals or businesses.
This classification include dry cleaning plants, metal machine and welding shops; furniture
upholstery shop; and similar business engagements in custom fabrication and repair.
Industrial: The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of
goods, or the extraction of minerals.
Industry, Heavy: A use involving the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products predominantly from extracted or raw materials, or use involving storage of, or
manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing
processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Industry, Light: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared
materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment,
packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic
industrial processing.
Infill Development: Development on vacant or underused lots in otherwise built-up areas.
Institutional: A non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or City-owned or -operated building, structure or land used for public
purposes.
Junk Yard: 1) a place occupied by three or more unregistered, unserviceable, discarded, or
junked automotive vehicles, or bodies, engines, or other parts thereof sufficient in bulk to equal
two vehicles or bodies, also referred to as a motor junk yard but excluding vehicle repair garages
where autos are being overhauled or held temporarily pending insurance claims, etc.; or 2) a
yard, field or other area used as a place of storage for discarded, worn-out or junked plumbing,
heating supplies, household appliances, furniture, discarded scrap and junked lumber, old or
scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste and scrap iron, steel
and other ferrous and non-ferrous material, including garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary
landfills.
Laboratory, Research and Development Facility: An establishment which conducts research,
development, production of scientific commodities for sale, or the breeding and managing of
animals for the purpose of distribution to other research facilities. It also includes laboratories
conducting educational or medical research or testing such as, but not limited to, a biotechnology
or biomedical establishments. Excluded from this definition are activities incorporating high
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
16 | P a g e
concentration of chemicals, biological and radiological hazards that are usually associated with
general manufacturing uses.
Land Management Road: A route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel,
or other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and
used primarily for timber harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not
including skid trails or skid roads.
Landing Area: A landing pad area, strip, deck, or building roof used to launch or receive nonemergency
aircraft.
Landscaping: Any combination of living plants, such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover,
flowers or grass, as well as fences, retaining wall, benches, and other similar structures.
Level of Service (LOS): is a measure of effectiveness for transportation infrastructure elements
such as intersections that considers mobility, timing and other factors.
Licensed Forester: A forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter 76.
Light Fixture, Outdoor: An outdoor illuminating device, outdoor lighting, or reflective surface,
lamp or similar device, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination, decoration, or
advertisement.
Light Trespass: Any light spill falling over property lines that illuminate adjacent ground or
buildings.
Lighting Maintenance: The servicing, repairing, or altering of any premises, appliance,
apparatus, or equipment to perpetuate the use or purpose for which such premises, appliance,
apparatus, or equipment was originally intended. Activities that change the character, size, or
scope of a project beyond the original design are not included in this definition.
Lighting, Fully Shielded: A light fixture that is shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted
by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture are projected below the
horizontal plane.
Loading, off-street: An unobstructed area provided for the temporary parking of trucks and
other motor vehicles for the purpose of loading, and unloading goods, wares, materials, and
merchandise.
Local Road: Roads or streets with relatively short trip lengths and which have as a primary
function property access. They are intended to provide access to residences, businesses, farms
and other abutting property and are not intended to provide through traffic, although a limited
amount of through traffic may use some local roads. These roads are not designed for mobility or
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
17 | P a g e
higher operating speeds. This function is reflected by use of lower design speeds and level of
service.
Lot Area, Shoreland: The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land
below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath
accessways serving more than two lots.
Lot Coverage, Shoreland: The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other nonvegetated
surfaces, within the shoreland zone for the lot or for a portion thereof that is located
within the shoreland zone, including land area previously developed.
Lot Lines: The property lines bounding a lot as defined below: 1) Front Lot Line is, on an
interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street or right-of-way. On a corner or through lot,
the line separating the lot from each street or right-of- way. On lots with shore frontage, the
shoreline constitutes the front lot line. 2) Rear Lot Line is the lot line opposite the front lot line.
On a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line between the side lot lines
parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line. On a
corner lot, the rear lot line shall be opposite the front lot line of least dimension. 3) Side Lot Line
is ant lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are
recorded on a document or map on file with the Hancock County Register of Deeds.
Lot Size, Minimum Area: The lot area, less the area of any land subject to right-of-way or
easements, other than utility easements servicing the lot, and also excluding lands which are
below the normal high water mark or defined wetlands.
Lot Width: The width of a lot at the front setback line.
Lot, Corner: A lot with at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a street or right-of-way.
Lot, Interior: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Minimum Width, Shoreland: The closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot.
When only two lot lines extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be
side lot lines.
Lot, Occupied: A parcel with a primary structure erected and ready for occupancy.
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by one building and the accessory
buildings or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are required by
ordinances and having frontage upon a public street, right-of-way, or private way.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
18 | P a g e
Low Impact Design: Low Impact Development (LID) is a stormwater management strategy
designed to maintain site hydrology and mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff and
nonpoint source pollution. LID actively manages stormwater runoff by mimicking a project
site’s pre-development hydrology using design techniques that infiltrate, store, and evaporate
runoff close to its source of origin. LID strategies provide decentralized hydrologic source
control for stormwater runoff. In short, LID seeks to manage the rain, beginning at the point
where it falls.
Lumen: A quantitative unit measuring the amount of light emitted from a light source.
Maintenance: The servicing, repairing, or altering of any sites, appliances, apparatus or
equipment to perpetuate the use or purpose for which such sites, appliances, apparatus, or
equipment was originally intended. Activities resulting in a substantial change are not considered
maintenance – see redevelopment definition.
Manufacturing: Uses include factories making products of all kinds and properties devoted to
operations such as processing, assembling, mixing, packaging, finishing or decorating, and
repairing.
Marijuana: Marijuana means the leave, stems, flowers and seeds of all species of the plant
genus cannabis, whether growing or not. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber
produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, and other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, fiber, oil or cake or
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
Marina: A use of waterfront land involved in the operation of a marina including structures and
activities normally integral to the operation of a marina, such as servicing, fueling, pumping-out,
chartering, launching, and dry-storage and boating equipment.
Market Value: The estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under
prevailing market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both
conversant with the property and with prevailing general price levels.
MDEP: Maine Department of Environmental Protection
MDOT: Maine Department of Transportation
Medical Use (medical marijuana): Medical use means the acquisition, possession, cultivation,
manufacture, use, delivery, transfer or transportation of marijuana or paraphernalia relating to the
administration of marijuana to treat or alleviate a registered patient’s debilitating medical
condition or symptoms associated with the registered patients debilitating
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
19 | P a g e
Mineral Exploration: Hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include
reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral Extraction: Any operation within any 12 month period which removes more than 100
cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like material from its
natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site (for
commercial purposes).
Mobile Home Pad: That portion of a mobile home site reserved for the placement of a mobile
home, appurtenant structures or additions.
Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land with accommodations for three or more mobile homes in
use as dwellings.
Mobile Home Site [aka mobile home park lot]: An area of land in a Mobile Home Park used
for installation of a mobile home and the exclusive use of its occupants that shall be designated
on the Mobile Home Park plan meeting all of the requirements of this Article 8 Performance
Standards section 819 Mobile Home Park Standards.
Mobile Home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis, and suitable for year round single family occupancy, with or without permanent
foundation.
Modular Home: Dwelling units that are designed to be placed on a permanent perimeter
foundation which extends below the frost line. These units come into multiple sections.
Multi-unit Residential: A residential structure containing three or more residential dwelling
units.
Municipal Officers: Municipal Officers shall mean the Ellsworth City Council.
Native: Indigenous to the local forests.
Net Residential Acreage: The total acreage available for the project, as shown on the proposed
plan, minus the area for streets or accessways and the areas, which are unsuitable for
development.
Noise: the intensity, duration and character of sounds from any and all sources.
Noise-Sensitive Use: Where people normally sleep such as homes, hospitals, and hotels; and
within classroom and contemplative settings such as schools, libraries, churches and funeral
homes.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
20 | P a g e
Non-conforming Condition, Shoreland: Non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed
solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Article 4 Shoreland Zoning or
subsequent amendment took effect.
Non-conforming Lot, Shoreland: A single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this Article 4 Shoreland Zoning, does not meet the area, frontage, or width
requirements of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Lot: A lot that fails to meet the requirements for area, height, yards, buffer, or
other bulk standards and regulations, generally applicable in the zoning district because of a
change in the applicable zoning district regulations or a government action.
Non-conforming Structure, Shoreland: A structure which does not meet any one or more of
the following dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed
solely because it was in lawful existence at the time this Article or subsequent amendments took
effect.
Nonconforming Structure: A structure that was lawfully erected but that no longer complies
with all the regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the structure is located.
Non-conforming Use, Shoreland: Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof
which is not allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely
because it was in lawful existence at the time this Article or subsequent amendments took effect.
Nonconforming Uses: A use that was lawfully established but that no longer complies with the
use regulations applicable to the zoning district in which the property is located.
Normal High-water Line (non-tidal waters): That line which is apparent from visible
markings, changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in
vegetation, and which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial
land. Areas contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation
and hydric soils and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great
pond during the period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Obstruction: Any building, structure, sign, apparatus, mechanical equipment, parked spaces,
fence, landscaping or other element of a long term nature placed above or on the ground with a
visibility triangle.
Open Space: The portion of a lot or site which is maintained in its natural state or planted with
grass, shrubs, trees, or other vegetation and which is not occupied by buildings, structures, or
other impervious surfaces.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
21 | P a g e
Parapet: That portion of a wall, which extends above the roof line.
Parking Lot, Private: Parking for the exclusive use of the owners, tenant, lessees, or occupants
of the lot on which the parking area is located or their customers, employees or whomever else
they permit to use the parking area.
Parking Lot, Public: Parking available to the public, with or without payment or fee.
Parking Lot: An open area other than an accessway used for the parking of two or more
vehicles, excluding an area associated with a residential driveway serving no more than two
residential dwelling units.
Parking, Commercial: Parking or storage of motor vehicles as a commercial enterprise for
which any fee is charged independently of any other use of the premise.
Parking, Excess: Required parking which has been demonstrated as being unused by an existing
land use or exceeds the minimum ordinance requirements.
Parking, Satellite: Parking not located on a parcel or lot that is contiguous or adjacent to the
parcel or a lot not containing the use for which the parking is intended.
Parking, Shared: A public or private parking area used jointly by two or more users.
Parking, Valet: Parking of vehicles by an attendant provided by the establishment for which the
parking is provided.
Patio: A level area adjacent to a dwelling unit constructed of stone, cement or other material
located at ground level, with no railing or other structure above the level of the ground.
Peak Flow: The greatest rate of flow in a drainageway, measured as volume per unit of time,
resulting from a storm of specified frequency and duration.
Peak Period: Period of maximum parking activity: can be by the hour, day of week, or season.
Permeability: The capacity of a material to transmit a liquid, which is expressed in terms of
hydraulic conductivity of water in centimeters-per-second units of measurement.
Person: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate,
partnership, association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other
legal entity.
Personal Service Establishment: Businesses primarily engaged in providing services involving
the care of an individual and his/her goods or apparel which does not in itself produce tangible
commodity.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
22 | P a g e
Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Below
the Normal High-water Line or Within a Wetland: 1) Temporary: Structures which remain in
or over the water for less than 7 months in any period of 12 consecutive months; 2) Permanent:
Structures which remain in or over the water for 7 months or more in any period of 12
consecutive months.
Planned Unit Development: A development controlled by a single developer for a mix of
residential, commercial, and industrial uses. A PUD is undertaken in a manner that treats the
developed area in its entirety to promote the best use of land, including the creation of open
space, a reduction in the length of road and utility systems, and the retention of the natural
characteristics of the land.
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the City of Ellsworth created by the Ellsworth City
Charter in accordance with State Statutes.
Point of Interest: An outdoor area or other places of scenic, historical, cultural or religious
interest, whether publicly or privately owned.
Portable Sign. A sign such as but not limited to, a sign on wheels, interchangeable message
board, A- or T-frame sign, menu board, or sandwich board.
Principal Structure: A building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal Use: A use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on
the same premises.
Privy: A pit in the ground into which human excrement is placed.
Processing, Fish Wholesale: The loading, unloading, packing, processing, and packaging of
edible fish and other seafood products but not including re-processing of fish wastes or fish byproducts.
Professional and Business Offices: The place of business, other than a residential unit, of
doctors, lawyers, accountants, financial advisors, architects, surveyors, real estate and insurance
agents, psychiatrists, psychologists, counselors, and the like, or in which a business conducts its
administrative, financial or clerical operations and, with the exception of the Business and
Technology Park Zone, it also includes providers of personal services such as barbers,
hairdressers, and beauticians.
Professional Establishment: Any establishment home occupation, whose primary activity is the
provision of assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, businesses, industry, government
and other enterprises such as lawyers, accountants, financial advisors, architects, surveyors, real
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
23 | P a g e
estate and insurance agents, psychiatrists, psychologists, counselors, doctors and therapists, and
the like, includes Health Care Facilities.
Project Data Sheet: A summary sheet of no more than two pages showing Land Use
Information (site area, total dwelling units, gross density, parking), Land Use Plan (buildings,
streets/parking, detention ponds, open space in acres, and percent of total land), Unit Information
(type, square footage, sales price) Economic Information (site acquisition, site improvement,
construction costs).
Projecting Sign. A sign attached to and projecting from a building or structure face or wall,
generally at right angles to the building.
Public Drinking Water: A public water system delivers water through a set of pipes for human
consumption and has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves at least 25 residents for
60 or more days per year.
Public Facility: Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas,
and accessways, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental
body or public entity.
Public Way: A street that allows vehicular and/or pedestrian use by the general population.
Recent Floodplain Soils: The following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey: Fryeburg, Hadley, Limerick, Lovewell, Medomak, Ondawa, Alluvia,
Cornish, Charles, Podunk, Rumney, Saco, Suncook, Sunday, and Winooski.
Reconstruction, Street: The rebuilding of a street in such a manner and to such an extent as to
substantially replace the existing street or a portion of the existing street, including but not
limited to widening, extending, straightening, and layout of an existing street.
Recording Plan: A copy of the Final Plan which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds and which
need not show information not relevant to the transfer of an interest in the property, such as
sewer and water line locations and sizes, culverts, and building lines.
Recreational Facility: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching
facilities.
Recreational, Trailer and Vehicle: A vehicle or vehicular attachment designed for temporary
sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, including, without limitation, a pickup
camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, motor home, or converted van or truck.
Redevelopment: The servicing, repairing, or altering of any structures, buildings, sites,
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
24 | P a g e
appliances, apparatus or equipment resulting in a substantial change irrespective of whether a
change occurs in the land use.
Registered Patient (medical marijuana): Registered patient means a patient who has a registry
identification card issued by the State of Maine.
Religious Institutions: Place of worship of religious assembly with related facilities such as the
following in any combination: rectory or convent, meeting hall, offices for administration of the
institution, and playground.
Repair, Street: Repair of a street or section thereof to maintain its serviceability including, but
not limited to patching, brush cutting, ditching, grading, erosion control measures and storm
water management, etc. It does not include construction, relocation and alterations.
Replacement System [subsurface wastewater disposal]: A system intended to replace: 1) an
existing system which is either malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of
design flow or use of the structure, or 2) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential Dwelling Unit: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for
use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and
containing cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental
units that contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented.
Recreational vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
Residential: A use intended primarily for human living accommodations.
Residual Basal Area: The average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site.
Residual Stand: A stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting and related
activities
Restaurant: An establishment where food and drink are prepared and served to the public.
Re-subdivision: The division of an existing subdivision or any change in the plan for an
approved subdivision which effects the lot lines, including land transactions by the subdivide not
indicated on the approved plan.
Retail Business: A business establishment engaged in the sale of goods or services to an
ultimate consumer for direct use or consumption, and not for resale, not including automobile
oriented businesses and not including electronic, mechanical, or video game arcades.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
25 | P a g e
Riprap: Rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least 6 inches in diameter, used for erosion control and
soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two units horizontal to one unit vertical or
less.
River: A free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands. For the
purposes of this Ordinance Ellsworth’s only River is the Union River from the Graham Lake
dam to Leonard Lake. The Union River below the Leonard Lake dam is a tidal estuary
considered a coastal wetland.
Road (street): A public or private way including but not limited to roads, alley, and other rightsof-
way for vehicular and/or pedestrian use.
Road Frontage: The linear distance connecting the intersections of the front lot line with the
side lot lines.
Road Types: Classification of roadways based on the character of service and access functions
they are intended to provide as determined by the City Planner or Planning Board for projects
reviewed or to be reviewed by the Planning Board and by the Code Enforcement Officer for all
other projects.
Road, Gravel: An unpaved road constructed of material as described in section 916.5.
Rubbish: Any discarded, worn-out, abandoned, or non-functioning article or articles or materials
including but not limited to tin cans, bottles, used wood products, junk appliances, junk
automobiles, or parts thereof, old clothing, or household goods. The word "rubbish" shall
include the words "trash," "waste materials," and "refuse."
Rural Area: Area of land as defined in the Comprehensive Plan.
Sawmill: A facility where logs or partially processed cants are sawn, split, shaved, stripped,
chipped, or otherwise processed to produce wood products, not including the processing of
timber for use on the same lot by the owner or resident of that lot.
Service Drop: Any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a
water body provided that: 1) in the case of electric service: a. the placement of wires and/or the
installation of utility poles is located entirely upon the premises of the customer requesting
service or upon an accessway right-of-way; and b. the total length of the extension is less than
1,000 feet. 2) in the case of telephone service: a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made
by the installation of telephone wires to existing utility poles, or b. the extension requiring the
installation of new utility poles or placement underground is less than 1,000 feet in length.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
26 | P a g e
Service Road: A public or private road, auxiliary to a collector or an arterial road, which has as
its purpose the maintenance of traffic mobility and safety off the collector and arterial to which it
serves, and access management to the parcels adjacent to it.
Setback from a Property Line: The horizontal distance from a side or rear property line to the
nearest part of a structure or other regulated object or area.
Setback from the Edge of a Right-of-way: The horizontal distance from a right of way to the
nearest part of a structure or other regulated object or area
Setback, Shoreline: The horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, accessway,
parking lot or other regulated object or area.
Setback: The horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a structure.
Shared Access: An access connecting two or more sites to the public street system.
Shopping Center: One or a group of retail and other commercial establishments that is planned,
owned and managed as a single property. On-site parking is provided: 1) Small: Maximum of
three businesses; total maximum building square footage of 15,000; 2) Community: Total
maximum building square footage of 100,000 square foot; and 3) Big-Box: Any establishment
having a gross floor area of 75,000 square feet or more in one or more buildings at the same
location, and any expansion or renovation of an existing building or buildings that results in a
retail business establishment's having a gross floor area of 75,000 square feet or more in one or
more buildings except when the expansion of an existing retail business establishment is less
than 20,000 square feet. Other retail business establishments on the same site as the large-scale
retail business establishment are not included in this definition unless they share a common
check stand, management, controlling ownership or storage areas.
Shoreland Zone: The land area located within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal highwater
line of any great pond or river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
coastal wetland, including all areas affected by tidal action; within 250 feet of the upland edge of
a freshwater wetland; or within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a
stream, as defined, and/or streams mapped on the Official Land Use Map.
Shoreline: The normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater or coastal wetland.
Shrub: A self-supporting woody perennial plant of low to medium height characterized by
multiple stems and branches continuous from the base, usually not more than ten feet in height at
its maturity.
Sidewalk: An improved pedestrian surface that is typically located adjacent to a road.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
27 | P a g e
Sign Setback. The minimum distance required between any property line and any portion of a
sign or sight structural support.
Sign, back-lit. An indirect source of light which illuminates a sign by shinning through a
translucent surfaced of a sign, including plastic signs, lit from an internal light source.
Sign: A sign is an object, devise or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or displayed in a
window, visible from a public access way, free standing or attached, which is used to advertise,
identify, display direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location, by any means including words, letters, figures, design,
symbols, fixtures, colors, illuminations or projected images.
Skid Road or Skid Trail: A route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or
drag forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires
minimal excavation.
Slash: The residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest.
Source Water Protection Area: The areas that contribute water to a pond, lake, stream or well
as shown on the most recent Ellsworth Public Water Supply Source Protection Areas Maps
prepared by the Maine Drinking Water Program, Source Protection section.
Special Use: A governmental or public service use providing public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, or the general welfare for the general benefit of the citizens funded in whole or in
part by the City of Ellsworth or a quasi-municipal organization, including by way of illustration,
municipal buildings, schools, public parks and recreational facilities, cemetery, public art,
museum, interpretation center, public parking, fire stations, ambulance services, highway garage,
distribution and transmission of essential services ; essential facilities, hospital, Federal Aviation
Administration –designated commercial service airport, heliport.
SSHB: Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges as published by the Maine
Department of Transportation
Stable: A structure or land use in or on which equines are kept for the sale or hire to the public.
Breeding, boarding, or training of equines may also be conducted.
Storage, Bulk: On-site storage of any soil, gravel, clay, mud, debris, vegetation, refuse of any
other material, organic or inorganic in a concentrated state.
Store, Convenience: A retail establishment which accommodate neighborhood needs for
groceries and which may sell, as accessory uses, prepared food for carry-out. The sales area of
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
28 | P a g e
such use shall be indoors only, and the total enclosed area for such use shall not exceed 4,000
square feet.
Stormwater Management Plan: A comprehensive plan including notes, plans, specifications
and details which, when implemented, provides methods, structures and mechanisms intended to
manage stormwater on a site. The plan also incorporates methods, techniques, designs, practices
and other means to control erosion and sedimentation.
Stormwater: The part of precipitation, including runoff from rain or melting ice and snow, that
flows across the surface as sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow, or in drainageways.
Story: That portion of a building contained between any floor and the floor or roof next above it,
but not including any portion so contained if more than one-half of such portion vertically is
below the average mean finished grade of the ground adjoining such building.
Stream: A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5
minute series topographic map, or a perennial or intermittent stream shown as such on the most
recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map and/or
mapped on the Official Land Use Map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river or
flows to another water body or wetland within the shoreland area.
Street: A public or private way including but not limited to roads, alley, and other rights-of-way
for vehicular use.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or
property of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in
the ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as decks and
patios. Only structures covering more than ten square feet must comply with the requirements of
zoning districts, exclusive of shoreland zoning districts, where all structures, regardless of size,
must comply with the shoreland zoning requirements. The following are not considered
structures: fences, poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated with service
drops as well as guying and guy anchors, a retractable awning or shade used solely to shade a
door or window. The following are not considered structures outside of shoreland zoning
districts: parking lots, driveways, an awning or tent for a temporary event and backyard tents
used for sleeping.
Subdivision Sign. A permanent sign that identifies the name of a residential subdivision or
apartment building.
Subdivision, Major: Any division containing more than four lots or any subdivision containing
a proposed public street.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
29 | P a g e
Subdivision, Minor: Any division containing four lots or less, and in which no street is
proposed to be constructed.
Subdivision: Means the division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more lots within any 5-year
period that begins on or after September 23, 1971. This definition applies whether the division is
accomplished by sale, lease, development, buildings or otherwise. The term subdivision also
includes the division of a new structure or structures on a tract or parcel of land into 3 or more
dwelling units within a 5-year period, the construction or placement of 3 or more dwelling units
on a single tract or parcel of land and the division of an existing structure or structures previously
used for commercial or industrial use into 3 or more dwelling units within a 5-year period. A.In
determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into 3 or more lots, the first dividing of
the tract or parcel is considered to create the first 2 lots and the next dividing of either of these
first 2 lots, by whomever accomplished, is considered to create a 3rd lot, unless: (1) Both
dividings are accomplished by a subdivider who has retained one of the lots for the subdivider's
own use as a single-family residence that has been the subdivider's principal residence for a
period of at least 5 years immediately preceding the 2nd division; or (2) The division of the tract
or parcel is otherwise exempt under this subchapter. B. The dividing of a tract or parcel of land
and the lot or lots so made, which dividing or lots when made are not subject to this subchapter,
do not become subject to this subchapter by the subsequent dividing of that tract or parcel of land
or any portion of that tract or parcel. The Planning Board shall consider the existence of the
previously created lot or lots in reviewing a proposed subdivision created by a subsequent
dividing. C. A lot of 40 or more acres will be counted as a lot by this ordinance. D.1 A
division accomplished by devise does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition,
unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of Chapter 28 Subdivision Ordinance.
D.2 A division accomplished by condemnation does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of
this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of Chapter 28
Subdivision Ordinance. D.3 A division accomplished by order of court does not create a lot or
lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives
of Chapter 28 Subdivision Ordinance. D.4 A division accomplished by gift to a person related
to the donor of an interest in property held by the donor for a continuous period of 5 years prior
to the division by gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless the
intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of Chapter 28 Subdivision Ordinance. If the real
estate exempt under this paragraph is transferred within 5 years to another person not related to
the donor of the exempt real estate as provided in this paragraph, then the previously exempt
division creates a lot or lots for the purposes of this subsection. "Person related to the donor"
means a spouse, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, child or grandchild related by blood,
marriage or adoption. A gift under this paragraph cannot be given for consideration that is more
than 1/2 the assessed value of the real estate. D.5 A division accomplished by a gift to the City
if the City accepts the gift does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this definition, unless
the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of Chapter 28 Subdivision Ordinance. D.6 A
division accomplished by the transfer of any interest in land to the owners of land abutting that
land that does not create a separate lot does not create a lot or lots for the purposes of this
definition, unless the intent of the transferor is to avoid the objectives of Chapter 28 Subdivision
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
30 | P a g e
Ordinance. If the real estate exempt under this paragraph is transferred within 5 years to another
person without all of the merged land, then the previously exempt division creates a lot or lots
for the purposes of this subsection. D.7 The division of a tract or parcel of land into 3 or
more lots and upon each of which lots permanent dwelling structures legally existed before
September 23, 1971 is not a subdivision. F. In determining the number of dwelling units in a
structure, the provisions of this subsection regarding the determination of the number of lots
apply, including exemptions from the definition of a subdivision of land. G. Notwithstanding the
provisions of this subsection, leased units, with the exception of condominiums, are not subject
to subdivision review as the units are subject to Major Site Development Review which is as
stringent as that required under this subchapter.
Substantial Change: Activities that alter the character, or the size or scope of a project
including structures, buildings, sites, appliances, apparatus or equipment beyond the existing
design costing more than 50% of the existing value of the buildings, appliances, etc.
Substantial Start: Completion of 30% of a permitted structure or use measured as a percentage
of estimated total cost.
Subsurface Sewage Disposal System: Any system designed to dispose of waste or waste water
on or beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields;
grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture,
mechanism, or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any discharge system
licensed under 38 M.R.S.A. section 414, any surface waste water disposal system, or any
municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or waste water treatment system.
Sustained Slope: A change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Technical Review Team: The Technical Review Team consists of the following Ellsworth
Staff: Fire Chief, Police Chief, Public Works Director and/or designees (Water Superintendent,
Sewer Superintendent, and Highway Foreman), and City Planner, and may include the City
Manager and a member of the City Council.
Telecommunications Tower: A structure designed and constructed to support one or more
antennas used by commercial wireless telecommunication facilities and including all appurtenant
devices attached to it. A tower can be freestanding (solely self-supported by attachment to the
ground) or supported (attached directly to the ground and with guy wires), of either lattice or
monopole construction.
Tidal Waters: All waters affected by tidal action during the highest annual tide.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
31 | P a g e
Timber Harvesting and Related Activities: Timber harvesting, the construction and
maintenance of accessways and land management roads used primarily for timber harvesting and
other activities conducted to facilitate timber harvesting.
Timber Harvesting: The cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has
less than two acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such
cutting or removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 410.14, Clearing or Removal of
Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting.
Tract (or Parcel) of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, provided that lands
located on opposite sides of a public or private road are considered each a separate tract or parcel
of land unless the road was established by the owner of land on both sides of the road. Land in
the same ownership that is separated by an intermittent or non-navigable stream or tidal waters
where there is no flow at low tide shall be considered part of the same tract or parcel of land.
Trailer: A vehicle without motive power and not intended for human occupancy, designed to be
towed by a motor vehicle including a utility trailer, boat trailer, horse trailer, or snowmobile
trailer.
Transit: Passenger services provided by public, private, or nonprofit entities such as, but not
limited to, fixed route bus.
Tree, shade: A woody plant, usually deciduous, that normally grows with one main trunk and
has a canopy that screens an filter the sun in the summer.
Tree: Any self supporting woody perennial plant which has a diameter at breast height (DBH) of
two inches or more and which normally attains an overall height of at least 15 feet at maturity,
usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches.
Tributary Stream: Means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface
water, which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed,
devoid of topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock;
and which is connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not
include rills or gullies forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural
vegetation cover has been removed by human activity. This definition does not include the term
"stream" as defined elsewhere in this Article, and only applies to that portion of the tributary
stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water body or wetland.
Trip Generation: An estimate of the peak number of vehicle trip ends generated for a selected
use or project used to estimate an ADT. It shall be as determined from 1) “Trip Generation” as
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (latest edition) or 2) specific traffic counts
provided by an Engineer.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
32 | P a g e
Trip or Trip End: A single or one-direction vehicle movement with either the origin or the
destination (exiting or entering) inside a study site. For trip generation purposes, the total trip
ends for a land use over a period of time are the total of all trips entering plus all trips exiting a
site during a designated time period
Upland Edge of a Wetland: The boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a
coastal wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant
vegetation and/or the highest annual tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For
purposes of a freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for
a duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of
wetland vegetation, but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are 6 meters
(approximately 20 feet) tall or taller.
Urban Core: An area of land shown on a map as defined by the City Council.
Use: The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed or intended, or
for which it is occupied.
Utility Pole: Pole used to support essential services such as power, telephone, or cable television
lines; or used to support street or pedestrian way lighting, typically located in public right-ofway.
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this ordinance where such variance would not be
contrary to the public interest where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the
result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in
unnecessary or undue hardship.
Vegetation: All live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over
and under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4½ feet above ground level.
Velocity Zone: An area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action
from storms or seismic sources.
Volume of a Structure: The volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed
exterior walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Walkway: An off-street pedestrian path.
Wall Sign. A sign attached to or painted on a wall of a building, a window, or structure so that
the wall forms the supporting structure or becomes the background of the sign. Also included as
a wall sign are roof signs and awning signs.
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
33 | P a g e
Warehouse: Facilities characterized by extensive warehousing, frequent heavy trucking activity,
or fully enclosed storage of material.
Water Body: Any great pond, river or stream.
Water Crossing: Any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects
include but may not be limited to accessways, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines,
and cables as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for
timber harvesting equipment and related activities.
Watershed: The land area that drains, via overland flow, drainageways, waterbodies or wetlands
to a given waterbody or wetland.
Wetland, Coastal: All tidal and subtidal lands; all lands with vegetation present that is tolerant of
salt water and occurs primarily in a salt water or estuarine habitat; and any swamp, marsh, bog,
beach, flat or other contiguous low land that is subject to tidal action during the highest tide level
for the year in which an activity is proposed as identified in tide tables published by the National
Ocean Service. Coastal wetlands may include portions of coastal sand dunes.
Wetland, Forested: A freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters
tall (approximately 20 feet) or taller.
Wetland, Freshwater: Freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which are: 1) Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and
adjacent to a surface water body, excluding any river, stream, such that in a natural state, the
combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and 2) Inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient to support, and which under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils. Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that
do not conform to the criteria of this definition
Wetland: A freshwater or coastal wetland.
Wholesaling: A business establishment engaged in the bulk sale of goods or materials not
manufactured or processed on the premises.
Windfirm: The ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist windthrow, wind
rocking, and major breakage.
Window Sign. A sign that is applied to or attached to the exterior or interior of a window or
located in such a manner within a building that it is visible from the exterior of the building
Chapter 56 Unified Development Ordinance
Article 14 Definitions
34 | P a g e
through a window, but excludes merchandise display. Window signs, graphics and text located
more than 12 inches from the face of the window are not considered signs.
Woody Vegetation: Live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Yard: On the same lot with a principal building, a space which is open to the sky and
unoccupied by any structures except a fence not more than six feet in height.
Zoning Acre: A measure of land containing 40,000 square feet.
1
CHAPTER 57
FRENCHMAN BAY REGIONAL SHELLFISH CONSERVATION
ORDINANCE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted by City Council April 19, 2010
Amended by City Council October 17, 2011
Amended by City Council July 15, 2013
Amended by City Council June 16, 2014
Repealed and Replaced by City Council April 17, 2017
2
FRENCHMAN BAY
REGIONAL SHELLFISH CONSERVATION
ORDINANCE
For the Municipalities of:
Ellsworth, Franklin, Hancock, Lamoine, Sorrento, Sullivan and Trenton
As adopted in 2010
Revised 2011/2012
Revised 2013
Revised 3/18/2014
Revised 5/27/2014
Revised 2/23/2017 (Master Copy)
Mission Statement: These municipalities shall act collaboratively as stewards to preserve,
protect, manage and enhance the shellfish resources and ecological well-being of the Greater
Frenchman Bay Region and to insure a sustainable harvest of shellfish and opportunity for
those who make their living on the tide.
Management Partnership Team
Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee
&
Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish Municipal Joint Board
3
FRENCHMAN BAY REGIONAL SHELLFISH
CONSERVATION ORDINANCE
Municipalities of Ellsworth, Franklin, Hancock, Lamoine, Sorrento, Sullivan and Trenton
Mission Statement: These municipalities shall act collaboratively as stewards to preserve,
protect, manage and enhance the shellfish resources and ecological well-being of the Greater
Frenchman Bay Region and to insure a sustainable harvest of shellfish and opportunity for
those who make their living on the tide.
1. Authority: This ordinance is enacted in accordance with 12 M.R.S.A. Section 6671.
2. Purpose: To establish a shellfish conservation program for the participating
municipalities, which shall insure the protection and optimum utilization of shellfish
resources within its limits. These goals shall be achieved by means, which may include,
but not be limited to:
A. Licensing.
B. Limiting the number of shellfish harvesters.
C. Restricting the time and area where digging is permitted.
D. Limiting the minimum size of clams taken.
E. Limiting the amount of shellfish taken daily by a harvester.
F. Intertidal Management Plan
3. Administration
3.1 The Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee: The Regional
Shellfish Management Program for the participating municipalities shall be
administered by the Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish Municipal Joint Board
(Municipal Joint Board) with technical input from the Frenchman Bay Regional
Shellfish Conservation Committee (Conservation Committee). The Conservation
Committee shall consist of one member and may include one alternate member for each
participating municipality. A non-resident may be appointed by a municipality to
represent that municipality on the Conservation Committee. Conservation Committee
Members shall be commercial harvesters licensed under this Ordinance, if they are
available and willing to serve, and shall be appointed by the municipal officers of the
participating municipalities and in accordance with the procedures outlined in this
document for terms of up to three (3) years. A quorum shall consist of a majority of
the members.
A. Selection of Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee Members:
Selectmen/Council members of each of the participating municipalities shall
appoint, and replace as necessary, Conservation Committee members according to
their own policies and procedures.
B. Meetings: The Chairman of the Shellfish Conservation Committee shall be elected
at the first meeting of each calendar year by the members of the Conservation
Committee. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the Committee.
Notice of all meetings of the Conservation Committee shall be given to each
member of the Conservation Committee and the Chairman of the Municipal Joint
4
Board, shall be published in accordance with each town's policies, and shall be open
to the public. Minutes shall be recorded and made available for public review.
C. Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee’s Responsibilities shall include:
i. Keeping this Ordinance under review and making recommendations for its
amendments.
ii. Recommending management actions to the Municipal Joint Board in conjunction
with the Area Biologist of the Department of Marine Resources. Such actions may
include, but are not limited to, re-seeding of defined shellfish flats, establishing
conservation closures, and limiting and/or expanding harvesting activities.
iii. Recommending to the Municipal Joint Board enforcement actions for the
protection of the resource.
iv. Submitting an annual report to the participating municipalities covering the
aforementioned topics and other Committee activities by February 1.
v. Assist in identifying possible sources of pollution harmful to the intertidal habitat
and the shellfish resources.
vi. By February 1 of each year submit an Annual Shellfish Management Review to
the Municipal Joint Board for their review and approval, prior to submitting to the
Department of Marine Resources by its April 1 deadline for review/approval.
vii. By April 1 of each year submit an Annual Shellfish License Sales and Lottery
Procedure Plan to the Municipal Joint Board for approval. This plan shall outline
in detail how many licenses are to be allocated on an annual basis and shall be
consistent with 12 M.R.S.A Section 6671 (3-A) and DMR Regulation Chapter 7.
After Municipal Joint Board approval, the Conservation Committee shall submit
the Annual Shellfish License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan to the Department
of Marine Resources for approval. After receiving approval for license allocations
from the Commissioner of Marine Resources, the Conservation Committee shall
notify the Administrative Municipality, in writing, the number of shellfish licenses
to be issued.
D. Attendance: Conservation Committee members shall make every effort to regularly
attend Conservation Committee meetings. Any Committee member who misses more
than two unexcused consecutive meetings may lose their seat on the Committee.
E. Convictions: Anyone convicted of violating this ordinance shall be removed from
the Shellfish Conservation Committee.
3.2. FRENCHMAN BAY REGIONAL SHELLFISH MUNICIPAL JOINT BOARD:
Each of the participating municipalities shall appoint one municipal officer
(Selectman/Council member), or a designee, as a member of the Municipal Joint Board to
act as the municipality representative for all issues concerning this Ordinance. Each of the
participating municipalities may also appoint one individual as an alternate member of the
5
Municipal Joint Board to represent the respective municipal officer during an absence at a
Municipal Joint Board meeting. The designee, and alternate, must be a resident of the
participating municipality and does not need to be a municipal officer
(Selectman/Councilman). The person so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the body
that made the appointment and may be replaced thereby.
A. Meetings: The Chairman of the Municipal Joint Board shall be elected at the first
meeting of each calendar year by the members of the Municipal Joint Board. A
quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the Board. Notice of all
meetings of the Municipal Joint Board shall be given to each member of the Board
and the Chairman of the Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee, shall be
published in accordance with each town's policies, and shall be open to the public.
Minutes shall be recorded and made available for public review.
B. Powers: The Municipal Joint Board is authorized to approve the number of
shellfish harvesting licenses to be issued, approve license fees, open and close the
flats, set times when harvesting is allowed, set permitted quantities that may be
harvested, and to take such actions as authorized by the Board of
Selectmen/Council of each of the participating municipalities, and subject to the
Department of Marine Resources approval as noted in Section 6, based upon the
recommendations of the Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee. These
actions shall be described in an Annual Shellfish Management Plan submitted by
the Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee.
4. Definitions
A. Resident: The term "resident" refers to a person being a Maine resident who has
proof of being domiciled in at least one of the participating communities
continuously for a minimum of six months prior to the time their claim of such
residence is made and/or whom has paid real estate taxes in at least one of these
participating communities continuously for at least five years. In order to determine
resident eligibility new residents shall provide two forms of proof of residency from
the list below. At least one shall be from Section 3 in the chart below. All licensed
harvesters will provide proof of residency on an annual basis.
Section 1 Section 2 Section 3
*Copy of deed AND
record of most recent
mortgage payment
*Copy of Lease AND
record of most recent
legal affidavit from
landlord affirming
tenancy.
*Legal affidavit from
landlord affirming
tenancy AND record of
A utility bill or other work
order dated within the past
60 days including:
*Gas Bill
*Oil Bill
*Electric Bill
*Telephone Bill
*Cable or Satellite Bill
Dated within the past
year:
*W-2 Form
*Excise (vehicle) tax
bill
*Any valid form of photo
ID and proof of
residency that may
include:
*A valid Maine Drivers
License displaying
physical address.
*A valid Maine photo ID
card displaying physical
address.
6
most recent rent
payment.
*Property tax bill
*Dated within the past 60
days:
*Letter from approved
government agency
*Payroll Stub
*Bank or credit card
statement
*A current vehicle
registration that
displays a physical
address.
B. Nonresident: The term "nonresident" means anyone not qualified as a resident
under this ordinance.
C. Shellfish, Clams and Intertidal Shellfish Resources: When used in the context
of this ordinance the words "shellfish", "clams", and "intertidal shellfish resources"
mean soft shell clams (Mya arenaria), quahogs (Mercenaria mercenaria), razor
clams (Ensis directus), and hen clams (Spisula solidissima).
D. Municipality: Refers to the municipalities of Ellsworth, Franklin, Hancock,
Lamoine, Sorrento, Sullivan and Trenton, Maine. Wherever the words “town” or
“community” may be used, they are intended to mean municipality.
E. Administrative Municipality: The municipality that administers this Ordinance
and the directives of the Municipal Joint Board.
F. Annual Shellfish License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan: A plan written by
the Conservation Committee and submitted to the Municipal Joint Board, by April
1 of each year, for approval. This plan shall outline in detail how licenses are to be
allocated on an annual basis and shall establish priority status for the allocation of
licenses as referred to in Section 5.3.
G. Annual Shellfish Management Review: A detailed shellfish resource
management plan written on an annual basis by the Frenchman Bay Regional
Shellfish Conservation Committee and submitted to, and approved by, the
Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish Municipal Joint Board for submission to, and
approval by, the Maine Department of Marine Resources. Said plan shall define
actions to be taken regarding the number of licenses to be issued, re-seeding
activities, conservation closures, limits on allowable harvest and harvesting days
and times, and other measures taken to ensure a sustainable harvest of the resource.
H. Conservation Work: The term Conservation Work or Conservation Time, as used
in this ordinance, shall be broadly defined and shall include the time accrued for
work spent performing, but is not limited to, such activities as shellfish reseeding,
pollution abatement, predator eradication, shellfish surveying, information
gathering, testing and sampling, and any other activity that the Shellfish
Conservation Committee deems as supporting shellfish resource enhancement and
the Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish Management Program. All such
Conservation Work activities must be approved by the Municipal Joint Board.
I. First-time Commercial License: Is 1) a commercial license of any class issued to
an individual who has never held a commercial license of any class, or 2) the
7
issuance of a commercial license of any class issued to an individual who has not
held a commercial license of any class during the previous twelve (12) months, at
time of application.
5. LICENSING:
A Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish License is required to harvest shellfish in the
jurisdiction of this Ordinance. It is unlawful for any person to dig or take shellfish from the
shores and flats of the participating communities for the purpose of selling the shellfish
without having a current commercial license issued by the Administrative Municipality as
provided by this Ordinance. Additionally, a commercial harvester must have a valid State
of Maine Commercial Shellfish License issued by the Department of Marine Resources
prior to harvesting shellfish for commercial purposes. It shall be unlawful for any
individual whose State of Maine Commercial Shellfish License, or right to harvest, has
been suspended by the State of Maine to harvest or possess shellfish without proof of
purchase. Also, if such individual currently holds a municipal license, such license shall be
suspended for the same period of time. Any restrictions on licenses regarding the harvest
of shellfish as defined in this ordinance shall be outlined in the Annual Shellfish License
Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan developed by the Regional Shellfish Conservation
Committee and approved by the Municipal Joint Board.
Licensing Requirements: All license sales shall be conducted as described in the Annual
Shellfish License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan developed each year by the Frenchman
Bay Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee.
5.1 Designation, Scope and Qualifications:
A. Resident Commercial Shellfish License: This license is available to residents
of a municipality who are also State of Maine Residents and/or real estate tax payers
in at least one of the participating municipalities, consistent with Section 4.A.,
above and entitles the holder to dig and take any amount of shellfish from the shores
and flats of the participating municipalities.
B. Nonresident Commercial Shellfish License: This license is available to
nonresidents of participating municipalities and entitles the holder to dig and take
any amount of shellfish from the shores and flats of the participating municipalities.
C. Resident Junior Commercial Shellfish License: This license is available to
residents of a participating municipality who are younger than age 19 at the time of
license application and entitles the holder to dig and take any amount of shellfish
from the shores and flats of the participating municipalities.
D. Nonresident Junior Commercial Shellfish License: This license is available
to nonresidents of the participating municipalities who are younger than age 19 at
the time of license application and entitles the holder to dig and take any amount of
shellfish from the shores and flats of the participating municipalities.
E. Resident Senior Commercial License: This license is available to senior
residents of a participating municipality who are over the age of 65 at the time of
8
license application and entitles the holder to dig and take any amount of shellfish
from the shore and flats of the participating municipalities.
F. Non-Resident Senior Commercial License: This license is available to
nonresident seniors of the participating municipalities who are over the age of 65
at the time of license application and entitles the holder to dig and take any amount
of shellfish from the shores and flats of the participating municipalities.
G. Residential Family/Individual Recreational Shellfish License: This license
is available to Residents and Maine resident real estate taxpayers of the
participating municipalities, consistent with Section 4.A., above, who do not hold
a valid State of Maine Commercial Shellfish License and entitles the family to dig
and take no more than one peck of shellfish or 3 bushels of “hen” or “surf” clams
in any one day for the use of their self and their family. Residents with an
Aquaculture Lease Permit shall be exempt and eligible for a recreational license.
H. Nonresident Family/Individual Recreational Shellfish License: This license
is available to any person not a resident of one of the participating municipalities
who does not hold a valid State of Maine Commercial Shellfish License and entitles
the family to dig and take not more than one peck of shellfish or 3 bushels of “hen”
or “surf” clams in any one day for the use of their self and their family. Nonresidents
with an Aquaculture Lease Permit shall be exempt and eligible for a recreational
license.
I. License must be signed: The licensee must sign the license to make it valid.
License must be in possession when engaged in harvesting. By signing the license
the harvester acknowledges that they must submit to inspection by the Municipal
Shellfish Warden.
5.2 Fees: A schedule of fees shall be available at the Administrative Municipality
offices. The fees for the licenses shall be determined annually by the Shellfish
Conservation Committee and Municipal Joint Board. Licensees shall submit fees,
in full upon issuance of license. Fees received for shellfish licenses shall be used
by the Administrative Municipality to support the Frenchman Bay Regional
Shellfish Conservation Ordinance. Sale of recreational licenses shall be the
responsibility of each participating municipality. Any and all fees and license sales
for recreational licenses shall be collected by the participating municipalities and
sent to the Administrative Municipality quarterly, except for a $3.00 agent fee per
license that will be retained by the issuing municipality.
Applicants for a resident or non-resident renewal commercial shellfish harvester
license and resident senior or non-resident senior renewal commercial shellfish
harvester license may volunteer to perform shellfish conservation work in exchange
for a reduction in the renewal commercial license fee as described in Section 5.4-
B, below. Generally, each hour of conservation work performed will be credited at
$15 so those conservation hours worked, multiplied by $15, may be deducted from
the full renewal commercial license fee, except that Resident Junior Commercial
renewal license and Non-resident Junior Commercial renewal licenses may be
9
purchased without performing any Conservation Work. A resident junior license
shall be half the cost of a regular commercial resident license. A nonresident junior
license shall be half the cost of a regular commercial nonresident license. A resident
senior commercial license shall be half the cost of, and require only half of the
voluntary conservation time necessary for, a regular commercial resident license.
A non-resident senior commercial license shall be half the cost of, and require only
half of the voluntary conservation time necessary for, a regular commercial nonresident
license.
First-time commercial licenses will be sold at the lowest fee for each class of
commercial license.
5.3 Application Procedure: Any person may apply to the municipal Clerk for the
licenses required by this ordinance on forms provided by the Administrative
Municipality. Notice of available commercial licenses shall be published in a trade
or industry publication, or in a newspaper, or newspapers, or combination of
newspapers with general circulation which the Municipal Joint Board considers
effective in reaching persons affected, not less than ten (10) days prior to the period
of issuance and shall be posted in the municipal offices of the participating
municipalities until the period expires. Applications for commercial licenses must
be received at the Town Office of the Administrative Municipality as required by
the Annual Shellfish License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan. No shellfish
licenses may be reserved and licenses cannot be transferred.
A. Contents of Application: The application must be in the form of an affidavit
and must contain the applicant's name, current address, birth date, height, weight,
signature and any additional information the municipality may require, including
photos.
B. Misrepresentation: Any person who intentionally gives false information on
a license application shall cause the application to be removed from consideration,
if a license is issued as a result of the false information, said license to become
invalid and void.
C. Address change: A person holding a commercial shellfish license under this
ordinance shall notify the town clerk of the Administrative Town within ninety (90)
days of address change outside of the participating municipalities. Failure to do so
will be considered and treated as misrepresentation.
5.4. License Allocation Procedures: License sales procedures shall be determined by
the Shellfish Conservation Committee, approved by the Municipal Joint Board, and
submitted to the Department of Marine Resources for their approval at least thirty
(30) days prior to the licenses going on sale. Notice of the number of licenses to
be issued and the procedure for application shall be defined by the Annual Shellfish
License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan.
A. The Clerk of the Administrative Municipality shall issue licenses to those
residents and non-residents who have met the requirements of obtaining a
10
commercial license. The Town Clerk shall issue licenses and hold a lottery for
nonresident commercial licenses by procedure described in the Annual
Shellfish License Allocation Procedure Plan.
B. Optional Conservation Work may be completed prior to the renewal of a
municipal commercial shellfish license to reduce the license cost in accordance
with the Annual Shellfish License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan. The
performance of Conservation Work in order to accrue Conservation Time is
optional and may be credited as described below:
1) Resident or non-resident commercial renewal shellfish licenses may be
purchased without performing conservation work, however, the performance
of Conservation Work will reduce a resident or non-resident renewal
commercial shellfish license fee by $15 for each hour worked, up to twelve
(12) hours.
2) Resident junior or non-resident junior commercial renewal shellfish licenses
may be purchased without performing conservation work.
3) Resident senior or non-resident senior commercial renewal shellfish licenses
may be purchased without performing conservation work, however, the
performance of Conservation Work will reduce a resident senior or nonresident
senior renewal commercial shellfish license fee by $15 for each hour
worked, up to six (6) hours.
4) First-time commercial licenses may be purchased at the lowest fee for each
class of commercial license.
C. Any license holder convicted of a violation of this ordinance shall forfeit
seniority. Those who have held commercial licenses uninterrupted, from the
first year of the Ordinance shall maintain seniority.
D. Details explaining how licenses will be issued will be described in the Annual
Shellfish License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan.
5.5 Limitation of Diggers: The number of commercial licenses may be limited and
will be issued according to the Annual Shellfish License Sales and Lottery
Procedure Plan.
A. If it is determined that Limited Licenses are necessary, the Administrative
Community shall issue licenses to residents and nonresidents as described in the
Annual Shellfish License Sales and Lottery Procedure Plan.
5.6 Open License Sales: When the Shellfish Conservation Committee determines
limiting shellfish licenses is not an appropriate shellfish management option for one
or more license categories for the following year;
A. The number of recreational licenses will not be limited. Recreational licenses
shall be issued to residents or non-residents without restriction.
11
5.7 License Expiration Date: Each license issued under authority of this ordinance
expires at midnight on June 30th of each year.
5.8 Fee Waivers: Recreational shellfish license fees are not required for individuals 65
years or older and younger than age 13 at the time of license application.
6. Opening and Closing of Flats: The Municipal Joint Board in conjunction with the
Shellfish Conservation Committee, upon approval of the Commissioner of Marine
Resources, may open and close areas for shellfish harvest. Upon concurrence of the
Department of Marine Resources Area Biologist that the status of shellfish resource and
other factors bearing on sound management indicate that an area should be opened or
closed, the Shellfish Conservation Committee and Municipal Joint Board may call a public
hearing, and shall send a copy of the notice to the Department of Marine Resources. The
decision of the Municipal Joint Board and Shellfish Conservation Committee made after
the hearing shall be based on findings of fact.
7. Minimum Legal Size of Soft Shell Clams: It is unlawful for any person to possess soft
shell clams within participating municipalities that are less than two (2) inches in the
longest diameter except as provided by Subsection 7.2 of this section.
7.1 Definitions:
A. Lot: The word "lot" as used in this ordinance means the total number of soft
shell clams in any bulk pile. Where soft shell clams are in a box, barrel, or
other container, the contents of each box, barrel, or other container
constitutes a separate lot.
B. Possess: For the purpose of this section, "possess" means dig, take, harvest, ship,
transport, hold, buy and sell retail and wholesale soft shell clam shell stock.
7.2 Tolerance: Any person may possess soft shell clams that are less than two inches
if they comprise less than 10% of any lot. The tolerance shall be determined
by count of not less than one peck nor more than four pecks taken at random
from various parts of the lot or by a count of the entire lot if it contains less
than one peck.
7.3 Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be punished as
provided by 12 M.R.S.A. Section 6681.
8. Penalty: A person who violates this ordinance shall be punished as provided by 12
M.R.S.A. Section 6671 (10) (10-A) (10-B).
9. Effective Date: This ordinance, which has been approved by the Commissioner of Marine
Resources, shall become effective after its adoption by the member municipalities provided
a certified copy of the ordinance is filed with the Commissioner within twenty (20) days
of its adoption.
10. Severability: If any section, subsection, sentence or part of this ordinance is for any reason
held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this ordinance.
12
11. Repeal: Any ordinance regulating the harvesting or conservation of shellfish in the
member communities and any provisions of any other town ordinance, which is
inconsistent with this ordinance, is hereby repealed.
12. Use of Fees and Fines, Funding: Fees for shellfish licenses shall be set forth in the Annual
Shellfish Management plan and shall accompany the application for the respective license.
Fees and fines received shall be used for costs incurred in the enforcement and management
of this ordinance.
12.1 Non-lapse Provision: Monies in the Municipal Shellfish Account shall not lapse
at the end of the year but shall be carried over to the next year in that account.
12.2 Funding: The Municipal Shellfish Program shall be self-supporting, to the extent
possible. Funds for operating the Program may be generated by license fees, fines,
and financial support from participating communities, fund-raising events, and
charitable contributions.
13. VIOLATIONS, SUSPENSION OF LICENSES, AND FINES:
Any person who violates this Ordinance shall be punished as provided by 12 M.R.S.A.
Section 6671 and/or Section 6681. A violation of this Ordinance may result in a license
suspension. A licensee whose shellfish license has been suspended pursuant to this
Ordinance may request return of their license only after the suspension period has expired.
A suspended license is not to be returned until the fine is paid in accordance with the court's
decree. The suspension of a commercial license shall begin automatically, following
conviction. Any licensee whose license has been suspended for a period of time greater
than 30 days, pursuant to this Ordinance, shall be entitled to a hearing before the Municipal
Joint Board upon the filing of a written request for a hearing with the Town Clerk of the
Administrative Town within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the suspension.
13-A. Costs and Attorney’s Fees: In addition to any penalty assessed for any violation
of this ordinance, if the municipality is the prevailing party, the municipality shall be
awarded reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs, unless the court finds that
special circumstances make the award of these fees and costs unjust.
Classifications of violations are categorized as follows:
13.1 Stopping for inspection: A person shall produce their license on demand of any
certified Municipal Shellfish Conservation Warden in uniform and having
"probable cause" to take such action. It is unlawful for the operator of a motor
vehicle, boat, vessel, or conveyance of any kind, or any person:
A. To deliberately fail or refuse to stop immediately upon request or signal of any
Certified Municipal Shellfish Conservation Warden.
B. After the person has stopped, to fail to remain stopped until the said Warden
has reached his/her immediate vicinity and makes known to the operator the
reason for his/her request or signal.
C. To fail or refuse to stand by immediately for inspection on request of said
Warden.
13
D. To throw or dump into any coastal waters or flats after having been requested
or signaled to stop by a Certified Municipal Shellfish Conservation Warden any
shellfish, or any pail, bag, hod or container before said Warden has inspected
the same.
E. To attempt to elude, disobey, or assault any Certified Municipal Shellfish
Conservation Warden.
Penalties: Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with Maine Department of
Marine Resources statutes and regulations.
13.2 Harvesting Clams in any Closed Area: It shall be unlawful for any person to
harvest, take or possess shellfish from any areas closed by those 7 municipalities
included in the Frenchman Bay Regional Shellfish Conservation Ordinance,
namely the municipalities of Ellsworth, Lamoine, Trenton, Hancock, Franklin,
Sullivan, and Sorrento, in accordance with DMR Regulation, Chapter 7.
Harvesting shellfish in a closed area is a violation of the regional ordinance of these
municipalities and is punishable under MRSA Title 12 §6671.
Boundaries of conservation closures are explicitly defined in the conservation
closure application submitted on behalf of the seven (7) above-named
municipalities to DMR and are part of the resulting permit issued by DMR. These
permits are posted on the website of the City of Ellsworth, the administrative
municipality for the seven (7) municipality regional ordinance, and also online at:
http://www.maine.gov/dmr/shellfish-sanitationmanagement/
programs/municipal/ordinances/towninfo.html
Penalties: Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with Maine Department of Marine
Resources statutes and regulations.
13.3 Minimum Legal Size of Shellfish: It is unlawful for any person to violate
minimum shellfish size regulation set forth in this Ordinance:
Penalties: Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with Maine Department of
Marine Resources statutes and regulations.
13.4 Harvesting without a license: It is unlawful to harvest shellfish without a license.
Penalties: Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with Maine Department of
Marine Resources statutes and regulations.
13.5 Tagging: The holder of a commercial shellfish license shall identify shellstock the
license holder has taken by means of a harvester tag. The tag shall be in accordance
with Maine Department of Marine Resources (DMR) rules.
Penalties: Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with Maine Department of
Marine Resources statutes and regulations.
14
13.6 Suspension: A person licensed under this ordinance who has had their State of
Maine Commercial Shellfish License suspended shall forfeit their Frenchman Bay
Regional Shellfish Conservation Ordinance license (Regional License) for the
duration of the State of Maine Commercial Shellfish License suspension. Such a
person in possession of shellfish must carry a receipt of purchase for said shellfish.
Any shellfish licensee having three convictions for a violation of this ordinance
within a three year period shall have their shellfish license suspended for a period
of thirty (30) days.
13.7 (Intentionally left blank.)
13.8 (Intentionally left blank.)
14. ENFORCEMENT: This ordinance shall be enforced by the certified Municipal Shellfish
Conservation Warden or any Municipal Shellfish Conservation Warden appointed by the
Municipal Joint Board who, within one year of appointment, must be certified by the
Commissioner of the Maine DMR. An enforcement action shall be filed in the name of
the municipality where the violation was alleged to have occurred.
15. AMENDMENTS
15.1 Initiation: A proposal for an amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by the
following:
A. A written petition submitted with the number of voters in the participating
municipalities equal to at least ten percent of the voters in the last gubernatorial
election;
B. A recommendation of the Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee; or
C. A recommendation of the Municipal Joint Board.
15.2 Procedure:
A. Any proposal for an amendment shall be made to the Municipal Joint Board, in
writing, stating the specific changes requested. All such proposals shall be
transmitted to the Regional Shellfish Conservation Committee for their review and
recommendation.
B. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a properly initiated amendment, the
Municipal Joint Board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. Notice of the
hearing shall be posted and advertised in a newspaper of general circulation within
the participating communities at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. The notice
shall contain the time, date and place of the hearing and sufficient detail about the
proposed changes as to give adequate notice of their content. If the proposed
changes are extensive, a brief summary of the changes, together with an indication
that a full text is available at the municipal Clerk's office shall be adequate notice.
15
15.3 Adoption: This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the Municipal
Joint Board, after proposed changes have been reviewed by the Department of
Marine Resources. Note: Ellsworth’s charter requires Council action.
15.4 Statute Law Changes: Any changes to referenced Statue Laws in this Ordinance
shall automatically update in this Ordinance upon enactment.
Adoption:
WHEREAS: In consideration of all of the above, and IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have
by their duly authorized officers caused this Ordinance to be adopted in all parts this 23rd day of
February, 2017.
Municipality Signature Name/Title __
Sorrento ___________________________________ Craig Clement, Joint Board Member
Sullivan ___________________________________ Gary Edwards, Joint Board Member
Franklin ___________________________________ Dana Smith, Joint Board Member
Hancock ___________________________________ Roger Dubois, Joint Board Member
Ellsworth ___________________________________ Stephen Beatham, Joint Board Member
Lamoine ___________________________________ Richard Fennelly, Joint Board Member
Trenton ___________________________________ Mike Hodgkins, Joint Board Member
1
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 58
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN
ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE
Adopted: May 16, 2011
Ch. 58 - PACE Ordinance 05/16/2011
2
PROPERTY ASSESSED CLEAN ENERGY (PACE) ORDINANCE.
Chapter 58
PREAMBLE
WHEREAS, the 124th Maine Legislature has enacted Public Law 2009, Chapter 591, “An
Act to Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and Businesses,” also known
as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”; and
WHEREAS, that Act authorizes a municipality that has adopted a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) Ordinance to establish a PACE program so that owners of qualifying
property can access financing for energy saving improvements to their properties located in the
City of Ellsworth, financed by funds awarded to the Efficiency Maine Trust under the Federal
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Block Grant (EECBG) Program and by other funds
available for this purpose, and to enter into a contract with the Trust to administer functions of its
PACE program; and
WHEREAS, Ellsworth wishes to establish a PACE program; and
NOW THEREFORE, Ellsworth hereby enacts the following Ordinance:
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ENABLING LEGISLATION
1 Purpose
By and through this Chapter, the City of Ellsworth declares as its public purpose the
establishment of a municipal program to enable its citizens to participate in a Property Assessed
Clean Energy (“PACE”) program so that owners of qualifying property can access financing for
energy saving improvements to their properties located in the City. The City declares its purpose
and the provisions of this Ordinance to be in conformity with federal and State laws.
2 Enabling Legislation
The City enacts this Ordinance pursuant to Public Law 2009, Chapter 591 of the 124th Maine
State Legislature -- “An Act To Increase the Affordability of Clean Energy for Homeowners and
Businesses,” also known as “the Property Assessed Clean Energy Act” or “the PACE Act”
(codified at 35-A M.R.S.A. § 10151, et seq.).
ARTICLE II - TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
3 Title
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “the City of Ellsworth Property Assessed
Clean Energy (PACE) Ordinance” (the “Ordinance”).”
Ch. 58 - PACE Ordinance 05/16/2011
3
4 Definitions
Except as specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have their
customary meanings; as used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings indicated:
1. Energy saving improvement: means an improvement to qualifying property that
is new and permanently affixed to qualifying property and that:
A. Will result in increased energy efficiency and substantially reduced energy
use and:
(1) Meets or exceeds applicable United States Environmental
Protection Agency and United States Department of Energy Energy Star
program or similar energy efficiency standards established or approved by
the Trust; or
(2) Involves air sealing, insulating, and other energy efficiency
improvements of residential property in a manner approved by the Trust;
or
B. Involves a renewable energy installation or an electric thermal storage
system that meets or exceeds standards established or approved by the
trust.
2. Municipality: means the City of Ellsworth.
3. PACE agreement: means an agreement between the owner of qualifying
property and the Trust that authorizes the creation of a PACE mortgage on
qualifying property and that is approved in writing by all owners of the qualifying
property at the time of the agreement, other than mortgage holders.
4. PACE assessment: means an assessment made against qualifying property to
repay a PACE loan.
5. PACE district: means the area within which the Municipality establishes a
PACE program hereunder, which is all that area within the Municipality’s
boundaries.
6. PACE loan: means a loan, secured by a PACE mortgage, made to the owner(s) of
a qualifying property pursuant to a PACE program to fund energy saving
improvements.
7. PACE mortgage: means a mortgage securing a loan made pursuant to a PACE
program to fund energy saving improvements on qualifying property.
8. PACE program: means a program established under State statute by the Trust or
a municipality under which property owners can finance energy savings
improvements on qualifying property.
9. Qualifying property: means real property located in the PACE district of the
City.
10. Renewable energy installation: means a fixture, product, system, device or
interacting group of devices installed behind the meter at a qualifying property, or
on contiguous property under common ownership, that produces energy or heat
from renewable sources, including, but not limited to, photovoltaic systems, solar
Ch. 58 - PACE Ordinance 05/16/2011
4
thermal systems, biomass systems, landfill gas to energy systems, geothermal
systems, wind systems, wood pellet systems and any other systems eligible for
funding under federal Qualified Energy Conservation Bonds or federal Clean
Renewable Energy Bonds.
11. Trust: means the Efficiency Maine Trust established in 35-A M.R.S.A.
§ 10103 and/or its agent(s), if any.
ARTICLE III - PACE PROGRAM
1. Establishment; funding. The City of Ellsworth hereby establishes a PACE
program allowing owners of qualifying property located in the PACE district who
so choose to access financing for energy saving improvements to their property
through PACE loans administered by the Trust or its agent. PACE loan funds are
available from the Trust in Ellsworth as the City has adopted this Ordinance; and
as the City plans to adopt and implement a local public outreach and education
plan; enters into a PACE administration contract with the Trust to establish the
terms and conditions of the Trust’s administration of the municipality’s PACE
program, and agrees to assist and cooperate with the Trust in its administration of
the City’s PACE program.
2. Amendment to PACE program. In addition, the City may from time to time
amend this Ordinance to use any other funding sources made available to it or
appropriated by it for the express purpose of its PACE program, and the
Municipality shall be responsible for administration of loans made from those
other funding sources.
ARTICLE IV – CONFORMITY WITH THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE TRUST
1. Standards adopted; Rules promulgated; model documents. If the Trust adopts
standards, promulgates rules, or establishes model documents subsequent to the
Municipality’s adoption of this Ordinance and those standards, rules or model
documents substantially conflict with this Ordinance, the City shall take necessary
steps to conform this Ordinance and its PACE program to those standards, rules,
or model documents.
ARTICLE V – PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION; MUNICIPAL LIABILITY
1. Program Administration
A. PACE Administration Contract. Pursuant to 35-A M.R.S.A.
§10154(2)(A)(2) and (B), the City will enter into a PACE administration
contract with the Trust to administer the functions of the PACE program
for the City. The PACE administration contract with the Trust will
establish the administration of the PACE program including, without
limitation, that:
Ch. 58 - PACE Ordinance 05/16/2011
5
i. the Trust will enter into PACE agreements with owners of
qualifying property in the City’s PACE district;
ii. the Trust, or its agent, will create and record a Notice of the PACE
agreement in the Hancock County Registry of Deeds to create a
PACE mortgage;
iii. the Trust, or its agent, will disburse the PACE loan to the property
owner;
iv. the Trust, or its agent, will send PACE assessment statements with
payment deadlines to the property owner;
v. the Trust, or its agent, will be responsible for collection of the
PACE assessments;
vi. the Trust, or its agent, will record any lien, if needed, due to
nonpayment of the assessment;
vii. the Trust or its agent on behalf of the City, promptly shall record
the discharges of PACE mortgages upon full payment of the PACE
loan.
B. Adoption of Education and Outreach Program. In conjunction with
adopting this Ordinance, the City shall adopt and implement an education
and outreach program so that citizens of Ellsworth are made aware of
home energy saving opportunities, including the opportunity to finance
energy saving improvements with a PACE loan.
C. Assistance and Cooperation. The City will assist and cooperate with the
Trust in its administration of the Municipality’s PACE program.
D. Assessments Not a Tax. PACE assessments do not constitute a tax but
may be assessed and collected by the Trust in any manner determined by
the Trust and consistent with applicable law.
2. Liability of City Officials; Liability of City
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the Ellsworth
City Council and City officials, including, without limitation, tax assessors
and tax collectors, are not personally liable to the Trust or to any other
person for claims, of whatever kind or nature, under or related to a PACE
program, including, without limitation, claims for or related to uncollected
PACE assessments.
B. Other than the fulfillment of its obligations specified in a PACE
administration contract with the Trust entered into under Article VI, §1(A)
above, the City has no liability to a property owner for or related to energy
savings improvements financed under a PACE program.
1
CHAPTER 59
City of Ellsworth, Maine
Consumer Fireworks
and
Commercial Outdoor Public Fireworks/Pyrotechnics Display
Ordinance
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted April 16, 2012
Amended December 15, 2014
Amended June 15, 2015
Amended August 7, 2015
2
This ordinance shall be known as "Consumer Fireworks and Commercial Outdoor Public Display of
Fireworks/Pyrotechnics Ordinance City of Ellsworth, Maine".
Section 1 AUTHORITY
1.1 This ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided for in Article VIII-A of the
Maine Constitution and MRSA Title 30-A § 3001, and MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A: Fireworks
Section 2 APPLICABILITY
2.1This ordinance shall apply to any person involved in consumer fireworks retail sales, consumer
fireworks use, or a commercial outdoor public fireworks/pyrotechnics display within the City of
Ellsworth.
Section 3 PURPOSE
3.1 To regulate the sale and use of consumer fireworks, receive notification of commercial outdoor public
fireworks/pyrotechnics display activities, within the City of Ellsworth and to provide the necessary
information concerning the sale of consumer fireworks and commercial outdoor public
fireworks/pyrotechnics display activities within the City.
Section 4 DEFINITIONS
4.1 Consumer Fireworks:
Consumer fireworks shall be as defined in MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A. Consumer fireworks does not
include the following products as defined by the State Fire Marshal’s Office by rule:
A. Missile-Type Rockets:
A device similar to a sky rocket in size, composition, and effect that uses fins rather than a
stick for guidance and stability. Missiles shall not contain more than 20 grams of total
chemical composition.
B. Helicopters and Aerial Spinners:
A tube containing more than 20 grams of chemical composition, with a propeller blade
attached. Upon ignition, the rapidly spinning device rises into the air. A visible or audible
effect may be produced at or near the height of flight.
C. Sky Rockets and Bottle Rockets:
A cylindrical tube containing not more than 20 grams of chemical composition as prescribed
under section 3.7 and Table 4.3-1 of the American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1
with a wooden stick attached for guidance and stability. Rockets rise into the air upon ignition.
A burst of color and/or sound may be produced at or near the height of flight.
3
D. Sky Lanterns:
Sky lanterns are the type of balloon that requires fire underneath, used to heat the air within the
balloon, to propel it into the air.
4.2 Display Fireworks:
Display fireworks means large fireworks designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation. This term includes, but is not limited to, salutes containing
more than 2 grains (130 mg) of explosive materials, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of
pyrotechnic compositions, and other display pieces which exceed the limits of explosive materials for
classification as consumer fireworks. This term also includes fused set pieces containing components
which together exceed 50 mg of salute powder.
4.3 Fireworks:
A. Fireworks means:
1. Combustible or explosive composition or substance;
2. Combination of explosive compositions or substances;
3. Other article that was prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, including blank cartridges or toy
cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloon that requires fire underneath to
propel it, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs, rockets, wheels,
colored fires, fountains, mines, serpents and other fireworks of like construction;
4. Fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound; or
5. Tablets or other device containing any explosive substance or flammable compound
B. The term, fireworks, does not include consumer fireworks, toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or
other devices in which paper caps or plastic caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive
compound are used if they are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap
when in place for the explosion, toy pistol paper caps or plastic caps that contain less than
20/100 grains of explosive mixture, sparklers that do not contain magnesium chlorates or
perchlorates or signal, antique or replica cannons if no projectile is fired. (The common or
usual name of the product is Fireworks UN0335 or Fireworks 1.3 G.)
4.4 Person:
Person means any individual, combination of individuals, group, association, municipality, amusement
park, or other legal or commercial entity.
4.5 Private Display:
Private display means an entertainment feature where the general public is not admitted or invited to
view the display or discharge of fireworks, consumer fireworks, or special effects.
4.6 Public Display:
Public display, for the purpose of this ordinance, means an entertainment feature where the general
public is admitted or invited, and permitted to view, the display or discharge of fireworks, consumer
fireworks, or special effects.
4
4.7 Pyrotechnic Articles:
Pyrotechnic articles means pyrotechnic devices for professional use similar to consumer fireworks in
chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, including articles meeting
the weight limits for consumer fireworks but not labeled as such and classified by U.S. Department of
Transportation regulations in 49 CFR 172.101 as UN0431 or UN0432.
4.8 Pyrotechnics:
Pyrotechnics means the science of using materials capable of undergoing self-contained and selfsustained
exothermic chemical reactions for the production of heat, light, gas, smoke and/or sound.
Pyrotechnics include not only the manufacture of fireworks but items such as safety matches, oxygen
candles, explosive bolts and fasteners, components of the automotive airbag and gas pressure blasting
in mining, quarrying and demolition.
Section 5 PROHIBITED and RESTRICTED USES
5.1 Consumer fireworks shall not be used when the fire danger class, as designated by the Maine Forest
Service, is a class 4 or 5 fire danger day.
5.2 The following are prohibited within the City of Ellsworth.
A. The use of pyrotechnic articles and consumer fireworks are prohibited within any structure in
the City of Ellsworth.
B. The sale and use of missile-type rockets, as defined by MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A, and the
State Fire Marshal’s Office.
C. The sale and use of helicopters and aerial spinners, as defined by MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A
and the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
D. The sale and use of sky rockets and bottle rockets, as defined by MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A
and the State Fire Marshal’s Office.
E. The sale and use of sky lanterns as defined in MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A and the State Fire
Marshal’s Office.
F. The use of Consumer Fireworks is prohibited on property owned by the City of Ellsworth.
G. The use of consumer fireworks is prohibited as shown on the official City of Ellsworth
Prohibited Fireworks Area and on the Enlarged Prohibited Fireworks Area Inset Maps, and
hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Ordinance. These official maps shall be
certified by the attested signature of the City Clerk and shall be located in the City Clerk’s
Office.
5.3 Except for the sale of consumer fireworks as defined in MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A, a person may not
sell, possess with the intent to sell, or offer for sale fireworks within the City of Ellsworth.
5.4 Consumer fireworks may be used on Fridays from 6:00pm to 10:00pm and Saturdays from 6:00pm to
10:00pm.
5
5.5 Consumer fireworks may be used on the following dates between the hours of 9:00am and 12:30am
the following day:
A. July 4th
B. December 31st
C. Consumer fireworks may be used from 6:00pm to 10:00pm from the Sunday immediately before
July 4th and December 31st to the Thursday immediately following July 4th and December 31st.
5.6 A person may use consumer fireworks only on that person’s property, or on the property owned by a
person who has consented with written permission, to the use of consumer fireworks on that property.
5.7 Any public display shall conform to the requirements of MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A.
A. Notification shall be made to the Ellsworth Police Department of the intent to conduct any
public or private display in proximity to fifty (50) or more persons.
B. Notification shall be made to the Ellsworth Public Safety Dispatch at (207) 667-2133.
C. Notification shall be made no less than two (2) days prior to the display.
D. All safety requirements listed on the product shall be followed.
Section 6 SALE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS
6.1 No person shall operate any establishment or sell from any establishment consumer fireworks within
the City of Ellsworth without obtaining a license in accordance with City of Ellsworth Chapter 14,
Licenses and Permits Ordinance. The license shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of
issuance by the City of Ellsworth. A public hearing is required prior to action on the initial license or
renewal.
6.2 No person shall operate any establishment or sell from any establishment consumer fireworks within
the City of Ellsworth without obtaining a state license.
6.3 Before an initial license application for the sale of consumer fireworks is submitted to the City of Ellsworth,
the applicant shall submit sufficient information and documentation to show compliance with MRSA Title
8, Chapter 9-A, §223-A and Chapter 36 Office of the State Fire Marshal’s Rules.
Additionally, an applicant must show:
A. Minimum distances, compliant with MRSA Title 8, Chapter 9-A, §223-A(4), from the proposed
permit location to the following:
1. Public ways
2. Buildings
6
3. Other consumer fireworks retail sales buildings
4. Motor vehicle fuel storage and dispensing facilities
5. Propane storage and dispensing facilities
6. Flammable and combustible liquid aboveground tank storage and dispensing facilities
7. Flammable gas and flammable liquefied gas, bulk aboveground storage and dispensing facilities
8. Vehicle access and parking areas
B. Floor plan and layout of storage and displays of the consumer fireworks product to indicate
compliance with state and local laws and regulations which shows:
1. Location and type of portable fire extinguishers
2. All means of egress
3. Construction details
6.4 The applicant must have a valid City of Ellsworth consumer fireworks retail sales license and a valid federal
license to sell consumer fireworks prior to submission of an application for a state license to the State Fire
Marshal’s Office.
6.5 Upon receipt of the state license, the applicant shall submit a copy of the current valid state license to the Fire
Chief or his designee.
6.6 Only consumer fireworks may be sold in the City of Ellsworth.
6.7 The consumer fireworks retail sales facility shall make available, to anyone purchasing consumer
fireworks, a current list of towns prohibiting or restricting the use of consumer fireworks in Maine and
shall post the same information at the point of sale.
Section 7 COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR PUBLIC FIREWORKS/PYROTECHNICS DISPLAY
PERMIT
7.1 Permit required.
A commercial outdoor public fireworks/pyrotechnics display permit from the State fire Marshal’s
Office is required to conduct a commercial outdoor public fireworks/pyrotechnic display within the
City of Ellsworth.
A. A separate permit is required for each location at which an applicant seeks to conduct a
commercial outdoor public fireworks display event.
7
B. A copy of the application for a State Fire Marshal’s Office permit, for the commercial outdoors
public display fireworks/pyrotechnic display event shall be submitted to the Fire Chief or his
designee no less than 10 days prior to the event date.
Section 8 CONFLICTS WITH OTHER RULES, REGULATIONS OR LAWS
8.1 Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are in conflict with the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted federal, state, or local ordinance, the requirements of the most restrictive or higher
standard shall govern, unless, the provisions of the local ordinance is preempted by federal or state
laws or regulations.
Section 9 SEVERABILITY
9.1 In the event that any section, subsection, or any provision of this ordinance shall be declared by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, such decision shall not be deemed to
affect the validity of any other section, sub-section, or other portion of this ordinance. To that end, the
provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared severable.
Section 10 PENALTIES
10.1 Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance or the license issued by the City of
Ellsworth for consumer fireworks sales, commits a civil violation for which a fine of not less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed for
each day such offense continues and the City’s reasonable fees and expenses, including attorneys fees.
Each offense may constitute a separate offense for each day the violation occurs.
Section 11 EFFECTIVE DATE
11.1 This ordinance shall become effective on the date of amendment by the City Of Ellsworth.
LEGEND
Prohibited Fireworks Area
Parcel Boundary
Municipal Boundary
Roads
Water
0 2 4 Miles
1 in = 1.68 miles
.
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate copy of the official City of Ellsworth Prohibited Fireworks
Area Map of Ellsworth, Maine, approved by the Ellsworth City Council on .
City Clerk
August 7, 2015 by JMN
\\store1\shares\planning\ordinances-final
\prohibitedfireworksareamap_08072015.pdf
INSET MAP CITY OF ELLSWORTH PROHIBITED FIREWORKS AREA MAP
The information in this table is provided only to assist the reader in understanding and complying with the ordinance. However, to
the extent that there is any inconsistency between the information in the table and the City of Ellsworth Prohibited Fireworks Area Map
or the Enlarged Prohibited Fireworks Area Inset Map, the maps control unless otherwise provided in specific sections of the ordinance.
Orland
Bucksport
Dedham
Otis
Mariaville
Waltham
Fletchers Landing
Township
Hancock
Lamoine
Trenton
Surry
Branch
Lake
Green
Lake
Graham
Lake
Union River
Bay
Street Name Street Name Street Name Street Name Street Name
ABRAM WAY COMMERCE PARK GRANT STREET MCKENZIE AVENUE SPRUCE STREET
ACADIA WAY COOKS LANE GRINDLE ROAD MEADOWVIEW LANE STATE STREET
ALLISON AVENUE COURT STREET GROVE WAY MERRILL LANE STERLING STREET
AMERICAN AVENUE CRISTIN LANE GUPTILL FARM ROAD MOUNTAIN VIEW DRIVE STONY RIDGE ROAD
ANDERSON ROAD DAISY WAY HALE PLACE MYRICK STREET STORE STREET
AQUARIUS LANE DANICO LANE HANCOCK STREET NANCY'S WAY STRAW WAY
ARGONNE STREET DAVIS STREET HANNA WAY NORTH STREET STRAWBERRY WAY
AVERY LANE DEANE STREET HIGGINS WAY OAK STREET SUGAR WAY
BANGOR ROAD DEANE STREET APT WAY HIGH STREET OLD MILL ROAD SUMMER WAY
BARRETT WAY DEERFIELD ROAD HILLSIDE DRIVE OUR WAY SURRY ROAD
BAYSIDE ROAD DOUGLAS HIGHWAY HOLT DRIVE PARCHER STREET SWEET FERN WAY
BAYVIEW AVENUE DOWNEAST HIGHWAY HOMESTEAD WAY PARK STREET TANGLEWOOD WAY
BEALS AVENUE EASTWARD LANE HUBBERT WAY PATRICK'S WAY THERA WAY
BECKWITH COURT EDACO COURT INFANT STREET PINE STREET THIRD STREET
BEECHLAND ROAD EDGEWOOD WAY JACKSON WAY PIONEER FARM WAY TINKER FARM WAY
BIRCH AVENUE ELM STREET JIMS WAY PLEASANT STREET TINKER MEADOW WAY
BLACK HOUSE DRIVE FAIRGROUND ROAD JOY WAY POND AVENUE TOASHUH WAY
BLUE HERON WAY FIELD STONE ROAD JUDE LANE PRINTING HOUSE SQUARE TOOTHAKER LANE
BOARDWALK WAY FIELD WAY KINGSLAND CROSSING PUMP STATION POINT TROGER WAY
BRAE DRIVE FIFTH STREET LAKES LANE RESORT WAY TURKEY HILL WAY
BRIDGE HILL APARTMENT CIRCLE FLETCHER STREET LAUREL STREET RIVER BREEZE WAY TWEEDIE LANE
BROOKSIDE COURT FLOCKAMOOSEN WAY LIBERTY STREET RIVERSIDE LANE UNION STREET
BUCKSPORT ROAD FORREST AVENUE LINCOLIN STREET SCHOOL STREET VALLEY WAY
BUTTERMILK ROAD FOSTER STREET LINSCOTT WAY SENNETT WAY VIOLAS WAY
CARDS COURT FOX STREET LONG LANE SHADY LANE WASHINGTON STREET
CARLISLE STREET FRANKLIN STREET LUNDIN WAY SHORE ROAD WATER STREET
CENTRAL STREET FRIENDSHIP WAY MADDOCKS AVENUE SHORT STREET WESTERN AVENUE
CHAPEL STREET GARDEN WAY MAIN STREET SOUTH STREET WESTWOOD DRIVE
CHRISTIAN RIDGE ROAD GEORGE MARY WAY MAPLE STREET SOUTHGATE WAY WICHITA WAY
CHURCH STREET GILES WAY MARIAVILLE ROAD SPEED WAY WILLOW STREET
CITY HALL PLAZA GINNIE MAY WAY MARIGOLD WAY SPENCER STREET WINDSOR ROAD
CLEMENT WAY GLADWICK WAY MCDEVITT WAY SPRING STREET WOOD STREET
COLBY WAY GRANDVIEW ROAD MCDONALD AVENUE SPRINGHOUSE LANE YOUNGS AVENUE
Blue Hill
State of Maine Railroad
ENGLARGED PROHIBITED FIREWORKS AREA INSET MAP
LEGEND
Prohibited Fireworks Area
Parcel Boundary
Water
Roads
State of Maine Railroad
I hereby certify that this is a true and accurate copy of the official Enlarged
Prohibited Fireworks Area Inset Map of Ellsworth, Maine, approved by the
Ellsworth City Council on .
City Clerk 1 in = 0.55 miles
0 0.5 1 Miles
.
Union Street
Main Street
Bucksport Road
Bangor Road
UV3
£¤1A
UV180
UV172
Surry Road
UV230 UV3 £¤1U
V184
High Street
£¤1
Union River
Surry
Beechland Road Buttermilk Road
Bayside Road
McDevitt Way
State Street
Christian Ridge Road
Red Bridge Road
August 7, 2015 by JMN
\\store1\shares\planning\ordinancesfinal\
fireworksinsetmap_
08072015.pdf
Hancock
Lamoine
UV179
1
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 60
Property Maintenance Ordinance
A true copy –
Attest: Heidi-Noel Grindle
City Clerk
Adopted August 19, 2013
2
101.1 Title.
These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Ordinance for the City of
Ellsworth, hereinafter referred to as "this code.”
101.2 Scope.
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all property in Ellsworth other than owneroccupied
single family residences. This code will promote the sanitation, protection from the
elements, life safety, fire safety and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the
responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and
premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
101.3 Intent and Construction.
This code shall be liberally construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public
health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and
maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply
with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety
as required herein.
101.4 Severability.
If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be
Invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY
102.1 General.
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific
requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the
referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different
sections of this code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
102.2 Maintenance.
Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or
code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be
maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off
from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, rooming unit, housekeeping unit, or sleeping
unit, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in
progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or
abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as
otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the
maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
102.3 Application of other codes.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in
accordance with the procedures and provisions of the City of Ellsworth Unified Development
3
Ordinance, Maine Uniform Building & Energy Code, Maine Uniform Plumbing Code and the
National Electric Code.
102.4 Existing remedies.
The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the
jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure
which is dangerous, unsafe and insanitary.
102.5 Workmanship.
Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by
the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
102.6 Historic buildings.
The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated
as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
102.7 Referenced codes and standards.
The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of
this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in Sections
102.7.1 and 102.7.2.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of
the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply.
102.7.1 Conflicts.
Where conflicts occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this code shall apply.
102.7.2 Provisions in referenced codes and standards.
Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes subject matter
that is within the scope of this code, the provisions of this code, as applicable, shall take
precedence over the provisions in the referenced code or standard.
102.8 Requirements not covered by code.
Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture,
structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically
covered by this code, shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer.
102.9 Application of references.
References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number,
shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.
4
102.10 Other laws.
The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal
law.
PART 2 — ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION 103 DEFINITIONS
ANCHORED. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
APPROVED. Approved by the Code Enforcement Officer.
ATTRACTIVE NUISANCE. Something on a piece of property that attracts children but also
endangers their safety. For example, unfenced swimming pools, open pits and abandoned
refrigerators have all qualified as attractive nuisances. Landowners have a duty to keep their
property free of attractive nuisances.
BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a water closet (flush), bathtub or
shower.
BEDROOM. Any room or space with or without a built in closet used or intended to be used for
sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
DETACHED. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another.
DETERIORATION. To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and lose effectiveness.
DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or
agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be
for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT. Those structural members or assemblies of members or
5
manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that
transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the
control of owners or operators of such premises.
GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open
sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking
surface to a lower level.
HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms,
toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered
habitable spaces.
IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or
death at any time.
INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats,
vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets
for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of
disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power.
INTERCHANGABILITY. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in
the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural
and the plural, the singular.
LABELED. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol
or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or
other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment,
material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a
specified purpose.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not
the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license,
or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
6
NEGLECT. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
NOXIOUS WEEDS. Are weeds in any living stage, such as seeds and reproductive parts, of any
parasitic or other plant of a kind, which is of foreign origin, is new to or not widely prevalent in
the United States, and can directly or indirectly injure crops, other useful plants, livestock, or
poultry or other interests of agriculture, including irrigation, or navigation, or the fish or wildlife
resources of the United States or the public health.
OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space
within a building.
OCCUPIED LIVING SPACE. (1) A room or space in which people sleep, which can also
include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not
both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
(2) Or a room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower. (3) Or Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.
OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let
or offered for occupancy; including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the
executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real
property by a court.
OWNER. Any person having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the
official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property.
PARTS. Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling", "premises", "building", "rooming
house" , "rooming unit", "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in this code, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit.
PEST ELIMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by
eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serves as
their food or water; by other approved pest elimination methods.
7
PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or private right of ways, including any
structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the
ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the
public for public use.
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for
compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall
include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
SCOPE. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this
code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof, which is permanently
fixed to the ground.
TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record,
occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TERMS NOT DEFINED. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION. The deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be
deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the maximum strength.
VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned
air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line,
undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
8
SECTION 104 DEPARTMENT OF CODE ENFORCEMENT
104.1 The Ellsworth Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible for administering this
ordinance.
SECTION 105 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
105.1 General.
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this
code. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to render interpretations of this
code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions.
Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose
of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements
specifically provided for in this code.
105.2 Inspections.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall make all of the required inspections, and
that the CEO may also accept reports from other City Departments in appropriate circumstances.
All reports of such inspections shall be in writing. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to
engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that
arise, subject to the approval of the City Manager
105.3 Right of entry.
Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or whenever
the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or
upon a premises a condition in violation of this code, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized
to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by
this code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the Code Enforcement Officer
shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If such structure or premises is
unoccupied, the Code Enforcement Officer shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If
entry is refused, the Code Enforcement Officer shall have recourse to the remedies provided by
law to secure entry.
105.4 Identification.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or
premises in the performance of duties under this code.
105.5 Notices and orders.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance
with this code.
105.6 Department records.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep official records of all business and activities of the
9
department specified in the provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official
records for the period required for retention of public records.
SECTION 106 APPROVAL
106.1 Modifications.
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases
upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the Code Enforcement Officer
shall first find the special individual reason that makes the strict letter of this code impractical
and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such
modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action
granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
106.2 Alternative materials, methods and equipment.
The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any
such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be
approved where the Code Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work
offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
106.3 Required testing.
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or
evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order
to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the
jurisdiction.
106.3.1 Test methods.
Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In
the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
be permitted to approve appropriate testing procedures performed by an approved
agency.
106.3.2 Test reports.
Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer for the period required
for retention of public records.
106.4 Used material and equipment.
The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is
permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless such elements are in good
repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working
10
condition.
106.5 Research reports.
Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not
specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid research reports from approved
sources.
SECTION 107 VIOLATIONS
107.1 Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any
of the provisions of this code.
107.2 Notice of violation.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with
Section 108.
107.3 Prosecution of violation.
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with
Section 107 shall be deemed to be in violation of this Ordinance. If the notice of violation is not
complied with, the Code Enforcement Officer shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or
in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order
or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the Code Enforcement Officer on such
premises as authorized by this Ordinance shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
107.4 Violation penalties.
Any person, who shall violate a provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws.
The penalty for a violation of this ordinance shall be a minimum of $100 to a maximum of
$2,500. Each day that the violation continues is a new violation.
107.5 Abatement of violation.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the
jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct,
business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
SECTION 108 NOTICES AND ORDERS
108.1 Notice to person responsible.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that there has been a violation of this code
11
or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in Sections 108.2 and 108.3 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in
this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 109.3.
108.2 Form.
Such notice prescribed in Section 108.1 shall be in accordance with all of the following:
1. Be in writing.
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice is being issued.
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs and
improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the
provisions of this code.
5. Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with Section 107.3.
108.3 Method of service.
Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. A copy of the notice left at the individual’s dwelling house or usual place of abode with
some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein.;
2. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or
3. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.
108.4 Unauthorized tampering.
Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the Code Enforcement Officer shall not be mutilated,
destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization from the Code Enforcement
Officer.
108.5 Penalties.
Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Section 107.4.
108.6 Transfer of ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a
compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the
compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner shall first
furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice
of violation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and shall furnish to the Code Enforcement
Officer a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the
responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such
compliance order or notice of violation. The new owner shall have the right to continue an
appeal timely commenced by the prior owner or to commence an appeal in the new owner’s
name, provided the time within which to appeal has not expired.
12
SECTION 109 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
109.1 General.
When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Enforcement Officer to be unsafe, or when a
structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be
condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.
109. 1.1 Unsafe structures.
An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or
safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum
safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure
contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or
of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is
possible.
109.1.2 Unsafe equipment.
Unsafe equipment is any equipment or system on the premises that is in such disrepair or
condition that it is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of
the premises or structure. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment,
elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or
other such equipment.
109.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy.
A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the Code Enforcement Officer finds
that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is
in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other
essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure
constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
109.1.4 Unlawful structure.
An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons
than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
109.1.5 Dangerous structure or premises.
For the purpose of this code, any structure or premises that have any or all of the
conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous:
1. Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does
not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as related to
the requirements for existing buildings.
2. The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of
egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe
and adequate means of egress.
13
3. Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by
fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or
by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely
collapse, or to become detached or dislodged.
4. Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on
the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so
anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or
artificial loads of one and one-half the original designed value.
5. The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement
of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason,
is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way.
6. The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use
and occupancy.
7. The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or
abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in
the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals
or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for
committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.
8. Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in
violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or
structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of
any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of
fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety.
9. A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes,
because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty
construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or
plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer to
be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to
cause sickness or disease.
10. Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fireresistance-
rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel
connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined
by the Code Enforcement Officer to be a threat to life or health.
11. Any portion of a building that remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is
abandoned so as to constitute such building or portion thereof as an attractive
nuisance or hazard to the public.
109.2 Closing of vacant structures.
If the structure is vacant or unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of
structural collapse, the Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to post a placard of
condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the
14
order, the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through
any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof
shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien
upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
109.3 Notice.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer has condemned a structure or equipment under the
provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment in accordance with Section 108.3. If the notice pertains to equipment, it
shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in
Section 108.2.
109.4 Placarding.
Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the
time given, the Code Enforcement Officer shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a
placard bearing the word "Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying
the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
109.4.1 Placard removal.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have
been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without
the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be subject to the penalties provided
by this code.
109.5 Prohibited occupancy.
Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
vacated as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer. Any person who shall occupy a placarded
premise or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the
premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premise or operate placarded equipment shall
be liable for the penalties provided by this code.
109.6 Abatement methods.
The owner, operator or occupant of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the
Code Enforcement Officer shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions
either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action.
109.7 Record.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report
shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.
SECTION 110 EMERGENCY MEASURES
15
110.1 Imminent dangers.
When, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger of failure or
collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure
because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or
materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the Code Enforcement Officer is
hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises
forthwith. The Code Enforcement Officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been
Prohibited by the Code Enforcement Officer.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such
structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing
the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
110.2 Temporary safeguards.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion of the Code
Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to
render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has
been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Code Enforcement Officer
deems necessary to meet such emergency.
110.3 Emergency repairs.
For the purposes of this section, the Code Enforcement Officer shall employ the necessary labor
and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.
110.4 Costs of emergency repairs.
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal
counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises
where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
110.5 Hearing.
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any
affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing
as described in this code
SECTION 111 DEMOLITION
111.1 General.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any
structure, which in the Code Enforcement Officer judgment after review is so deteriorated or
dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise
unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure,
to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by
16
repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to
demolish and remove at the owner’s option; or where there has been a cessation of normal
construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, the Code Enforcement Officer
shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair.
Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond one year, unless approved by
the building official.
SECTION 112 MEANS OF APPEAL
Appeals shall be made in accordance with Article 13 of the City of Ellsworth Unified
Development Ordinance
SECTION 201 MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURES, EQUIPMENT AND EXTERIOR
PROPERTY
201.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of
persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
201.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with
these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe
condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary
and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises
which they occupy and control.
201.3 Vacant structures and land.
All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe,
secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
SECTION 301 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
301.1 Sanitation.
All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or
controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
17
301.2 Sidewalks and driveways.
All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a
proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
301.3 Weeds.
All Commercial, Vacant, Foreclosed or Abandoned premises and exterior property that is
normally maintained, shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 8 inches.
All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this section shall not include cultivated
flowers, gardens, agricultural areas or fields.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after
service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section
107.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the
notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the
weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent
responsible for the property.
301.4 Accessory structures.
All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained
structurally sound and in good repair.
301.5 Motor vehicles.
Refer to State Statutes & City of Ellsworth Unified Development Ordinance.
301.6 Defacement of property.
No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any
structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving
or graffiti.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of
maintenance and repair.
SECTION 302 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS
302.1 Swimming pools.
Refer to MUBEC & Maine State Uniform Plumbing Code.
18
SECTION 303 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
303.1 General.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so
as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. Please refer to MUBEC (Maine
Uniform Building & Energy Code).
303.2 Roofs and drainage.
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage
shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the
structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from
obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
303.3 Overhang extensions.
All overhang extensions including, but not limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings,
fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly
anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or
wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of
weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
303.4 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies.
Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall
be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of
supporting the imposed loads.
303.5 Chimneys and towers.
All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained
structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be
protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
303.6 Handrails and guards.
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed
loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
303.7 Window, skylight and door frames.
Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and
weather tight.
303.7.1 Glazing.
All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
303.7.2 Openable windows.
Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily opened able and capable of
being held in position by window hardware.
19
303.8 Doors.
All exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall
tightly secure the door.
303.9 Basement hatchways.
Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and
surface drainage water.
303.10 Building security.
Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be
provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.
303.10.1 Doors.
Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily opened from the side
from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall
have a minimum lock throw of 1 inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according
to the manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of
this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.
303.10.2 Windows.
Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground
level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash
locking device.
303.10.3 Basement hatchways.
Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping
unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from
unauthorized entry.
SECTION 304 INTERIOR STRUCTURE
304.1 General.
The interior of all rental structures and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure
which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure
containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units
or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the
shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
20
304.2 Interior surfaces.
All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and
sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or
covered. Cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected. All removal of Lead Paint and/or Asbestos will be in compliance with State of Maine
Statutes/Guidelines.
304.3 Stairs and walking surfaces.
Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in
sound condition and good repair.
304.4 Handrails and guards.
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed
loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
304.5 Interior doors.
Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being
opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as
intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.
SECTION 305 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
305.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
SECTION 401 Light & Ventilation
401.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light,
ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
401.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in
compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit
21
another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
401.3 Alternative devices.
In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or
mechanical ventilation complying with the MUBEC shall be permitted.
SECTION 402 LIGHTING REQUIRMENTS
402.1 Common halls and stairways.
Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family
dwellings, shall be able to be illuminated at all times with a light bulb/ lamp that will produce at
least 600 lumens of light for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area, provided that the spacing
between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm).
402.3 Other spaces.
All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the
maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the
appliances, equipment and fixtures.
SECTION 403 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
403.1 Privacy.
Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be
arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.
403.2 Minimum room widths.
A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be a minimum of 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan
dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear passageway of 3 feet (914 mm) between
counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls.
403.3 Minimum ceiling heights.
Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable
basement areas shall have a minimum clear ceiling height of 7 feet (2134 mm).
Exceptions:
1. In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced a minimum of 4 feet (1219
mm) on center and projecting a maximum of 6 inches (152 mm) below the required
ceiling height.
2. Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry,
study or recreation purposes, having a minimum ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches (2033
mm) with a minimum clear height of 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) under beams, girders,
ducts and similar obstructions.
22
3. Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a
sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a minimum clear ceiling height of 7 feet
(2134 mm) over a minimum of one-third of the required minimum floor area. In
calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a
minimum clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524 mm) shall be included.
403.4 Bedroom and living room requirements.
Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of Sections 403.4.1 through
403.4.5.
403.4.1 Room area.
Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall
contain a minimum of 70 square feet (6.5 m2) and every bedroom occupied by more than one
person shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet (4.6 m2) of floor area for each occupant
thereof.
403.4.2 Access from bedrooms.
Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable
spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
403.4.3 Water closet accessibility.
Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without
passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to
at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
403.4.4 Prohibited occupancy.
Kitchens and non-habitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
403.5 Overcrowding.
Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area
requirements of Table 403.5.
TABLE 403.5 MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
SPACE
MINIMUM AREA IN SQUARE
FEET
1-2
occupants
3-5
occupants
6 or more
occupants
Living
rooma, b
120 120 150
23
Dining
rooma, b
No
requirement
80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply with Section 403.4.1
SECTION 501 GENERAL
501.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and
plumbing fixtures to be provided.
501.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing
fixtures in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
SECTION 502 REQUIRED FACILITIES
502.1 Dwelling units.
Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen
sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be
placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a
substitute for the required lavatory.
502.2 Rooming houses.
At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming
units.
502.3 Hotels.
Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory
and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten
occupants.
502.4 Employees’ facilities.
A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to
employees.
502.4.1 Drinking facilities.
Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or
24
disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located
in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
502.5 Public toilet facilities.
Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working condition in
accordance with the International Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or
cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during
occupancy of the premises.
SECTION 503 PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES
Refer to the Maine Uniform Plumbing Code
SECTION 504 WATER SYSTEM
Refer to the Maine Uniform Plumbing Code
SECTION 505 SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Refer to the Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules
SECTION 506 STORM DRAINAGE
506.1 STORMWATER DISCHARGE
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall
not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
SECTION 601 MECHANICAL & ELECTRICAL
601.1 Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and
equipment to be provided.
601.2 Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and
equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant
or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements
of this chapter.
SECTION 702 HEATING FACILITIES
702.1 Facilities required.
Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
25
702.2 Residential occupancies.
Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of
68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
Cooking appliances shall not be used, nor shall portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be
used, as a means to provide required heating.
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C), a minimum
temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
702.3 Heat supply.
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or
sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall
supply heat during the period from September 1st to May 1st to maintain a minimum temperature
of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the
locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided
that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum
temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
26
A101 APPENDIX
A101.1 SECURING BUILDINGS
All windows and doors shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent entry by unauthorized
persons and shall be painted to correspond to the color of the existing structure.
A102 MATERIALS
A102.1 Boarding sheet material.
Boarding sheet material shall be minimum 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) thick wood structural panels
complying with the MUBEC.
A102.2 Boarding framing material.
Boarding framing material shall be minimum nominal 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm)
solid sawn lumber complying with the MUBEC.
A102.3 Boarding fasteners.
Boarding fasteners shall be minimum 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) diameter carriage bolts of such a length
as required to penetrate the assembly and as required to adequately attach the washers and nuts.
Washers and nuts shall comply with the MUBEC.
A103 INSTALLATION
A103.1 Boarding installation.
The boarding installation shall be in accordance with Figures A103.1(1) and A103.1(2) and
Sections A103.2 through A103.5.
27
28
FIGURE A103.1 (1) BOARDING OF DOOR OR WINDOW
FIGURE A103.1 (2) BOARDING OF DOOR WALL
A103.2 Boarding sheet material.
The boarding sheet material shall be cut to fit the door or window opening neatly or shall be cut
to provide an equal overlap at the perimeter of the door or window.
A103.3 Windows.
The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to pass through or the window sash shall
be removed and stored. The 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) strong back framing material
shall be cut minimum 2 inches (51 mm) wider than the window opening and shall be placed on
the inside of the window opening 6 inches minimum above the bottom and below the top of the
window opening. The framing and boarding shall be predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned
and the bolts, washers and nuts shall be installed and secured.
29
A103.4 Door walls.
The door opening shall be framed with minimum 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) framing
material secured at the entire perimeter and vertical members at a maximum of 24 inches (610
mm) on center. Blocking shall also be secured at a maximum of 48 inches (1219 mm) on center
vertically. Boarding sheet material shall be secured with screws and nails alternating every 6
inches (152 mm) on center.
A103.5 Doors.
Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or door openings. One door to the
structure shall be available for authorized entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved
manner.
City of Ellsworth
Chapter 61
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA PROHIBITION ORDINANCE
Enacted and effective on the 19th day of December 2016.
Automatically expires two (2) years after the effective date
unless it is repealed or reauthorized by the City Council.
Attest:
________________________
City Clerk
Heidi-Noel Grindle
City of Ellsworth – Chapter 61
Recreational Marijuana Prohibition Ordinance
Page 2 of 5
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA PROHIBITION ORDINANCE
Section 1. Title. This ordinance shall be known and cited as the “Recreational Marijuana
Prohibition Ordinance” of the City of Ellsworth.
Section 2. Authority. The ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Title 30-A M.R.S. §3001
and Title 7 M.R.S. c. 417.
Section 3. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this ordinance is to impose a ban on the
operation of Retail Marijuana Establishments and Retail Marijuana Social Clubs
in the City of Ellsworth to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the people of
Ellsworth as these activities constitute a nuisance.
Section 4. Prohibition. The operation of Retail Marijuana Establishments which includes
Retail Marijuana Stores, Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facilities, Retail Marijuana
Products Manufacturing Facilities, and Retail Marijuana Testing Facilities; and
the operation of Retail Marijuana Social Clubs are prohibited within the City of
Ellsworth, and therefore all activities related to the abovementioned retail uses
such as, but not limited to, cultivation, possession, extraction, manufacturing,
processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, delivering,
dispensing, transferring, and distributing are expressly prohibited within the City
of Ellsworth.
Section 5. Exemptions.
A. Personal Use of Marijuana. This ordinance shall not be construed to prohibit
the Personal Use of Marijuana per Title 7 M.R.S. c. 417 section 2452.
B. Medical Use of Marijuana. This ordinance shall not be construed to limit any
privileges or rights of a qualifying patient, primary caregiver, registered or
otherwise, or registered dispensary under the Maine Medical Use of
Marijuana Act and the City of the Ellsworth Code of Ordinances, c. 56 Unified
Development Ordinance.
Section 6. Effective Date. This ordinance enacted on the 19th day of December 2016 by the
Ellsworth City Council shall take effect immediately.
City of Ellsworth – Chapter 61
Recreational Marijuana Prohibition Ordinance
Page 3 of 5
Section 7. Sunset Provision. This ordinance automatically expires two (2) years after the
effective date unless it is repealed or reauthorized by the City Council.
Section 8. Relationship with Other Ordinances. Whenever a provision of this ordinance is
inconsistent with another provision of any other ordinance, regulation, or
statute, the more restrictive provision shall control.
Section 9. Validity and Severability. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be
declared by the courts to be invalid, such a decision shall not invalidate any other
section or provision of this ordinance.
Section 10. Enforcement.
A. Any duly designated Ellsworth Police Officer is authorized and shall have the
authority to enforce all provisions of this ordinance.
B. The City Manager is authorized to order that legal action be taken to enforce
the provisions of this Ordinance.
Section 11. Cease Operations Order.
A Police Officer may issue a written cease operations order directing the
occupancy, use, and other activities prohibited under this ordinance to cease
immediately, and that the premises be vacated. Upon notice of the cease
operations order, all occupancy, use, or other activity subject to the cease
operations order shall stop immediately and the premises shall be vacated and
closed.
Section 12. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance may be liable for
the penalties set forth below:
A. Civil Penalties.
i. First Violation. The maximum penalty for undertaking an activity related
to Retail Marijuana Establishments or Retail Marijuana Social Clubs is
$2,500.
ii. Multiple. The maximum penalty for undertaking an activity related to
Retail Marijuana Establishments or Retail Marijuana Social Clubs is
$25,000 when it is shown that there has been a previous conviction of
the same person within the past five (5) years for a violation of the
ordinance.
iii. Economic Benefit. The maximum penalty may be increased if the
economic benefit resulting from the violation exceeds the applicable
penalties. The maximum civil penalty may not exceed an amount equal to
twice the economic benefit resulting from the violation. Economic benefit
includes, but is not limited to, the costs avoided or enhanced value
City of Ellsworth – Chapter 61
Recreational Marijuana Prohibition Ordinance
Page 4 of 5
accrued at the time of the violation as a result of the violator’s
noncompliance with the applicable legal requirements.
iv. Setting of Penalty. In setting a penalty, the following shall be considered:
a. Prior violations by the same party;
b. The impact caused and/or potential impact posed by the operation of
the prohibited activity to the health, safety, and welfare of the people
of Ellsworth.
c. The damage that cannot be abated or corrected; and
d. The extent to which the violation continued following an order to
stop.
B. Abatement and Mitigation. The violator may be ordered to correct, abate or
mitigate the violations.
C. Damaged Incurred. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
ordinance shall become liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage
incurred by the City by reason of such violation.
D. Attorney Fees. If Ellsworth is the prevailing party, the City must be awarded
reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs.
Section 13. Definitions. The definitions below are per Title 7 M.R.S. c. 417, section 2442.
Marijuana: Means cannabis.
Extraction: The process of extracting marijuana with solvents or gases.
Person: A natural person, partnership, association, company, corporation,
limited liability company or organization or a manager, agent, owner, director,
servant, officer or employee thereof. "Person" does not include any
governmental organization.
Retail Marijuana: Cannabis that is cultivated, manufactured, distributed or sold
by a licensed retail marijuana establishment or retail marijuana social club.
Retail Marijuana Cultivation Facility: An entity licensed to cultivate, prepare
and package retail marijuana and sell retail marijuana to retail marijuana
establishments and retail marijuana social clubs.
Retail Marijuana Establishment: Retail marijuana store, a retail marijuana
cultivation facility, a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility or a retail
marijuana testing facility.
City of Ellsworth – Chapter 61
Recreational Marijuana Prohibition Ordinance
Page 5 of 5
Retail Marijuana Product: Concentrated retail marijuana and retail marijuana
products that are composed of retail marijuana and other ingredients and are
intended for use or consumption, including, but not limited to, edible products,
ointments and tinctures.
Retail Marijuana Products Manufacturing Facility: An entity licensed to
purchase retail marijuana; manufacture, prepare and package retail marijuana
products; and sell retail marijuana and retail marijuana products only to other
retail marijuana products manufacturing facilities, retail marijuana stores and
retail marijuana social clubs.
Retail Marijuana Social Club: An entity licensed to sell retail marijuana and retail
marijuana products to consumers for consumption on the licensed premises.
Retail Marijuana Store: An entity licensed to purchase retail marijuana from a
retail marijuana cultivation facility and to purchase retail marijuana products
from a retail marijuana products manufacturing facility and to sell retail
marijuana and retail marijuana products to consumers.
Retail Marijuana Testing Facility: An entity licensed and certified to analyze and
certify the safety and potency of retail marijuana and retail marijuana products.
\\store1\redirect\planning\mgagnon\My Documents\Planning\recreational marijuana\Prohibition ban.doc


CHAPTER33
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MAINE
A true copy - ~
c-!C__-!- ·3 t- -b ~ If, . I ~( /' -. J1 17 ~- __, (:/'() YlV{ lz
- .f
._ A~t~st: H~di -Noel Grindle
City Clerk
--
'•
tR4.~ ELLSWORTH
.Business, Leisure, Life.
Adopted: October 16, 2006
Amended with revisions through April 2005
Repealed and replaced May 16, 2016
Effective: July 20, 2016
·.
· .
. ·
•.· ...
-,
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
FOR THE
CITY OF ELLSWORTH, MA.INE
ENACTED: MAY 16 , 2016
Date
EFFECTIVE: J ULY 20, 2016
Date
CERTIFIED ~di--'l}ful G1'()rrolC(
1gnature
CERTIFIED BY: -1-kiJ /def ~(IJ/J..
Print Name
CITY CT ERK
Title A.ffix Seal
)0.3(e)
Prepared 1/25/1 6 by DACF/JP
... - ••""-~ .· ·I
.·
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS ·
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT ............................. ................................................... 2
II. PER11IT REQUIRED .......................................................................................................... 2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT ........................................................................................... 2
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE ........................................... ........................... 4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS ................................................................................................................. 4
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS .................................... ................. ... ............................ ... 6
VII. CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW .............................. .. .... ..... ........ .............. ........ .. .......... .... 13
VIII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE ..................................................................... ............ 14
IX. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS ......................... 14
X. APPEALS AND VARIANCES ........................................................................................ 15
XI. ENFORCEMENT AND PENAL TIES ............... .... ...... .... ..... ...... ... ... .. ........................ .... .. 1 7
XII. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY ................................................................................ : 18
XIII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES ................................................................... 18
XIV. DEFINITIONS ........................................................... -:: ....... ....... ...... .. ................................ 18
XV. ABROGATION ................... .............................................................................................. 23
·-.
60.3 (e) Rev. 01/16
ARTICLE I - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the City of Ellsworth, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages to
properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the City of Ellsworth, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the City of Ellsworth, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards in
all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special flood hazards.
The City of Ellsworth has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future flood
losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352, 4401-4407, and Title 38 MRSA, Section
440.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the City of
Ellsworth having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance establishes a
Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development activities in the
designated flood hazard areas of the City of Ellsworth, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zones A, AE, and VE for the City of Ellsworth, Hancock County,
vfaine, identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance
Study - Hancock County, Maine," dated July 20, 2016 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map"
dated July 20, 2016 with panels: 544D, 563D, 564D, 568D, 569D, 588D, 589D, 590D, 591D, 593D,
710D, 726D, 727D, 729D, 731D, 732D, 733D, 734D, 736D, 740D, 741D, 742D, 744D, 751D, 752D,
753D, 754D, 756D, 757D, 758D, 759D, 761D, 762D, 763D, 764D, 766D, 767D, 768D, 769D, 956D, and
957D, derived from the county wide digital Flood Insurance Rate Map entitled "Digital Flood Insurance
Rate Map, Hancock County, Maine," are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
Ordinance.
ARTICLE II - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development (as defined in Article XIV), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I, a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer except as provided in
Article VII. This permit shall be in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the
codes and ordinances of the City of Ellsworth, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERl\1IT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include: ·
\. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor;
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
2
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including. but not limited to
structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and filled, and lot
dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.3. apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical
Datum (NAVD), or to a locally established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zones AE and VE from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Hancock County,
Maine," as described in Article I; or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood elevation data from federal, state, or other technical sources (such
as FEMA's Quick-2 model, FEMA 265), including information obtained pursuant to
Article VLK. and IX.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic map
prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered professional engineer, if the
floodplain boundary has a significant correlation to the elevation contour line(s); or, in
the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary and a line
perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground through the site of the
proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement; and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
3
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments for which
elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or architect,
that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are accurate
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
1. a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81 ~65, as amended), to verify that the flood proofing
methods for any non-residential structures will meet the floodproofing criteria of .Article III.H.4.;
Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
2. a V-Zone Certificate to verify that the construction in coastal high hazard areas, Zone VE, will
meet the criteria of . .\rticle VI.P.; and other applicable standards in P.Jticle VI;
3. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in foundation
walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
4. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M.;
5. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N.;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development standard in
Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV -APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the City Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the
same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the applicant
within 10 days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall constitute a
violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert shall not be
hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either consented to such
hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant who is dissatisfied
with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
fhe Code Enforcement Officer shall:
4
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements of
Article VI (Development Standards) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Pennit applications:
1. the base flood and floodway data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Hancock County,
Maine," as described in Article I.;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and floodway data are not provided, the
Code Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information obtained
pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article VLK.; and Article IX.D., in order to administer Article VI
of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined in
Article III.H. l .b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program.
c. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the maps
described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all necessary permits
have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government agencies from which prior
approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course and submit
copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements ofthis Ordinance, approve the issuance of one of the
following Flood Hazard Development Permits, based on the type of development:
1. A two-part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall authorize the
applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only above the base flood
level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement Officer with a Elevation
Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer or
architect based on the Part I permit construction, "as built", for verifying compliance with the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P. Following review of the
Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours of receipt of the application,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood Hazard Development Permit. Part
II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Pennit for Floodproofing of Non-Residential Structures that are
new construction or substantially improved non-residential structures that are not being elevated
5
but that meet the floodproofing standards of Article VI.G. l .a., b., and c. The application for this
permit shall include a Floodproofing Certificate signed by a registered professional engineer or
architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that is not new
construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or
additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the structure. Minor development
also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J., mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or
water supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges,
dams, towers, fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
For development that requires review and approval as a Conditional Use, as provided for in this
Ordina.11ce, the Flood Hazard Development Permit Application shall be acted upon by the Planning Board
as required in Article VII.
G. Maintain, as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit Applications,
corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the Board of Appeals on
variances granted under the provisions of Article X of this Ordinance, and copies of Elevation
Certificates, Floodproofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance and certifications of design
standards required under the provisions of Articles III, VI, and VIII of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT ST AND ARDS
All developments in areas of spedal flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers and
docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage; and
4. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components du.ring flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
6
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems· All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed and
located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharges from the
system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated portions of
a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no reduction occurs in the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure located
within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.l.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D.
3. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
G. Non Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential structure
·located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:
a. be floodproofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below that
elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the
application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required by Article III.K. and shall
include a record of the elevation above mean sea level to which the structure is floodproofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot above the
base flood eievation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H. l.b.; Article V.B.; or
Article IX.D., or
7
a. together with anendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the floodproofing standards of
Article VI.G. l.
3. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at
least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation walls, with
hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any of which support the
manufactured home so that no \veight is supported by its wheels and axles; arid,
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four comers of the manufactured home,
plus two additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50
feet long require one additional tie per side); or by,
(2) frame ties at each comer of the home, plus five additional ties along each side at
intermediate points (manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require four additional
ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.l.c.(1) & (2) shall be
capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds. ·.
2. Zone A shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H. l. b., such that the
lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the
base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H. l .b.; Article
V.B; or Article IX.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H. l .c.
3. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of Article VI.P.
I. Recreational Vehicles - Recreational Vehicles located within:
1. Zones A and AE shall either:
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
8
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use
if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick discmmect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in Article VI.H.l.
2. Zone VE shall meet the requirements of either Article VI.I.1.a. and b., or Article VI.P.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIV, located within Zones A and
AE, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article VLF. & G. above, if all other
requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met. Accessory Structures shall:
1. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation; ·
2. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two different walls of the
accessory structure;
3. be located outside the floodway;
4. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of flooding than is the
primary structure; and,
5. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroaclunents, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway which
is designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map unless a technical evaluation
certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments
will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other development
shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in .,.\rticle VI.K.3. unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the .
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing
development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any
point within the community; and,
9
b: is consistent with the technical criteria contained in FEMA's guidelines and standards for
flood risk analysis and mapping.
3. In Zones AE and A riverine areas, for which no regulatory floodway is designated, the regulatory
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the adjacent land
areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured from the normal high
water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of any
structure in Zones A and AE that meets the development standards of Article VI, including the
elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or Hand is elevated on posts, columns, piers,
piles, "stilts," or crawl spaces may be enclosed below the base flood elevation requirements provided
all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not ·"basements" as defined in Article XIV;
2. Enclosed areas shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no higher than
one foot above the lowest grade; and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically without any
external influence or control such as human intervention, including the use of electrical
and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are usable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones A, AE, and VE shall
be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated to at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
10
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structural design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements of
this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.; and
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation, collapse
and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all
structural components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
N. Containment Walls - New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall located
within:
1. Zones A, AE, and VE shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the
effects of buoyancy; and,
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions
of this section. Such certification shall be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard
Development Permit, as required by Article III.K.
0. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves, piers, and
docks are permitted in Zones A, AE, and VE, in and over water and seaward of the mean high tide if
the following requirements are met: ·
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal regulations;
and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall develop or
review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction.
P. Coastal Floodplains -
1. All new construction located within Zones AE and VE shall be located landward of the reach of
mean high tide except as provided in Article VI.P.6.
2. New construction or substantial improvement of any structure located within Zone VE shall:
a. be elevated on posts or columns such that:
( 1) the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the
pilings or columns) is elevated to one foot above the base flood elevation;
11
(2) the pile or column foundation and the elevated portion of the structure attached thereto
is anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components; and,
(3) water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading
values used shall be those required by applicable state and local building standards.
b. have the space below the lowest floor:
(1) free of obstructions; or,
(2) constructed with open wood lattice-work, or insect screening intended to collapse under
wind and water without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting piles or columns; or,
(3) constructed to enclose less than 300 square feet of area with non-supporting breakaway
walls that have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 or more than 20
pounds per square foot.
c. require a registered professional engineer or architect to:
(1) develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,
which must meet or exceed the technical criteria contained in the Coastal Construction
Manual, (FEMA-55); and,
(2) certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the criteria of Article VI.P.2.
3. The use of fill for structural support in Zone VE is prohibited.
4. Human alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE is prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that such
alterations will not increase potential flood damage.
5. The area below the lowest floor shall be used solely for parking vehicles, building access, and
storage.
6. Conditional Use - Lobster sheds and fishing sheds may be located seaward of mean high tide and
shall be exempt from the elevation requirement in Article VI.G. only if permitted as a Conditional
Use following review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided in Article VII, and if all the
following requirements and those of Article VI.A., VLK., and VI.L. are met:
a. The conditional use shall be limited to low value structures such as metal or wood sheds 200
square feet or less and shall not exceed more than one story.
12
b. The structure shall be securely anchored to the wharf or pier to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building
components.
c. The structure will not adversely increase wave or debris impact forces affecting nearby buildings.
d. The structure shall have unfinished interiors and shall not be used for human habitation.
e. Any mechanical, utility equipment and fuel storage tanks must be anchored and either elevated or
floodproofed to one foot above the base flood elevation.
f. All electrical outlets shall be ground fault interrupt type. The electrical service disconnect shall
be located on shore above the base flood eievation and when possible outside the Special Flood
Hazard Area.
ARTICLE VII - CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW
The Planning Board shall hear and decide upon applications for conditional uses provided for in this
Ordinance. The Planning Board shall hear and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove all
applications for conditional uses. An applicant informed by the Code Enforcement Officer that a
Conditional Use Permit is required shall file an application for the permit with the Planning Board.
A. Review Procedure for a Conditional Use Flood Hazard Development Permit
1. The Flood Hazard Development Permit Application with additional information attached
addressing how each of the conditional use criteria specified in the Ordinance will be satisfied,
may serve as the permit application for the Conditional Use Permit.
2. Before deciding any application, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the
application within thirty days of their receipt of the application.
3. If the Planning Board finds that the application satisfies all relevant requirements of the
ordinance, the Planning Board must approve the application or approve with conditions within 45
days of the date of the public hearing.
4. A Conditional Use Permit issued under the provisions ofthis Ordinance shall expire if the work
or change involved is not commenced within 180 days of the issuance of the permit by the
Planning Board.
5. The applicant shall be notified by the Planning Board in writing over the signature of the
Chairman of the Planning Board that flood insurance is not available for structures located
entirely over water or seaward of mean high tide.
B. Expansion of Conditional Uses
13
1. No existing building or use of premises may be expanded or enlarged without a permit issued
under this section if that building or use was established or constructed under a previously issued
Conditional Use Permit or if it is a building or use which would require a Conditional Use Permit
if being newly-established or constructed under this Ordinance.
ARTICLE VIII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be ~ccupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer: .
1. an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional -engineer,
or architect, for compliance with Article VI, paragraphs F, G, H, or P and,
2. for structures in Zone VE, certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
design and methods of construction used are in compliance with Article VI.P.2.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within 10 working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the required certificate(s) and the applicant's written notification; and,
2. upon determination that the development conforms to the provisions of this ordinance, shall issue
a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE IX - REVIEW OF SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under other federal law, state law, local ordinances or regulations, and all projects on 5 or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into two or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided in order to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain, floodway
data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency.
14
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval requiring that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard Area, are
to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement will be included
in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement, or document transferring or expressing an intent to
transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not limited to a time-share interest. The
condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality may enforce any violation of the construction
requirement and that fact shall also be included in the deed or any other document previously
described. The construction requirement shall also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be
signed by the Planning Board or local reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE X - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the City of Ellsworth may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause; and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, public expense, or
create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances; and,
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or local laws
or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which in this
sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the
general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and,
15
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a detem1ination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may impose such conditions
to a variance as is deemed necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development for
the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article X and Article VLK. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during
the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Va..ria..11ces may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through D. above; and,
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. Any applicant who meets the criteria of Article X, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified by the
Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in greatly
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per $100 of insurance
coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in the use
of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and defend the
municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's decision to use
land located in a floodplain and that the applicant individually releases the municipality from any
claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are related to the use of land located
in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrntive and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved party
within thirty days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning
Board.
16
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the
decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five days of its
receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five days after the close of the
hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the Code
Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes any
conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five
days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE XI-ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA § 4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-A MRSA § 4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer may, upon identifying a violation, submit
a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance Administration requesting a flood
insurance denial. The valid declaration shall consist of;
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient to
confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local law,
regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and a citation
to that authority;
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the National
Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
17
ARTICLE XII - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall not
invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XIII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit, or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE XIV - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law, and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used in
the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; 11 shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory Structure - a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the principal
structure.
Adjacent Grade - the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed
walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - land in the floodplain having a one percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study cited in Article I ofthis
Ordinance.
Base Flood - a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year,
commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - area of a building that includes a floor that is subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall - a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through
its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the
elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - a document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer- a person certified under Title 30-A MRSA, Section 4451 (including
~xceptions in Section 4451, paragraph 1) and employed by a municipality to enforce all applicable
omprehensive planning and land use laws.
18
I
Conditional Use - a use that, because of its potential impact on surrounding areas and structures, is
permitted only upon review and approval by the Planning Board pursuant to Article VII.
Containment Wall - wall used to convey or direct storm water or sanitary water from the initial source to
the final destination.
Development - a marunade change to improved or unimproved real estate. This includes, but is not
limited to, buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition, or extraction of materials.
Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - see Flood Insurance Rate Map
Elevated Building - a non-basement building that is:
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones A or AE, so that the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of
a building in Zone VE, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated
floor, elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns, post, piers, or"stilts;" and
b. adequately anchored to not impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to one
foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones A or AE, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L. In the case of Zone VE, Elevated Building also includes a
building otherwise meeting the definition of elevated building, even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Article VI.P.2.b.(3).
Elevation Certificate - an official fom1 (FEMA Form 81-31, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Pro gram; and,
b. is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
1. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a
severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or
19
by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph
a.1. of this definition.
Flood Elevation Study - an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance
Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
Flood Insurance Study - see Flood Elevation Study.
Floodplain or Floodprone Area - land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
flooding).
Floodplain Management - means the operation of a..11 overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing' flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations - zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes,
health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance, and
erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
"'Jrevention and reduction.
Flood proofing - any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to
structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and
sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - the lines marking the limits of flood ways on federal, state, and local
floodplain maps.
Free board - a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain
management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave action, bridge
openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, which could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and flood way conditions.
Functionally Dependent Use - a use that cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or
carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are
necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department
oflnterior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the National Register;
20
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Loca!!y Established Datum - for purposes of this ordi..11ance, a.."1. elevation established for a specific site to
which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not referenced to the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NA VD) or any other
established datum and is used in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be
practically used.
Lowest Floor - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood
resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements described in Article
VI.L. of this Ordinance.
Manufactured Home - a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent
chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes park trailers,
travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level-when related to the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum, to which base flood
elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value
of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided for in Article VI.J.,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply
facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - the national vertical datum, a standard established in
1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD is based upon mean sea
level in 1929 and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL )".
21
. New Construction - structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective
date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)- means the national datum whose standard was established in
1988, which is the new vertical datum used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) for all new
Flood Insurance Rate Maps. NAVD is based upon vertical datum used by other North American countries
such as Canada and Mexico and was established to replace NGVD because of constant movement of the
earths crust, glacial rebound, and subsidence and the increasing use of satellite technology.
100-year flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - a vehicle that is:
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway -
a. the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot, and
b. when not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be the
channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width
of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
Riverine - relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, ,brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it
:nclude the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
Jwelling units or not pa.rt of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, or
22
modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost ofrestoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. ·
Substantial Improvement - means any rec.onstructiori., rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the tenns of a floodplain management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain
management regulations.
ARTICLE XV-ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
60.3 (e) Rev. 01/16
Prepared by DACF/JP
23