1 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
Town of Fairfield
Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard
Ordinance
The effective adoptive date of this Ordinance is the 9th day of October, 2002.
Amended:
May 9, 2018
A True Copy
Attest:__________________________
Town Clerk
Town Seal
2 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
Severability
Should any portion of this ordinance be found invalid for any reason by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then all portions not found invalid shall remain unaffected and continue in full force and
effect.
Section 1. Authority
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Title 30-A, Section 3752- Section 3756 of the Maine Revised
Statutes Annotated.
Section 2. Short Title
This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance of the
Town of Fairfield".
Section 3. Purpose
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide adequate controls to ensure that automobile graveyards,
automobile recycling businesses and junkyards do not have a negative impact on the Town's health,
safety, general welfare and property values.
Section 4. Applicability
This ordinance shall apply to all automobile graveyards, automobile recycling businesses and junkyards
as defined in Title 30-A M.R.S.A. Section 3752 and as further defined in Appendix A of this ordinance,
which is incorporated herein by reference, whether located on private or commercial property. This
ordinance shall not apply to the temporary storage, as defined in Appendix A.
Section 5. Permits Required
Unless otherwise provided by the Council, the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required to
administer this ordinance. As provided for in this section, the Town Council shall issue all permits
according to the requirements set forth below.
5.1 A person or entity may not establish, operate or maintain an automobile graveyard, automobile
recycling business or junkyard without first obtaining a nontransferable permit from the Town
Council.
Including:
1. Any automobile graveyard, recycling business location or junkyard location that was
created after the date of enactment of this ordinance.
2. Any proposed expansion to an existing site which is beyond the limit shown on the
original site plan approved at the time the graveyard, recycling business or junkyard was
first permitted prior to the date of enactment of this ordinance.
3. Any graveyard, recycling business or junkyard that has been in existence but never
permitted.
5.2 All permits, whether new or renewals shall be issued annually. Permits shall become effective
October 1st and expire September 30th of each year. An annual fee of $100 will be charged for
new or renewal permits. New permits issued during the year shall expire on September 30th
and must be renewed for the next year.
3 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
5.3 Prior to approval of any permit, new or renewal, the Code Enforcement Officer shall inspect the
site to ensure compliance with this ordinance and State automobile graveyards, automobile
recycling businesses and junkyard laws.
5.4 Before granting a permit, the Town shall schedule a Public Hearing. A notice of said Hearing
shall be sent to the Town Council and mailed to all abutting property owners, posted at the
Town Office and one other public place and published in the local newspaper at least 7 and not
more than 14 days before said Hearing. The cost of posting and publishing said notice shall be
paid by the applicant. The Town Council shall give written or electronic notice of the application
to establish a new automobile graveyard or automobile recycling business to the automobile
dealer licensing section of the Department of the Secretary of State, Bureau of Motor Vehicles
by mailing a copy of the application at least 7 and not more than 30 days before the hearing.
5.5 Any permit granted with restrictions or conditions of approval shall clearly state those
conditions or restrictions on or attached to the permit.
5.6 The denial of any permit shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for the denial.
Section 6. Right, Title, and Interest
No permit will be issued for an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business or junkyard unless
there is proof of ownership, a sale/lease agreement, or an authorization letter that the land (site) may
be used for that particular type of operation.
6.1 All proof of ownership (copy of deed), lease agreement, or letter of agreement shall be on file
at the Town Office at all times. All lease agreements and letters of agreements must show the
number of years that the site may be used for that particular operation and must be notarized.
6.2 A person or entity may file an application for a permit on a site that already has a permit if the
permit holder has a sales agreement with the person or entity seeking the permit. The permit
may be granted but will only become valid when the transaction has been completed.
Section 7. Submission Requirements
Applicants for permit renewals shall be submitted by September 1st of each year. If found to be
incomplete; the Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately notify the permit holder that the required
information must be submitted prior to the Public Hearing date. If there are no changes to the
ownership, size or nature of the existing automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business or
junkyard facility, an applicant for a renewal permit does not need to submit the information as further
described in this section, except as otherwise specified by the Town Council.
7.1 For new permit applicants, or for existing facilities which are proposed to be changed or
expanded beyond the original permitted area, a completed application must be submitted at
least 30 days prior to the required Public Hearing to provide the public an opportunity for
review.
4 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
All such applications shall contain the following information:
7.2 The property owner's name and address and the name and address of the person or entity that
will operate the site.
7.3 A site plan drawn to scale not to exceed 1" = 100', on which is shown:
a. The boundary lines of the property
b. Soils information from Somerset County Soil Conservation Service web site:
http://somersetswcd.org/
c. The location of any and all gravel aquifer recharge area(s) as mapped by the Maine
Geological Survey, or a licensed geologist web site:
http://www.maine.gov/dacf/mgs/index.shtml
d. The location of all wells within three hundred (300) ft. of where cars or junk will be
placed
e. The location of any public building, schools, churches, playgrounds or public parks,
public bathing beach within five hundred (500) feet of the area where cars or junk will
be placed
f. The location of any water bodies on the property or within two hundred (200) feet of
the property lines
g. The boundaries of the 100-year flood plain, if applicable
h. The location and name or route number of all roads within one thousand (1000) feet of
the site
i. Yard access roads
j. Designated areas for the storage of vehicles, vehicle parts and any and all other items
associated with this facility.
This site plan does not need to be an engineered drawing.
7.4 A written plan must be submitted describing how all fluids/special wastes will be stored and
eventually disposed of. Estimates of quantities and schedules for removal and disposal must be
included along with agreements with haulers. Storage and disposal of batteries and tires must
also be addressed in this written plan to show compliance with State and Federal solid waste
and hazardous waste regulations.
7.5 Copies of all permits and licenses held by the operator at this facility.
7.6 No permit will be issued for an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business or
junkyard to a person or entity seeking a new site or buying an existing site until all revoked
permits and all violation and enforcement actions have been corrected. This would include not
only local violations, but also any violations of State/Federal laws regardless of where
committed.
7.7 Any person or entity submitting false or misleading information on an automobile graveyard,
automobile recycling business or junkyard site permit application will be subject to revocation
of the permit after a public hearing or a penalty of one thousand ($1000) dollars or both if the
5 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
Town Council finds that the misleading or false information was critical to granting of the
permit.
7.8 Highways; Interstate System and Primary System. A permit may not be granted for an
automobile graveyard within 1,000 feet of the right-of-way of any highway incorporated in both
the Interstate System and Primary System or within 600 feet of the right-of way of any other
highway, except for:
A. Those automobile graveyards or junkyards that are kept entirely screened from ordinary
view from the highway at all times by natural objects, plantings or fences. Screening required
by this paragraph must be:
(1) At a height, density and depth sufficient to accomplish complete screening from ordinary
view;
(2) Well constructed and properly maintained at a minimum height of 6 feet;
(3) Placed outside of the highway right-of-way; and
(4) Acceptable to the Town Council; and
B. Those automobile graveyards or junkyards located within areas that have been zoned for
industrial use and located more than 600 feet but less than 1,000 feet from the right-of-way of
any highway incorporated in both the Interstate System and Primary System.
Section 8. Operating Standards
All automobile graveyards and junkyards permitted pursuant to State Law, Title 30 A, Section 3753 are
required to comply with the following standards:
8.1 All fluids, including, but not limited to, engine lubricant, transmission fluid, brake fluid, power
steering fluid, hydraulic fluid, engine coolant, gasoline, diesel fuel and oil, must be properly
handled in such a manner that they do not leak, flow or discharge into or onto the ground or
into a body of water.
8.2 A vehicle containing fluids may not be stored or dismantled:
(1) Within 100 feet of any body of water or freshwater wetland, as defined by Title 38, Section
436-A, Subsection5;
(2) Within the 100-year floodplain; or
(3) Over a mapped sand and gravel aquifer.
8.3 Junk, scrap metal, vehicles or other solid wastes may not be placed or deposited, directly or
indirectly, into the inland waters of the State or on the ice of inland waters or on the banks of
inland waters in such a manner that they may fall or be washed into these waters.
8.4 Junkyard and automobile graveyard owners must demonstrate at the time of licensing that the
facility or facilities for which they seek permits are, or are part of, a viable business entity and
the facility or facilities are actively engaged in the business of salvaging, recycling, dismantling,
processing, repairing or rebuilding junk or vehicles for the purpose of sale or trade.
8.5 To reduce noise created by the commercial business that can be heard outside the premises, all
dismantling of motor vehicles shall take place after 7:00 a.m. and before 6:00 p.m. Mondays
through Saturdays. No dismantling of motor vehicles shall take place on Sundays.
6 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
8.6 Town Council Members shall designate the Code Enforcement Officer to carry out the
provisions of this ordinance to determine compliance with any laws, ordinances, licenses or
permit approvals to:
A. Enter any automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business, or junkyard property and
inspect all outside areas, equipment and activities at reasonable hours for compliance with this
ordinance.
B. Enter any building on the property with the consent of the owner, occupant or agent to
inspect the activities within any building for compliance with this ordinance.
8.7 No vehicles or junk shall be stored within three hundred (300) feet from the property line of
any school, church, public playground, public park or cemetery or within ordinary view from a
public building.
8.8 No vehicles or junk shall be dismantled or stored within three hundred (300) feet of a well that
serves as a public or private water supply unless such well serves the business or the owner or
owners abutting residence. Automobile graveyards, junkyards and automobile recycling
businesses operating under the terms of permits issued prior to the effective date of this
subsection and handling junk, scrap metal, vehicles or other solid waste within 300 feet of wells
that serve as public or private water supplies may continue to operate in those locations under
the terms of those permits. The Town Council may renew a permit allowing the continued
handling of junk, scrap metal, vehicles or other solid waste within 300 feet of a well serving as a
public or private water supply as long as no further encroachment toward the well occurs. The
Town Council may not renew a permit if there is substantial, credible evidence that the
permitted activities have caused contaminations of the well.
8.9 A log must be maintained of all motor vehicles handled that includes the date each vehicle was
acquired, a copy of the vehicle’s title or bill of sale and the date or dates upon which all fluids,
refrigerant, batteries and mercury switches were removed.
8.10 All fluids, refrigerant, batteries and mercury switches must be removed from motor vehicles
that lack engines or parts that render the vehicles incapable of being driven under their own
motor power, appliances and other items within 180 days of acquisition. Fluids required to be
removed under this paragraph must be removed to the greatest extent practicable. Storage,
recycling or disposal of all fluids, refrigerant, batteries and mercury switches must comply with
all applicable Federal and State laws, rules and regulations.
Section 9. Permit Denials, Revocations Clean Up
The Town Council may issue a permit to an automobile graveyard, automobile recycling
business, or junkyard if that automobile graveyard, automobile recycling businesses or junkyard
meets the operating standards set forth in section 8 of this ordinance and the Town Council
may attach conditions of approval to all permits for automobile graveyards, automobile
recycling businesses or junkyards.
7 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
Any automobile graveyard, automobile recycling or junkyard businesses permit application which is not
approved at the time of review, has three (3) months from the expiration date to become relicensed.
Any permit issued after three (3) months from the expiration date of the previous permit shall comply
with all requirements for new site approvals. In other words, the site will lose its grandfathered status
and be considered as a new permit site. This will also apply to any permits revoked during the year.
The Code Enforcement Officer may grant one extension of not more than three (3) months of the time
for correction of the violation if, based upon all relevant circumstances, that the person responsible for
the violation cannot reasonably be expected to make the correction with the time allowed due to
seasonal weather conditions, personal physical illness or financial hardship.
9.1 Any existing automobile graveyard, automobile recycling business/junkyard not issued a permit
because of a lack of any application or an incomplete application must clean up the site within
three (3) months of the date of expiration of the last permit issued.
9.2 In addition to its other enforcement options, the Town may revoke any permit when, after
notice and hearing, it is shown that the operator or owner is not in compliance with the
conditions of the permit or the requirements of this ordinance.
9.3 Any automobile graveyard, automobile recycling businesses/junkyard that has either been
denied a license or has had a license revoked shall have three (3) months to clean up the site of
said automobile graveyard/junkyard. If applicable, the property owner if different from the
applicant will be held responsible for clean-up.
Section 10. Enforcement and Penalties
The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall enforce this ordinance. If the CEO finds a violation of this
ordinance, the CEO shall notify in writing the person responsible for it, specifying the nature of the
violation, ordering whatever action may be necessary to correct it and giving the person not more than
30 calendar days to make the correction. A copy of the notice shall be given to the municipal officers.
If the violation is not corrected as ordered by the CEO, the CEO will notify the Town Council and they
may initiate any and all actions and proceedings, legal or equitable that may be necessary or
appropriate to enforce this ordinance. The CEO may grant one extension of not more than three (3)
months for correction of the violation. If CEO determines, based upon all relevant circumstances, that
the person responsible for the violation cannot reasonably be expected to make the correction with
the time allowed due to seasonal weather conditions, personal physical illness, or financial hardship.
Any person who violates this ordinance shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-1 MRSA 4452
including, without limitation, a penalty of $100 to $2500 per day for a specific violation, injunctive
relief and reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs.
Section 11. Appeals
Any and all appeals under this ordinance may be taken within 30 days of the decision to the Somerset
County Superior Court in accordance with the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B.
8 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
Section 12. Severability and Conflict
In the event that any provision of this ordinance is ruled to be invalid, the remaining provisions shall
continue in full force and effect. In the event that any provision of this ordinance is found to be less
restrictive than State law, the requirements of State law shall govern.
Section 13. Conflict and Other Laws
Whenever a provision of this ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this
ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the provision imposing the greater restriction
shall control. The newest version of this ordinance shall be the one that is enforced.
Section 14. Effective Date
This ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by Fairfield Town Council and may be amended by the
Town Council in accordance with Town requirements for amending ordinances.
____________________________________________________________________________________
APPENDIX A – Definitions
Automobile Graveyard: "Automobile graveyard" as used in this ordinance shall mean a yard, field or
other area used as a place of storage, other than temporary storage, to store three (3) or more
unregistered or uninspected motor vehicles, as defined in Title 29-A M.R.S.A. section 101 subsection
(42), or parts of the vehicles. Automobile graveyard includes an area used for automobile dismantling,
salvage and recycling operations. For purposes of this ordinance, the term "unregistered or
uninspected motor vehicle" shall mean not ready for use or presently useable as a motor vehicle, as
opposed to incapable of being registered or inspected.
Junkyard: "Junkyard" as used in this chapter shall mean a yard, field, or other outside area used
to store, dismantle or otherwise handle:
a. Discarded worn out or junked plumbing, heating supplies, electronic or industrial equipment,
household appliances and furniture;
b. Discarded, scrap and junked lumber; and
c. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, waste and all
scrap iron, steel and other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material;
d. Garbage dumps, waste dumps and sanitary fills
Automobile Recycling Business: "Automobile recycling business" means the business premises of a
dealer or a recycler licensed under Title 29-A, sections 851 to 1112 who purchases or acquires salvage
vehicles for the purpose of reselling the vehicles or component parts of the vehicles or rebuilding or
repairing salvage vehicles for the purpose of resale or for selling basic materials in the salvage vehicles,
provided that 80% of the business premises specified in the site plan in section 3755-A, subsection 1,
paragraph C is used for automobile recycling operations.
Temporary Storage: The term "temporary storage" as used in this ordinance shall mean storage of
vehicles by an establishment or place of business that is primarily engaged in business as an insurance
salvage pool. In order for a vehicle’s storage to be considered temporary under this subparagraph, the
vehicle must be removed from the site within 180 days of receipt of title by the business.
9 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
____________________________________________________________________________________
APPENDIX B
General
Screening:
May be accomplished by natural or man-made objects, plantings or properly constructed fences, any
of which must completely screen the items from ordinary view from any portion of any public way or
abutting property throughout the entire calendar year. All screening must be located outside of the
public way right-of-way limits.
Natural or man-made objects may be interpreted to be:
1. Hill, gullies, or embankments. Such man-made objects must be constructed to blend with
the landscape with loaming and seeding or other treatment as may be necessary to establish a
natural appearance
2. Buildings or other installations
3. Combinations of above
Plantings:
Trees, shrubs, or other vegetation of sufficient height, density and depth of planting or growth to
completely screen the junkyard from ordinary view from any highway within the prescribed distance
throughout the entire calendar year may be used for screening.
Fences:
Fences shall be so located and of sufficient height to completely screen the junkyard from ordinary
view from any highway within the prescribed distances. It must be emphasized that height must be
sufficient to accomplish the complete screening from ordinary view. All fences shall be well
constructed and maintained. Only sound undamaged material, uniform in appearance, and erected in a
workmanlike manner will be acceptable.
Suggested Materials:
Post:
Wood-sound, round or square. Preservative treatment is suggested. 4"X4" (square) or 4” minimum
diameter (round).
Metal- Steel pipe or structural section steel either galvanized or base coated painted with rust
inhibitive paint.
All posts to extend a minimum of 40 inches below ground level and to be set plumb.
Recommended post spacing 8' by 12'. End and corner posts to be diagonal braced to nearest adjacent
post.
10 | P a g e Town of Fairfield - Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance
Stringers:
Minimum 2x4-Spruce or Fir, sound and free of excessive or weakening knots, and relatively free from
warp or wain, preferably treated with a preservative stain/paint after cutting to length. Solidly spiked
wood posts or bolted to metal posts. Three stringers for 6’ to 8’ foot height of fence, 4 stringers for 10’
to 12’ foot height. Over 12 foot in height would require a special design.
Steel pipe or structural section stringers may be used. There should be either galvanized or base coat
paint with a rust inhibitive paint.
Facing Materials:
Facing materials may be wood, composite, sheet metal or plastic. Although new material will not be a
requirement, bent, damaged, poor quality, scrap, discarded, mixed or conglomerate materials will not
be acceptable.
Suggested materials would be sound, new or used boards; exterior grade hardboard; corrugated steel,
aluminum, or plastic.
It is suggested that all fasters be galvanized nails, spikes, bolts, clamps, etc., and that all wood materials
be treated with a preservative stain/paint ( of uniform color ) to preserve and prolong the life of the
fence and to present a uniformity of appearance.
Since wind damage is a problem with any fence, bracing may be required and certainly would be
essential on any fence over 8 feet in height. In board fence construction, relief of wind pressure may be
achieved by placing the boarding alternatively on outside and inside of stringers with the spacing to be
such that the edges overlap enough to present a solid appearance and effectively screen the junkyard
from ordinary view.
TOWN OF FAIRFIELD
CEMETERY ORDINANCE
INTRODUCTION
For the mutual protection of all lot purchasers (a person having burial rights to a lot purchased), to
insure respect for the deceased and properties of others, and for the Cemeteries as a whole, the
following rules and regulations have been adopted by the Town of Fairfield as the rules and
regulations of all Town maintained Cemeteries and all lot purchasers and visitors within the
Cemetery. All lots sold shall be subject to these rules and regulations and any future rules and
regulations, amendments or alteration as may be adopted by the Town of Fairfield.
Fairfield cemeteries are operated by the Fairfield Public Works Department. The Public Works
Director or designee shall have the authority to enforce all rules and regulations as set forth in this
ordinance. For the purpose of this ordinance, Fairfield Public Works shall be referred to as Cemetery
Management.
Rules and Regulations
1) All Cemeteries operated by the Town of Fairfield shall be open from dawn to dusk from
May 1st to October 31st. Anyone found in the Cemeteries between dawn and dusk
without permission of the Cemetery Management will be considered a trespasser.
Trespassers shall be liable to prosecution. During the winter and early spring months,
Cemeteries will be closed off because of weather elements causing poor road conditions.
2) Children under the age of thirteen are not allowed in cemeteries unless accompanied by
an adult. Playing on lots and lawns as well as climbing on memorials or monuments is
prohibited. We welcome your walking and enjoying the grounds of the cemetery.
3) Out of respect to the deceased and lot purchasers, dogs are not allowed in Cemeteries
unless they are dogs assisting the handicapped.
4) No firearms allowed except at military funerals or by permission of the Cemetery
Management.
5) The speed limit within the Cemetery is fifteen (15) miles per hour. Fast driving will not
be permitted. Vehicles must not turn or back up on roads, but must be driven around
the nearest circuit. Vehicles must not pass a funeral procession or a lot where services
are being held.
6) Visitors must not park on the grass, pick flowers, or injure trees or shrubs and must, in
all cases, respect the properties of the Cemetery.
7) Drivers and chauffeurs must remain by their vehicles and no loud conversation will be
allowed during funeral services. Undertakers will be held responsible for the enforcement
of this rule and for any improper conduct on the part of the drivers or chauffeurs while
in the Cemetery.
8) Cemetery Management will not be held responsible for anything left on lots including,
but not limited to, floral pieces, potted plants or urns and their contents. Items left on
lots must be removed by October 1st or they will be removed and discarded. Cemetery
Management reserves the right to remove any unsightly flowers, wreaths, or other items
left on the graves at any time.
9) Solicitation in the Cemetery is prohibited.
10) Any person disturbing the peace by noise, fast driving, or any improper conduct, or who
shall violate any of the rules will be compelled to leave the grounds and will be reported
to the proper authorities.
11) The Town of Fairfield disclaims all responsibility for any and all damages or loss from
causes, beyond its reasonable control and especially from damage caused by the
elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischief
makers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasion, insurrections, riots, or order of any
military or civil authority, whether the damage be direct or collateral.
Burial Lots
1) Persons desiring to purchase a burial lot should apply to the Cemetery Office, where a
competent person will accompany the purchaser into the Cemetery where lots may be
seen and a suitable selection made.
2) Persons desiring to place a monument on a lot must receive permission from Cemetery
Management prior to the monument being placed. Cemetery Management is not liable
for loss of grave space due to the placement of the monument, even though the
monument was placed on the lot with the Cemetery Management’s permission.
3) No conveyance or transfer of any lot, or interest therein shall be valid unless it shall have
been approved in writing by the Town of Fairfield through its agents and has been
recorded in its books. Burial lots shall be passed equally to blood descendants and
legally adopted children of the original purchaser next in line unless designated by will.
Burial rights may not be denied to blood descendants and legally adopted children of the
original purchaser unless specifically denied by said purchaser.
4) Cemetery lots may not be sold by the purchaser to anyone other than the Town of
Fairfield. The sale price of the lot shall be the original purchase price paid for said lot.
Interments
1) Interments shall not be made until the Cemetery Management has received the proper
permits as may be required by law. The Town of Fairfield will not be responsible for the
procurement of burial permits required by law.
2) No interment will be made until the grave space which is to be used has been paid in
full. Also, the fee for the interment must be paid prior to burial unless a local funeral
director is willing to accept financial responsibility for it. Any outstanding charges on the
lot must be paid prior to interment.
3) Orders for interment should be given at least 48 hours before the time of interment. It
is important that the purchaser or representative of a lot give personal attention to the
location of the graves. An authorization for interment needs to be signed and given to
Cemetery Management prior to interment. Unless prior notice is given to the Cemetery
Management, it shall be understood that the licensed funeral director is duly authorized
to make funeral arrangements as the agent of the family and/or the person having legal
custody of the remains of the deceased and also the purchaser of the lot or interment
space.
4) Funerals on arrival at the Cemetery shall be under the charge of the Cemetery
Management or person appointed.
5) The cost of interment and disinterment can be obtained upon application to Cemetery
Management. An overtime charge will be made for all burials that cannot be completed
within regular hours.
6) To prevent settling of graves, concrete or steel vaults or cement liners are required for
outside containers. Permanent containers are required to bury remains.
7) Should a burial be incorrectly sited, the Town of Fairfield reserves the right to correct
this error by reburial.
8) Disinterment will not be made without signed authorization of next of kin and all proper
permits required by law. All charges for disinterment must be prepaid in full. The utmost
care will be made in making disinterment or removals. However, Cemetery Management
and its personnel shall assume no liability if any casket, burial case or urn is damaged.
9) Winter burials will be made up to such time as excessive snow, frost or cemetery road
conditions might prevent such burials. The Town of Fairfield reserves the right to make
that decision.
Memorials
The purchaser (meaning a person having burial rights to a lot purchased) may wish to discuss
memorial regulations with the Cemetery Management before selecting a memorial.
1) Curbing, corner posts, above grade, platforms, steps, buttresses, settees, or vases,
except flower holders, will no longer be allowed or replaced from the date of this
ordinance.
2) Designs, locations and materials for all monuments and markers or other structures
must be submitted to the Cemetery Management for approval. This should be done
before contracts are signed or orders given. The Town of Fairfield shall reserve the right
to reject any plan or design for any memorial which by reason of size, design,
inscription, finish or quality of stone is, in the opinion of the Town of Fairfield,
unsuitable.
3) A concrete foundation is required for any above grade memorial. Arrangements for
foundation are to be made by the lot purchaser with a memorial company. No above
grade monument (memorial) shall be erected until the lot is paid in full.
4) Should any monument become unsightly, dilapidated or a menace to visitors or the
Cemetery personnel, the Cemetery Management shall have the right to correct the
condition or remove the same after the proper notification is made. If the purchaser or
next of kin cannot be located, the Cemetery Management can remove the monument
and not replace it. If this occurs, the Cemetery Management will place a marker on the
lot indicating the names and dates of death of those interred on the lot.
5) While the Town of Fairfield will exercise all possible care to protect monuments and
markers from damage, it disclaims any liability for damage or injury.
Flower and Decorative Policy
All plantings and decorations shall be subject to the general supervision of the Cemetery
Management, and to such rules and regulations and conditions as the Cemetery Management may
impose to insure the future welfare and appearance of the Cemetery.
1) All plantings must be approved by the Cemetery Management.
2) Annual plantings are allowed directly in front of the monument. These plantings shall not
exceed one foot in width or the length of the monument. No plantings shall be made at
or near any flush markers. These plantings interfere with the mowing, trimming and the
opening of graves and will be removed without notice.
3) Artificial flowers are restricted to urns, baskets and vases. No artificial flowers shall be
placed in the ground.
4) Any vase or urn which is deemed to be an obstacle to lawn mowing operations shall be
moved or removed without notice. The use of jars, glass, china, or tin cans is strictly
prohibited. These containers not only become unsightly, they are hazardous to Cemetery
personnel. Also, the use of rocks, bricks or wires to hold down vases are prohibited for
the same reasons. The use of washed, colored or crushed stone is prohibited.
5) The Town of Fairfield reserves the right to remove any plantings, containers or
decorations in violation of the above said rules and to charge the purchaser for any
expenses incurred, including the repair of the sod. Beginning October 1st of each year,
the Cemetery personnel will clean up for the coming winter season. All flowers, real and
artificial, vases, baskets, etc. will be picked up and disposed of. Lot purchasers should
remove any item they wish to keep before this date. Urns may be left on the lot, but
should be emptied and turned over to avoid breakage. Winter decorations are permitted
from November 1 to April 30. After April 30, any decorations not picked up by the owner
will be discarded by Cemetery personnel.
Trees & Shrubs
The Town of Fairfield maintains, to the best of its ability, all trees and shrubs planted by the
Cemetery Management. However, it is not responsible for the care and trimming of any plantings on
individual lots by the purchaser or his/her heirs.
1) From the date of this ordinance forward, the planting of evergreens, trees, and shrubs is
strictly forbidden.
2) Any tree or shrub that is not maintained, becomes unsightly, encroaches on a
neighboring lot, or obstructs the normal operation of the Cemetery shall be removed.
3) The Cemetery Management reserves the right to remove without notice any planting in
violation of foregoing rules, conditions and limitations.
Perpetual Care
Perpetual Care shall include the mowing and trimming of grass at reasonable intervals, raking of fall
leaves, and maintenance of graves. The general care assumed by The Town of Fairfield shall in no
case or instance mean the maintenance, repair or replacement of any monument, memorial tomb,
mausoleum or marker placed or erected on Cemetery lots.
Future Changes to the Ordinance
The Town of Fairfield reserves the right to change, amend, alter, repeal, rescind or add to these rules
and regulations or to adopt any new rule or regulation with respect to the Cemeteries or anything
pertaining thereto.
Adoption
The above Ordinance has been adopted by the Fairfield Town Council on this ______day of
______________, 2007.
________________________________ _________________________________
Richard Spear, Chairman Franklin Bouchard, Vice-Chair
________________________________ _________________________________
Edward Stevens, Jr., Secretary William Towne
________________________________
P. Michael Slaney
Attest: __________________________
Tracey L. Stevens, Town Clerk
DISBURSEMENT WARRANT ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide an alternative to the statutory
procedure for approval of warrants authorizing the treasurer to disburse money.
SECTION 2 AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to 30-A M.R.S.A. 3001 and 5603(2)(A).
SECTION 3 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
The treasurer may disburse money only on the authority of a warrant drawn for
the purpose, either (a) affirmatively voted and signed by a majority of the
municipal officers at a duly called public meeting, (b) seen and signed by a
majority of them acting individually and separately, or (c) signed as otherwise
provided by law for the disbursement of employees’ wages and benefits and
payment of municipal education costs.
Adopted May 21, 1996 By Town Council
Attested: Cynthia P. Blair, Town Clerk
Emergency Management Ordinance for the
Town of Fairfield
Section 1
1. Short Title: This ordinance shall be known and may
be cited and referred to as the “Emergency
Management Ordinance for the Town of Fairfield”,
authorized under Title 37-B M.R.S.A., Sec 782.
2. Appointment, Term and Removal: The Fairfield
Town Council shall appoint the EMD. This
appointment shall be annual and shall take place at the
time the Council sets. The Council may remove the
EMD for cause.
3. Oath of Office: Once appointed, the EMD shall take
an oath of office before assuming any duties, pursuant
to Title-B M.R.S.A., Sec 2526.
4. Authority: Once sworn, the EMD shall have that
authority afforded the position under Title 37-B
Chapter 13, Maine Emergency Management Agency
and this ordinance.
5. Duties and Responsibilities:
A. Control and direct emergency training activities of the
Emergency Management forces for the Town.
B. Maintain a liaison with other Municipal, County, State and
Federal Emergency Management Agencies.
C. Maintain up-to-date Emergency Action Plan for the Town of
Fairfield to include resources from all Town departments and
private industry.
D. When appropriate, request that the Town Manager or
designee, or in their absence the Council Chair, declare a
State of Emergency for the Town of Fairfield.
E. Prepare, under the direction and control of the Town
Manager, for the consideration of the Town Council, such
policies and operating procedures as may be deemed
necessary for the administration and operational requirements
of the Town. These policies and procedures will be effective
upon approval of the Town Council. The Town Council may
amend policies and procedures at their discretion.
F. Notwithstanding any provision of this Ordinance to the
contrary, the Director, with consultation of the Town
Manager or designee, may procure by purchase or lease, such
goods and services as are deemed necessary for the Town’s
emergency response effort. This emergency procurement of
goods or services may be made in the open market for
immediate delivery or furnishing without filing a requisition
or estimate and without advertisement. A full written account
of all emergency procurements made during an emergency,
to include supplies, equipment, or services, shall be
submitted by the EMD to the Town Manager and Town
Council within 30 days of the conclusion of the emergency.
Section 2 -Definitions
Disaster: The occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural
or man-made cause, including, but not limited to fire, flood,
earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other hazardous
material, or other water contamination requiring emergency action to
avert danger or damage, epidemic, extreme public health emergency,
blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or hostile terrorist act.
Emergency Management: The coordination and implementation of
an organized effort to prepare for, respond to, recover from a disaster
and/or alleviate the conditions that may lead to a disaster.
Emergency Management Director: (EMD) shall mean the
appointed Town official responsible for the four phases of Emergency
Management “preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation” and
for liaison with the Somerset County Emergency Management
Agency.
Emergency Management Forces: Shall mean the employees,
equipment and facilities of all the Town of Fairfield’s departments
and agencies, and in addition shall also include all volunteer
personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from
volunteer persons and/or agencies.
Section 3 -Emergency Proclamation; Town Managers Powers:
The Town Council is responsible for the safety and well being of the
citizens of Fairfield and in protecting their property. Although the
Town Council is in session only when assembled in a Council
Meeting, the Town Manager shall have the authority to proclaim,
after consultation with available members of the Town Council, that a
state of emergency exists under the conditions specified in Title 37-B
M.R.S.A., Sec. 742. The proclamation shall declare that an
emergency exists in a specified section or throughout the Town. A
copy of such proclamation shall be filed within twenty-four (24)
hours with the Town Clerk. In the event that consultation with the
majority of the Town Council would result in substantial delay in an
effective response in alleviating or preventing an emergency or
disaster, the Town Manager is authorized to take whatever actions are
necessary to prevent the loss of life and property in the Town. If the
Town Manager or designee are absent or unavailable, then the
appointed Emergency Management Director for the Town of Fairfield
shall declare an emergency after consultation with a majority of the
Town Council. In the event that majority of the Town Council is not
available for consultation, then the Emergency Management Director
shall be authorized to take whatever actions are necessary to prevent
the loss of life and property in the Town.
Section 4 -Town Managers Duties and Emergency Powers
During any emergency or disaster or the imminent threat of an
emergency or disaster, the Town Manager or designee may
promulgate temporary regulations in order to preserve critical
resources within the purpose of this section. Such regulations may
include, but shall not be limited to the following:
A. Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of
vehicles and/or persons from areas within or without the
Town.
B. Such other regulations necessary to preserve public peace,
health and safety.
C. The power to execute contracts for emergency
construction or repair of public improvements, when the
delay of advertising and public bidding might cause
serious loss or injury to the Town.
D. The power to purchase or lease goods and services that
the Emergency Management Director deems necessary to
the Town’s emergency response, or for the repair of Town
facilities, or both, upon following the procedures of
SECTION 1-(F).
E. The power to lease real property, or structures, or both,
that the Emergency Management Director deems
necessary for the continued operation of Town
government.
F. The power to establish temporary curfews when necessary
to protect public health, safety and welfare.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority or responsibility of any department to proceed
under powers and authority granted to them by State Statute
or Town ordinance.
Section 4-1
A. The Town Manager or Director shall be authorized to
request aid and/or assistance from Somerset County and/or
the State or any other political subdivision of the State and
shall render assistance to other areas or political
subdivisions under provisions of Title 37-B M.R.S.A.
B. During the existence of an emergency, the powers,
functions and duties of the emergency organization of this
Town shall be those prescribed by State law, ordinance
and resolutions of this Town and by the Fairfield
Emergency Management Plan, as approved by the Town
Council.
C. The duties and powers prescribed by this ordinance shall
terminate at the end of the declared emergency.
Section 5 – Emergency Operational Plans
The Emergency Management Director for the Town of Fairfield will
prepare an emergency operations plan for the Town, which shall be
submitted to the Town Council for approval. Amendments to the
plan will be submitted to the Town Council for approval.
It shall be the responsibility of all municipal departments and
agencies to perform the functions assigned and to maintain their
portion of the plan in a current state of readiness. The plan shall be
reviewed annually by the Town Manager in conjunction with all
Town department heads and the Emergency Management Director.
Section 6 – No Municipal or Private Liability
Immunity from liability shall be set forth in Title 37-B M.R.S.A., Sec.
795 and Sec. 822 of Maine law.
Section 7 -Compensation for Injuries
All members of the Fairfield Emergency Management Forces shall be
deemed to be employees of the State of Maine when engaged in
training for or on duty, and shall have the rights of State employees
under the Workers’ Compensation Act and as specified in Title 37-B
M.R.S.A., Sec. 823.
Section 8 – Right-of-way Penalties
Personnel and equipment required to respond to an emergency or
disaster shall have the right-of-way over all public ways and roads
and anyone failing to grant said right-of-way shall suffer penalties as
specified under Title 37-B M.R.S.A., Sec. 828.
Section 9 – Violation of Regulations
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this Ordinance or of the regulations or plans issued pursuant to the
authority contained herein, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay
any member of the EMA Forces as herein defined in carrying out the
provisions of this Ordinance or any regulation of plan issued pursuant
to the same.
Section 10 –Severability Clause
Should any section or part thereof be declared invalid by the court,
the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or
any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
This ordinance is enacted this 13th day of September, 2006 by the
Fairfield Town Council.
_______________________
Richard Spear, Chairman
_______________________
Philip Roy, Jr., Vice-Chair
_______________________
Edward Stevens, Jr., Secretary
_______________________
Franklin Bouchard
_______________________
William Towne
A True Copy Attest: ________________________
Tracey L. Stevens, Town Clerk
Town of Fairfield and Town of Benton
Fire Prevention and Protection
Ordinance
First Adopted July 14, 2004
Amended:
December 12, 2007
December 10, 2008
April 22, 2015
June 22, 2016
December 27, 2017
September 26, 2018
1
Article 1. Fire Chiefs Powers and Duties in General
Section 1-1. Article 1 Appointment of the Fire Chief
1-1.1 The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Town Manger with approval of the Town
Council.
Cross Reference (s) Maine Law 30-A § 3153 & Town Charter
Section 1-2. Powers of the Fire Chief
1-2.1 The powers of the chief of the fire department shall be those necessary and
proper to execute the duties of the department and its office in a manner providing for
the greatest safety to life and property.
Section 1-3. Duties of the Fire Chief in General
1-3.1 Superintend the overall duties of the fire department.
1-3.2 Establish departmental rules and regulations.
1-3.3 Make annual reports to the Town Council and the citizens of the Town of Fairfield.
1-3.4 Recommend ordinances and ordinance amendments with a view toward
improving the protection of life and property.
1-3.5 Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Town Manager or law.
Cross Reference (s) Maine Law 30-A § 3153
Section 1-4. Authority of the Fire Chief to detail members of the department
1-4.1 The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the department and
inspectors as necessary.
1-4.2 The chief of the department may delegate to members of the fire department any
of his/her powers he/she feels necessary in the pursuit of safety to life and property
and enforcement of this ordinance or those allowed by Maine Law.
Article 2. Fire Alarms and Sprinkler Systems
Section 2 –1. False Alarms
2-1.1 No person shall willfully or maliciously give or cause to be given a false alarm of
fire by ringing an alarm bell or pulling an alarm box of any alarm system.
2
2-1.2 For the purpose of this section, a “false alarm” is defined as a fire department
response to an alarm received from a sprinkler or alarm system activated for reasons
other then heat, smoke or fire. A “false alarm” includes alarms received from a sprinkler
or alarm system deliberately activated when a response is not required and alarms
received from malfunctioning systems.
2-1.3 The presumption shall be that an alarm is a false alarm unless the user
demonstrates otherwise to the satisfaction of the fire officer in charge. (see SEC. 6-1)
2-1.4 All sprinkler systems, including planning, installation and inspection of such
systems or part thereof, shall follow Maine Law: Title 32§1371 thru 1380.
2-1.5 All exterior fire department connections leading to a sprinkler or standpipe system
shall be painted RED in color and shall be kept clear of any obstructions.
2.1.6 Access Box. All buildings with fire alarms or sprinklers systems and all multi –
occupancy buildings shall have an approved access box installed in a place attached to
the building approved by the Fire Chief
Article 2-A. Existing Sprinkler Systems in Existing Buildings
2.A.1 Permanent shutdown; NFPA 101 2009 ed. States; “No existing life safety feature
shall be removed or reduced where such feature is a requirement for new construction”
Permanent shut down of any sprinkler MUST be approved by, the State Fire Marshal,
the Fire Chief and the building owners Insurance carrier and follow The State Fire
Marshals guidelines.
2.A.2 Temporary / Seasonal Shut Down of Sprinkler Systems;
For Temporary or Seasonal Shut Down of a Sprinkler the following guideline must be
used.
1. Obtain a written acknowledgment from the buildings insurance carrier
2. Obtain a written acknowledgment form the fire chief
3. Make acknowledgment to your water district if required…use letter from fire chief
4. Notify the alarm company if applicable
5. Make sure the building remains locked and unoccupied during the shutdown. This
includes keeping out work-crews or other persons…(It is acceptable for the owner or
owner representative to do an occasional walk-through inspection).
6. Have a licensed fire sprinkler contractor or inspector shut the system down and
prepares it for inactivity
7. At the time of reactivation have a licensed fire sprinkler or inspector reactive the
system and do the required through annual inspection at that time. Contact the Fire
Department to notify them the system has been activated.
3
Article 3. Fire Hydrants
Section 3-1 Obstruction of Fire Hydrants
3-1.1 No person shall park or cause to be parked any vehicle for any purpose within five
(5) feet of any fire hydrant.
Exception: Fire apparatus in the pursuit of their duties at an emergency, training or
testing of said fire hydrant.
3-1.2 No person shall obstruct, or cause to be obstructed or place any snow within five
(5) feet of any fire hydrant.
Exception: Town Public Works Department or State of Maine Department of
Transportation in their normal removal of snow from public streets and ways.
Section 3-2 Use of Fire Hydrants
3-2.1 Any person, business, or corporation using any municipal (KWD) fire hydrant for
any purpose, such as but not limited to: filling swimming pools, filling of construction
vehicles or agricultural use, shall contact the fire department before such use and then
when such use is discontinued. This shall be done each for day of use. Use of any
municipal fire hydrant is at the discretion of the Kennebec Water District, Waterville
Maine
3-2.2 No person, business or corporation shall use any town owned Dry Hydrant for any
purpose without permission of the fire department.
Article 4. Life Safety and Fire Prevention
Section 4-1 N.F.P.A. 101 Lifesafety Code and N.F.P.A. 1 Fire Code:
The Town of Fairfield and the Town of Benton hereby adopts the National Fire
Protection Association Lifesafety Code 101 (2009 edition) and all referenced codes and
the National Fire Protection Association Fire Code (NFPA 1) (2009 edition) and all
referenced codes, National Fire Protection Association Fire Code (NFPA 1) (2018
edition) chapter 38 and all referenced chapters and codes and this Fire Prevention &
Protection Ordinance. These codes and this ordinance shall be updated from time to
time to stay in line with changes with the existing edition of the codes or when the
State Fire Marshal’s office adopts a more recent edition of the codes
The authority to enforce such codes and ordinances shall be given to the Fire Chief or
his delegate and the Code Enforcement Officer of each Municipality
State of Maine Statues Title 25 Ch. 313 Sec 2360
4
4-1.1 For the purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, addition, repair,
removal, demolition, use, occupancy, maintenance and inspection of all Commercial
structures and Apartment buildings with three or more units, within the Town of
Fairfield and the Town of Benton the above National Fire Protection Association Codes
shall be used.
4-1.2 The Fire Chief or his delegate shall perform the duties of Fire Code Inspector
under the State of Maine Statues 25§2351 – 2361 and 30A Subchapter V§ 4452.
4-1.3 Any owner or occupant failing to comply with the order of the Inspector shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 for each day’s neglect, in accordance with
State of Maine Statue 25§2360.
Section 4-2 Compliance Permit
4-2.1 As of the adoption date of this ordinance, no new construction, modification or
change of occupancy of existing Commercial buildings or Apartment buildings with three
or more units may be occupied in whole or in part in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance, NFPA Life Safety Code or NFPA Fire Code, unless the following conditions
exist:
A) A plan of correction has been approved,
B) No serious life safety hazards exist, as judged by the Inspector,
C) A permit has been issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and the Fire Chief or his
Delegate. (CEO in this case would only be for the Town of Fairfield)
Section 4-3 Truss Construction
4-3.1 All new construction and existing renovated buildings containing roof or floor
truss constructed supports, made from any common construction material or common
construction style shall be marked as described below, as having such construction.
Exception: Residential Construction
Sample Marking:
The triangle shall be not less than eight (8) inches long and six (6) inches high. This
marker shall be placed no further than eighteen (18) inches to the right or left, and at a
height of not less than sixty (60) nor more than seventy-two (72) inches of all
pedestrian entrance points. Said triangle shall have a background color of white. A
letter “T” shall be placed within the triangle and the color of black of block type font.
4-3.2 Cost of construction, placement and materiel choice of said triangle shall be the
burden of the building owner.
T
5
Article 5. Fire Lanes
Section 5-1 Purpose
5-1.1 Fire Lanes are established for the purpose of promoting public health, safety and
welfare by recognizing that there exist, and will in the future exist, buildings and other
areas within the town(s) to which the public will be invited, served or housed. Those
buildings or other areas must be provided prompt, adequate emergency services
including access by firefighters and firefighting equipment and/or other emergency
personnel and equipment in order to accomplish said purpose and affects the saving of
life and property in emergency situations.
Section 5-2 Applicability
5-2.1 The provisions of this article, in order to accomplish the stated purpose shall be
applicable those buildings defined in N.F.P.A 1 Fire Code 2009 ed., AND Non-residential
and Residential Subdivisions as described in the Town Land Use Ordinance, all schools
whether public or private, hospitals, convalescent homes, rest homes, nursing homes
and group homes with six (6) or more persons and places of public assembly used for
gathering together fifty (50) or more persons.
Section 5-3 Maintenance and Identification of Fire Lanes
5-3.1 Fire lanes shall be marked with posted signs or marked curbs, sidewalks or other
traffic surfaces that have the words “FIRE LANE – NO PARKING” painted in contrasting
colors.
Article 6. Billing for Services
Section 6-1 Billing Authorized
6.1.1 Any person who shall receive emergency medical or fire department services
requested by such person or on behalf of such person by any other person acting in
good faith and in the interest of the health or safety of such service, recipient shall pay
to the Town of Fairfield a fee for services in accordance with Section 6.1.2 of this
ordinance, such section to be amended from time to time by majority vote of the
Fairfield Town Council.
6.1.2 Billable costs associated with Personnel and Apparatus:
Fire Permit Violations when summoned by Maine Forestry Service;
Hazardous Materials Response;
6
Response to Vehicle Crash and/or Vehicle Fires;
Response to false Fire and/or Sprinkler Alarms; after 2 incidents in a 12 month period.
6.1.3 Billing Rates & Fees:
Shall be set by the Town Council annually, located in Town of Fairfield Fee Schedule.
6.1.4 Cost Recovery:
The Town shall use a third party billing agency for claims made to insurance companies
as provided by law and shall add other type incidents as allowed by law.
No Fairfield or Benton resident shall be responsible for any denied or reduced amount
of payment for any claim made on behalf of the Towns.
6.1.5 Revenues:
All revenues received shall be placed in the Fire Rescue Reserve Account to the
accounts limit of $75,000.00 as set by the Town Council. Any amount received above
this limit shall be placed in Town of Fairfield General Fund or as directed by the Fairfield
Town Council.
Article 7. Fire Permits
Section 7-1 Purpose
Maine law Title 12 § 9325 Open Burning has (2) previsions;
1. Permissible Outdoor Burning with a permit and;
2. Permissible Outdoor Burning without a permit
This ordnance is for the purpose of Residential Recreational use of Grills, Fireplaces and
Fire Pits as Defined only.
Section 7-2 Definitions
A. Grills;
An Appliance usually heated by Propane or Charcoal Bisques manufactured of
metal used for cooking food products.
B. Fireplaces;
7
1. A manufactured device for the purpose of burning wood products for the
purpose of having an open flame (usually manufactured from some type of metal
and may be enclosed).
2. A device made from brick or stone with mortared joints for the purpose of
burning wood or charcoal. This device may or may not be used for cooking food
and is usually not fully enclosed.
C. Fire Pit;
1. A pit (8-10 inches deep) surrounded by stones, bricks or cement block,
without mortared joints
2. A pit (8-10 inches deep) surrounded by some type of metal barrier such as an
open center tire rim.
3. The bottom of a metal drum with sides of 10-12 inches in height.
Section 7-3 Issuing of Fire Permits for recreational use
A. For the Recreational use of Grills and Fireplaces as defined above NO Fire
Permit is necessary for their use.
B. For the use of Fire Pits as defined above a Fire Permit will not be necessary if
the following conditions are met:
1. A pit cleared to exposed soil, 8-10 inches in depth and surrounded by
stones, brick or cement block at least 6 inches in height.
2. The pit can be no larger than 30 inches across measured from the inside of
the stone, brick or cement block.
3. Tire Rims; A pit cleared to exposed soil, 8-10 inches in depth, the rim shall
be no larger than 30 inches across.
4. Metal Drum – an area cleared to exposed soil where the drum will sit. The
drum should have a height of no more than 12 inches and placed atop
bricks or cement blocks. – Large tanks such as used oil tanks must be
approved by the fire chief. A permit may or may not be necessary
depending on its use.
5. If a response from the fire department finds that these conditions have not
been met, the property owner may be subject to Section 7-6 Non-
Compliance with State Statues for Outdoor Burning
Section 7-4 Conditions for use of Outside Fireplaces and Fire Pits as defined above
8
A. Only natural wood products may be burned, no paper, cardboard or other
prohibited products.
B. It is very dangerous to burn Pressure Treated Wood products as they give
off Toxic Gasses and should not be burned
C. Wood products must fit within the confined of the device.
D. Bon Fires – any fire larger than 30 inches in diameter WILL require a Fire
Permit
Section 7-5 Outside burning other than defined above
A. Other than as defined as above ALL outside burning requires a Fire Permit
B. Fire Permits maybe obtain at the Fairfield Fire Station after 9 am – earlier if it is
raining or there is snow covered ground. At no time permits will be issued before
7 am. There is no fee.
C. Fire Permits may be obtained from the State Forest Service online – There is a
fee for this service.
D. Fire permits issued by the Fairfield Benton Emergency Services Department shall
be issued for one day only. As long as the fire is attended there is no expiration
of time the fire needs to be extinguished, however the if the fire is found to be
unattended the person responsible for signing the permit shall be found in
violation of the state outdoor burning laws.
E. Fire permits issued by the Maine Forest Service shall follow the regulations found
on that permit.
Section 7-6 Non-compliance with State Statues for Outdoor Burning
The following offences are subject to the person signing the permit being issued a
summons and fine.
A. Burning without a permit when necessary
B. Burning Non-permitted material
C. Burning beyond the scope of an issued permit
D. Burning beyond the scope of this ordinance
Maine Statues permit a responding fire department to seek reimbursement of
their cost for suppression if a summons is issued by law enforcement personnel.
This cost may include but is not limited to:
? Hourly rate for fire apparatus and equipment
? Hourly rate for any responding personnel
? Lost or damaged equipment
? Cost for mutual aid departments responding if applicable
9
ARTICLE 8. OUTDOOR WOOD BOILERS, INDOOR WOODSTOVES and
FIREPLACES
Section 8-1 Purpose
Installation, Use and Control of Emissions from Outdoor Wood Boilers are regulated
by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
This ordinance in no way is meant to regulate the Installation, Distribution, or Sales
of outdoor wood boilers.
Installation of Indoor Woodstoves and Fireplaces are regulated by the State of
Maine Fire Marshal and/or Local Code Officials. This ordinance in no way is meant to
regulate the Distribution or Sales of Indoor Woodstoves or Factory – Built Fireplaces
The Town of Fairfield and the Town of Benton, set the following regulations
pertaining to complaints of prohibited fuels used in outside wood boilers and indoor
Woodstoves and Fireplaces MANAFACTURED FOR THE PURPOSE OF BURING
SOLID FUELS. Adopted pursuant to municipal home rule ordinance authority and
Title 30-A MRSA, Section 3001.
Section 8-2 Definitions:
As defined by DEP Control of Emissions from Outdoor Wood Boilers Chp.150
Clean Wood: “Clean wood” means wood that has no paint, stain, or other types of
coatings and wood that has not been treated with, including but not limited to, copper
chromium arsenate, creosote or pentachlorophenol.
Outdoor Wood Boiler: “Outdoor wood boiler” (also known as outdoor wood-fired
hydronic heater, water stove or outdoor furnace) means a fuel burning devise designed
to (1) burn wood or other approved solid fuels; (2) that the manufacturer specifies for
outdoor installation in structures not normally occupied by humans (e.g., garages); and
(3) heats building space and / or water via the distribution, typically through pipes, of a
fluids heated in the device, typically water or a water/antifreeze mixture.
Section 8-2-A as defined by N.F.P.A 211
Fireplace: A hearth, fire chamber, or similarly prepared area and a chimney
MANAFACTURED FOR THE PURPOSE OF BURINING SOLID FUELS.
Factory - Built Fireplace: (SOLID FUEL-BURNING DEVICE) fireplace composed of
listed, factory built components assembled in accordance with the terms of the listings.
10
Masonry Fireplace: (SOLID FUEL-BURNING DEVICE) A hearth and fire chamber of
solid masonry units, such as brick, stones, listed masonry units or reinforced concrete,
provided with a chimney.
Woodstove (Solid Fuel-Burning Appliance): A chimney connected device that burns solid
fuel designed for the purpose of heating, cooking or both.
Solid Fuel: Wood, coal, and other similar organic materials and any combination of
them.
Nuisance: “Nuisance” means emissions of air contaminates to the outdoor atmosphere
of such quality, characteristic or duration that may be injurious to human, plant or
animal life or to property or that unreasonably interferes with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property.
Section 8-3 Nuisance Conditions
A). No person shall operate an outdoor wood boiler, Indoor Woodstove or Fireplace AS
DEFINED ABOVE using prohibited fuels.
(Any material other than clean wood, coal or other organic materials as defined
above. Fuel oil or propane may be used for multi-fuel boilers where recommend by the
manufacture).
For a list of prohibited materials contact Maine Department of Environmental Protection or visit their web
site at www.maine.gov/dep/air/woodsmoke/woodcombustion.htm
B).Those persons found to be in violation of this ordinance shall be subject to the
following:
First Offence: Warning
Second Offence: $50.00 fine and in the case of Outdoor Boilers a report
made to the Maine Department of Environmental Protection
Article 9. Fire Code Appeals Board
Section 9-1 Fire Code Appeals Board
Section 9-1.1 ESTABLISHMENT:
A board of appeals shall be established for the purpose of hearing and acting upon
appeals of a decision made by the Authority Having Jurisdiction regarding established
Fire and Lifesafety Codes.
11
A) This board shall be; The Town of Fairfield and/or Town of Benton’s established
LAND USE BOARD OF APPEALS.
B) Appointment and Terms of appointments to this board shall follow those rules
now established by each municipality.
C) Governing rules shall be those established by the board or municipality except
those established by this document.
Section 9-1.2 DUTIES:
A) The board of Appeals shall provide for a reasonable interpretation of the
provisions of the Fire and Lifesafety Codes and rule on appeals from decisions of
the AHJ.
B) The ruling of the Board of Appeals shall ensure that the intent of the code(s) is
compiled with and public safety is secured.
C) The Board shall be permitted to grant alternatives or modifications within the
limits established by each code.
D) The Board shall not have the authority to waive the requirements found in any
code.
E) Rulings of the Board shall not be precedence setting.
Section 9-1.3 MEETINGS:
A) The Board shall meet as necessary giving fire days’ notice, but in no case shall it
fail to meet on an appeal within 30 calendar days of the filing of notice of appeal.
B) All meetings / hearings of the Board shall be open to the public. Public notice of
meetings / hearings shall follow established rules of the municipality.
C) The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each
member on every question, or if the member is absent of fails to vote, indication
such actions.
D) The Board shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions.
E) Minutes and records of the Board shall be public record.
Section 9-1.4 MEANS OF APPEALS:
1. Any person shall be permitted to appeal a decision of the AHJ to the Board of
Appeals when it is claimed that any one or more of the following conditions exist:
A) The true intent of the code(s) or ordinance(s) has been incorrectly
interpreted.
B) The provisions of the codes or ordinances do not fully apply.
C) A decision is unreasonable or arbitrary as it applies to alternatives or new
materials.
2. An appeal shall be submitted to the AHJ in writing within 30 calendar days of the
notification of decision or violation outlining the codes(s) or ordinance from
which relief is sought and the remedy proposed.
12
3. All documentation supporting an appeal shall be submitted to the AHJ. No
additional information should be submitted to review by the Board without the
information submitted to the AHJ for their review prior to the hearing date.
Additional information submitted after the filing date of the appeal to the Board
and AHJ should be made available to the Board and AHJ in a timeframe that
permits adequate review before the hearing date.
Section 9-1.5 DEFINITIONS:
Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ): The Fire Chief or his/her delegate
Code: The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA); 101 Lifesafety and NFPA 1 Fire
Code and those codes referenced by these.
Ordinance: The Town of Fairfield and / or The Town of Benton’s Fire Prevention and
Protection Ordinance.
A True Copy
Attest:__________________________
Town Clerk
Town Seal
ENACTED: February, 9 2005
CERTIFIED BY: certified
NAME
TOWN CLERK
TITLE
Affix Seal
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
FOR THE
TOWN OF FAIRFIELD, MAINE
DATE
ARTICLE PAGE
I. PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT…………………………………. 2
II. PERMIT REQUIRED…………………………………………………… 2
III. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT…………………………………………. 2
IV. APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE………………………….. 4
V. REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT
PERMIT APPLICATIONS……………………………………………… 4
VI. DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS………………………………………. 5
VII. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE……………………………………. 10
VIII. REVIEW OF SUBDIVISIONS AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS 11
IX. APPEALS AND VARIANCES………………………………………… 11
X. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES…………………………………. 13
XI. VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY……………………………………… 14
XII. CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES…………………………… 14
XIII. DEFINITIONS…………………………………………………………… 14
XIV. ABROGATION…………………………………………………………. 19
60.3 (d) Rev 6/02
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
CONTENTS
ARTICLE 1 - PURPOSE AND ESTABLISHMENT
Certain areas of the Town of Fairfield, Maine are subject to periodic flooding, causing serious damages
to properties within these areas. Relief is available in the form of flood insurance as authorized by the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968.
Therefore, the Town of Fairfield, Maine has chosen to become a participating community in the National
Flood Insurance Program, and agrees to comply with the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended) as delineated in this Floodplain Management Ordinance.
It is the intent of the Town of Fairfield, Maine to require the recognition and evaluation of flood hazards
in all official actions relating to land use in the floodplain areas having special floods hazards.
The Town of Fairfield has the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures to reduce future
flood losses pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA, Sections 3001-3007, 4352 and 4401-4407.
The National Flood Insurance Program, established in the aforesaid Act, provides that areas of the Town
of Fairfield having a special flood hazard be identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
and that floodplain management measures be applied in such flood hazard areas. This Ordinance
establishes a Flood Hazard Development Permit system and review procedure for development
activities in the designated flood hazard areas of the Town of Fairfield, Maine.
The areas of special flood hazard, Zone A and AE, are identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a report entitled "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Fairfield, Maine, Somerset County," dated
February 17, 1988 with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" February 17, 1988, which are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE 11 - PERMIT REQUIRED
Before any construction or other development ( as defined in Article XIII), including the placement of
manufactured homes, begins within any areas of special flood hazard established in Article I. a Flood
Hazard Development Permit shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement Officer. This permit shall be
in addition to any other permits which may be required pursuant to the codes and ordinances of the Town
of Fairfield, Maine.
ARTICLE III - APPLICATION FOR PERMIT
The application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement
Officer and shall include:
A. The name, address and phone number of the applicant, owner, and contractor:
B. An address and a map indicating the location of the construction site;
C. A site plan showing location of existing and/or proposed development, including but not
limited to structures, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, areas to be cut and
filled, and lot dimensions;
D. A statement of the intended use of the structure and/or development;
E. A statement of the cost of the development including all materials and labor;
2
F. A statement as to the type of sewage system proposed;
G. Specification of dimensions of the proposed structure and/or development;
[Items H-K.2 apply only to new construction and substantial improvements.]
H. The elevation in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), or to a locally
established datum in Zone A only, of the:
1. base flood at the proposed site of all new or substantially improved structures, which is
determined:
a. in Zone AE, from data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Fairfield,
Maine," as described in Article I, or,
b. in Zone A:
(1) from any base flood evaluation data from federal, state, or other technical
sources (such as FEMA's Quick-2 model, FEMA 265/July 1995), including
information obtained pursuant to Article VI.K and VIII.D.;
(2) from the contour elevation extrapolated from a best fit analysis of the floodplain
boundary when overlaid onto a USGS Quadrangle Map or other topographic
map prepared by a Professional Land Surveyor or registered
professional engineer, if the floodplain boundary has a significant correlation
to the elevation contour line(s); or, in the absence of all other data,
(3) to be the elevation of the ground at the intersection of the floodplain boundary
and a line perpendicular to the shoreline which passes along the ground
through the site of the proposed building.
2. highest and lowest grades at the site adjacent to the walls of the proposed building;
3. lowest floor, including basement; and whether or not such structures contain a basement;
and,
4. level, in the case of non-residential structures only, to which the structure will be floodproofed;
I. A description of an elevation reference point established on the site of all developments
for which elevation standards apply as required in Article VI;
J. A written certification by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or
architect, that the base flood elevation and grade elevations shown on the application are
accurate;
K. The following certifications as required in Article VI by a registered professional engineer or
architect:
1. a Flood proofing Certificate (FEMA Form 81-65, 08/99, as amended), to verify that the
flood proofing methods for any non-residential structures will meet the flood proofing
criteria of Article III.H.4; Article VI.G.; and other applicable standards in Article VI;
3
2. a Hydraulic Openings Certificate to verify that engineered hydraulic openings in
foundation walls will meet the standards of Article VI.L.2.a.;
3. a certified statement that bridges will meet the standards of Article VI.M;
4. a certified statement that containment walls will meet the standards of Article VI.N;
L. A description of the extent to which any water course will be altered or relocated as a result
of the proposed development; and,
M. A statement of construction plans describing in detail how each applicable development
standard in Article VI will be met.
ARTICLE IV - APPLICATION FEE AND EXPERT'S FEE
A non-refundable application fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the Town Clerk and a copy of a receipt for the
same shall accompany the application.
An additional fee may be charged if the Code Enforcement Officer and/or Board of Appeals needs the
assistance of a professional engineer or other expert. The expert's fee shall be paid in full by the
applicant within ten (10) days after the town submits a bill to the applicant. Failure to pay the bill shall
constitute a violation of the ordinance and be grounds for the issuance of a stop work order. An expert
shall not be hired by the municipality at the expense of an applicant until the applicant has either
consented to such hiring in writing or been given an opportunity to be heard on the subject. An applicant
who is dissatisfied with a decision to hire expert assistance may appeal that decision to the Board of
Appeals.
ARTICLE V - REVIEW STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
APPLICATIONS
The Code Enforcement Officer shall:
A. Review all applications for the Flood Hazard Development Permit to assure that proposed
developments are reasonably safe from flooding and to determine that all pertinent requirements
of Article Vi ( Development Standards ) have been, or will be met;
B. Utilize, in the review of all Flood Hazard Development Permit applications:
1. the base flood data contained in the "Flood Insurance Study - Town of Fairfield, Maine." as
described in Article I;
2. in special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data are not provided, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
and floodway data from federal, state, or other technical sources, including information
obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.; Article VI.K.; and Article VIII.D., in order to administer
Article VI of this Ordinance; and,
3. when the community establishes a base flood elevation in a Zone A by methods outlined
in Article III.H.1.b., the community shall submit that data to the Maine Floodplain Management
Program in the State Planning Office.
4
C. Make interpretations of the location of boundaries of special flood hazard areas shown on the
maps described in Article I of this Ordinance;
D. In the review of Flood Hazard Development Permit applications, determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, and local government
agencies from which prior approval is required by federal or state law, including but not
limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. 1344;
E. Notify adjacent municipalities, the Department of Environmental Protection, and the Maine
Floodplain Management Program in the State Planning Office prior to any alteration or
relocation of a water course and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency;
F. If the application satisfies the requirements of this Ordinance, approve the issuance of
one of the following Flood Hazard Development Permits based on the type of development:
1. A two part Flood Hazard Development Permit for elevated structures. Part I shall
authorize the applicant to build a structure to and including the first horizontal floor only
above the base flood level. At that time the applicant shall provide the Code Enforcement
Officer with an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional Land Surveyor, registered
professional engineer or architect based on the Part I permit construction, "as built", for
verifying compliance with the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H.
Following review of the Elevation Certificate data, which shall take place within 72 hours
of receipt of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall issue Part II of the Flood
Hazard Development Permit. Part II shall authorize the applicant to complete the construction
project; or,
2. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Flood proofing of Non-Residential Structures that
are new construction or a substantially improved non-residential structures that are not
being elevated but that meet the flood proofing standards of Article VI.G.1.a., b., and c.
The application for this permit shall include a Flood proofing Certificate signed by a
registered professional engineer or architect; or,
3. A Flood Hazard Development Permit for Minor Development for all development that
is not new construction or a substantial improvement, such as repairs, maintenance,
renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market value of the
structure. Minor development also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures
as provided for in Article VI.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation,
drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, deposition or extraction of
materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities that do not
involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers, fencing,
pipelines, wharves and piers.
G. Maintain , as a permanent record, copies of all Flood Hazard Development Permit
Applications, corresponding Permits issued, and data relevant thereto, including reports of the
Board of Appeals on variances granted under the provisions of Article IX of this Ordinance,
and copies of Elevation Certificates, Flood proofing Certificates, Certificates of Compliance
and certification of design standards required under the provisions of Articles III, Vi, and VII
of this Ordinance
ARTICLE VI - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
All developments in areas of special flood hazard shall meet the following applicable standards:
A. All Development - All development shall:
5
1. be designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation (excluding piers
and docks), collapse or lateral movement of the development resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
2. use construction materials that are resistant to flood damage;
3. use electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment, and other
service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during flooding conditions.
B. Water Supply - All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems.
C. Sanitary Sewage Systems - All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed and located to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharges from the system into flood waters.
D. On Site Waste Disposal Systems - On site waste disposal systems shall be located and
constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during floods.
E. Watercourse Carrying Capacity - All development associated with altered or relocated
portions of a watercourse shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no
reduction occurs in the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse.
F. Residential - New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure
located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.;
Article V.B.; or Article VIII.D.
G. Non Residential - New Construction or substantial improvement of any non-residential
structure located within:
1. Zone AE shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities
shall:
a. be flood proofed to at least one foot above the base flood elevation so that below
that elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effects of buoyancy; and ,
6
c. be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood proofing
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall
be provided with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as
required by Article III.K. and shall include a record of the elevation above mean
sea level to which the structure is flood proofed.
2. Zone A shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to Article III.H.1.b.;
Article V.B.; or Article VIII.D., or
a. together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities meet the flood proofing
standards of Article VI.G.1.
H. Manufactured Homes - New or substantially improved manufactured homes located within:
1. Zone AE shall:
a. be elevated such that the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured
home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation;
b. be on a permanent foundation, which may be poured masonry slab or foundation
walls, with hydraulic openings, or may be reinforced piers or block supports, any
of which support the manufactured home so that no weight is supported by its
wheels and axles; and
c. be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but
are not limited to:
(1) over-the-top ties anchored to the ground at the four corners of the manufactured
home, plus two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate points (manufactured
homes less than fifty (50) feet long require one additional tie per side);
or by
(2) frame ties at each corner of the home, plus five (5) additional ties along each
side at intermediate points (manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long
require four additional ties per side).
(3) all components of the anchoring system described in Article VI.H.1.c.(1) & (2)
shall be capable of carrying a force of 4800 pounds.
2. Zone 1 shall:
a. be elevated on a permanent foundation, as described in Article VI.H.1.b., such that
the lowest floor (including basement) of the manufactured home is at least one
foot above the base flood elevation utilizing information obtained pursuant to
Article III.H.b.; Article V.B.; or Article VIII.D.; and
b. meet the anchoring requirements of Article VI.H.1.c.
I. Recreational Vehicles - recreational vehicles located within:
1. Zone AE shall either:
7
a. be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,
b. be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for
highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions; or,
c. be permitted in accordance with the elevation and anchoring requirements for
"manufactured homes" in Article VI.H.1.
J. Accessory Structures - Accessory Structures, as defined in Article XIII, located within Zones
AE and A, shall be exempt from the elevation criteria required in Article Vi.F. & G. above, if all
other requirements of Article VI and all the following requirements are met. Accessory
Structures shall:
1. be 500 square feet or less and have a value less than $3000;
2. have unfinished interiors and not be used for human habitation;
3. have hydraulic openings, as specified in Article VI.L.2., in at least two (2) different walls
of the accessory structure;
4. be located outside the floodway;
5. when possible be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters and be placed further from the source of
flooding than is the primary structure; and,
6. have only ground fault interrupt electrical outlets. The electric service disconnect shall be
located above the base flood elevation and when possible outside the Special Flood
Hazard Area.
K. Floodways -
1. In Zone AE riverine areas, encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvement, and other development shall not be permitted within a regulatory floodway
which is designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, unless a technical
evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that
such encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designated,
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other
development shall not be permitted in the floodway as determined in Article VI.K.3. unless
a technical evaluation certified by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing development and anticipated development:
a. will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot
at any point within the community; and,
8
b. is consistent with the technical criteria contained in Chapter 5 entitled "Hydraulic
Analyses," Flood Insurance Study-Guidelines and Specifications for Study
Contractors, (FEMA 37/January 1995, as amended).
3. In Zones AE and A riverine areas for which no regulatory floodway is designate, the regulatory
floodway is determined to be the channel of the river or other water course and the
adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width of the floodplain as measured
from the normal high water mark to the upland limit of the floodplain.
L. Enclosed Areas Below the Lowest Floor - New construction or substantial improvement of
any structure in Zones AE and A that meets the development standards of Article VI, including
the elevation requirements of Article VI, paragraphs F, G, or H and is elevated on posts,
columns, piers, piles, "stilts," or clrawlspaces may be enclosed below the base flood
elevation requirements provided all the following criteria are met or exceeded:
1. Enclosed areas are not "basements" as defined in Article XIII;
2. Enclosed ates shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing fot the entry and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either:
a. be engineered and certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or,
b. meet oe exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) a minimum of two opennings having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for wvery square foot of the enclosed area;
(2) the bottom of all openings shall be below the base flood elevation and no
higher than on foot above the lowest grade: and,
(3) openings may be equipped with screen, louvers, valves, or other coverings
or devices provided that they permit the entry and exit of flood waters automatically
without any external influence or control such as human intervention,
including the use of electrical and other non-automatic mechanical means;
3. The enclosed area shall not be used for human habitation; and,
4. The enclosed areas are useable solely for building access, parking of vehicles, or storage.
M. Bridges - New construction or substantial improvement of any bridge in Zones AE and A shall
be designed such that:
1. when possible, the lowest horizontal member (excluding the pilings, or columns) is elevated
to at least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
2. a registered professional engineer shall certify that:
a. the structual design and methods of construction shall meet the elevation requirements
of this section and the floodway standards of Article VI.K.; and
9
b. the foundation and superstructure attached thereto are designed to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all structural components. Water loading values shall be those
associated with the base flood.
N. Containment Walls -New construction or substantial improvement of any containment wall
located within:
1. Zones AE and A shall:
a. have the containment wall elevated to at least one foot above the base flood
elevation;
b. have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the provisions of this section. Such certification shall be
provided with the application for a Flood Hazard Development Permit, as required
by Article III.K.
O. Wharves, Piers and Docks - New construction or substantial improvement of wharves,
piers, and docks are permitted in Zones AE and A, in and over water and seaward of the
mean high tide if the following requirements are met:
1. wharves, piers, and docks shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
regulations; and
2. for commercial wharves, piers, and docks, a registered professional engineer shall
develop or review the structural design, specifications, and plans for construction.
ARTICLE VII - CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
No land in a special flood hazard area shall be occupied or used and no structure which is constructed or
substantially improved shall be occupied until a Certificate of Compliance is issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer subject to the following provisions:
A. For New Construction or Substantial Improvement of any elevated structure the applicant shall
submit to the Code Enforcement Officer, an Elevation Certificate completed by a Professional
Land Surveyor, registered professional engineer, or architect, for compliance with Article VI,
paragraphs F, G, or H.
B. The applicant shall submit written notification to the Code Enforcement Officer that the development
is complete and complies with the provisions of this ordinance.
C. Within ten (10) working days, the Code Enforcement Officer shall:
1. review the Elevation Certificate and the applicant's written notification; and,
10
2. upon determination that the development conforms with the provisions of this ordinance,
shall issue a Certificate of Compliance.
ARTICLE VIII - REVIEW SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
The Planning Board shall, when reviewing subdivisions and other proposed developments that require
review under federal law, state law or local ordinances or regulations and all projects on five (5) or more
disturbed acres, or in the case of manufactured home parks divided into tow (2) or more lots, assure that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
B. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located
and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D. All proposals include base flood elevations, flood boundaries, and, in a riverine floodplain,
floodway data. These determinations shall be based on engineering practices recognized
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
E. Any proposed development plan must include a condition of plan approval that structures
on any lot in the development having any portion of its land within a Special Flood Hazard
Area, are to be constructed in accordance with Article VI of this ordinance. Such requirement
will be included in any deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement. Or document transferring
or expressing an intent to transfer any interest in real estate or structure, including but not
limited to a time-share interest. The condition shall clearly articulate that the municipality
may enforce any violation of the construction requirement that fact shall also be included in
the deed or any other document previously described. The construction requirement shall
also be clearly stated on any map, plat, or plan to be signed by the Planning Board or local
reviewing authority as part of the approval process.
ARTICLE IX - APPEALS AND VARIANCES
The Board of Appeals of the Town of Fairfield may, upon written application of an aggrieved party, hear
and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or
determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in the
administration or enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance.
The Board pf Appeals may grant a variance from the requirements of this Ordinance consistent with state
law and the following criteria:
A. Variances shall not be granted within any designated regulatory floodway if any increase in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
B. Variances shall be granted only upon:
1. a showing of good and sufficient cause: and,
2. a determination that should a flood comparable to the base flood occur, the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
public expense, or create nuisances, cause fraud or victimization of the public or conflict
with existing local laws or ordinances; and,
11
3. a showing that the issuance of the variance will not conflict with other state, federal or
local laws or ordinances; and,
4. a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in "undue hardship," which
in this sub-section means:
a. that the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted; and,
b. that the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the neighborhood; and,
c. that the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
and,
d. that the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
C. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief, and the Board of Appeals may
impose such conditions to a variance as it deems necessary.
D. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
1. other criteria of Article IX and Article VI.K. are met; and,
2. the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
E. Variances may be issued for the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of Historic
Structures upon the determination that:
1. the development meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through D. above; and
2. the proposed repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
F. any applicant who meets the criteria of Article IX, paragraphs A. through E. shall be notified
by the Board of Appeals in writing over the signature of the Chairman of the Board of Appeals
that:
1. the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in
greatly increase premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
2. such construction below the base flood level increases risks of life and property; and,
3. the applicant agrees in writing that the applicant is fully aware of all the risks inherent in
the use of land subject to flooding, assumes those risks and agrees to indemnify and
defend the municipality against any claims filed against it that are related to the applicant's
decision to use land located in a flooplain and that the applicant individually releases the
municipality from any claims the applicant may have against the municipality that are
12
related to the use of land located in a floodplain.
G. Appeal Procedure for Administrative and Variance Appeals
1. An administrative or variance appeal bay be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved
party within thirty (30) days after receipt of a written decision of the Code Enforcement
Officer or Planning Board.
2. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record
of the decision appealed from.
3. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within thirty-five (35) days
of it receipt of an appeal request.
4. The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
5. The Board of Appeals shall decide all appeals within thirty-five (35) days after the close
of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all appeals.
6. The Board of Appeals shall submit to the Code Enforcement Officer a report of all variance
actions, including justification for the granting of the variance and an authorization for the
Code Enforcement Officer to issue a Flood Hazard Development Permit, which includes
any conditions to be attached to said permit.
7. Any aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of
Appeals may take an appeal to superior Court in accordance with State laws with fortyfive
(45) days from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
ARTICLE X - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance
pursuant to Title 30-A MRSA §4452.
B. The penalties contained in Title 30-a MRSA §4452 shall apply to any violation of this Ordinance.
C. In addition to any other actions, the Code Enforcement Officer, upon determination that a
violation exists, shall submit a declaration to the Administrator of the Federal Insurance
Administration requesting a denial of flood insurance. The valid declaration shall consist of:
1. the name of the property owner and address or legal description of the property sufficient
to confirm its identity or location;
2. a clear and unequivocal declaration that the property is in violation of a cited State or local
law, regulation, or ordinance;
3. a clear statement that the public body making the declaration has authority to do so and
a citation to that authority;
13
4. evidence that the property owner has been provided notice of the violation and the prospective
denial of insurance; and,
5. a clear statement that the declaration is being submitted pursuant to Section 1316 of the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, as amended.
ARTICLE XI - VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY
If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision shall
not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
This Ordinance shall not in any way impair or remove the necessity of compliance with any other
applicable rule, ordinance, regulation, bylaw, permit or provision of law. Where this Ordinance imposes
a greater restriction upon the use of land, buildings, or structures, the provision of this Ordinance shall
control.
ARTICLE XIII - DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning
as they have at common law and to give this Ordinance its most reasonable application. Words used
in the present tense include the future, the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
Accessory structure - means a small detached structure that is incidental and subordinate to the
principle structure.
Adjacent Grade - means the natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Area of Special Flood Hazard - means the land in floodplain having a one percent or greater chance
of flooding in any given year, as specifically identified in the Flood Insurance Study citied in Article I of
this Ordinance.
Base Flood - means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year, commonly called the 100-year flood.
Basement - means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Building - see Structure.
Certificate of Compliance - A document signed by the Code Enforcement Officer stating that a structure
is in compliance with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
Code Enforcement Officer - any person or board responsible for performing the inspection, licensing,
and enforcement duties required by a particular statute or ordinance.
Development - means any change caused by individuals or entities to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings or other structures; the construction of
additions or substantial improvements to buildings or other structures; mining, dredging, filing, grading,
paving, excavation, drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; and the storage, deposition,
14
extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water supply facilities.
Elevated Building - means a non-basement building
a. built, in the case of a building in Zones AE or A, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns, posts, piers, or "stilts," and
b. adequately anchored sp as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to
one foot above the magnitude of the base flood.
In the case of Zones AE or A, Elevated Building also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with hydraulic openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement
of flood waters, as required in Article VI.L.
Elevation Certificate - An official form (FEMA Form 81-31, 07/00, as amended) that:
a. is used to verify compliance with the floodplain management regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program; and,
b. Is required for purchasing flood insurance.
Flood or Flooding - means:
a. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally cry land areas from:
1 The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
2 The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
b. The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or
suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe
storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by
some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in paragraph
a.1. of this definition.
Flood Evaluation Study - means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if
appropriate, corresponding water surface evaluations.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) - means an official map of a community, on which the Federal
Insurance Administrator has delineated both the special hazard areas and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study - se Flood Evaluation Study.
Floodplain or Flood-prone Area - means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source (see flooding).
15
Floodplain Management - means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works, and flooplain management regulations.
Floodplain management Regulations - means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as Floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance,
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or
local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing - means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and contents.
Floodway - see Regulatory Floodway.
Floodway Encroachment Lines - mean the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state, and
local floodplain maps.
Freeboard - means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of
floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors, such as wave
action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed, that could contribute
to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway condition.
Functionally Dependent Use - means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Historic Structure - means any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department
of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting requirements
for individual listing on the National Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical
significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs
which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either:
1 by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or
2 Directly by the Secretaty of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Locally Established Datum - means, for purposes of this ordinance, an elevation established for a
specific site to which all other elevations at the site are referenced. This elevation is generally not
16
referenced to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or any other established datum and is used
in areas where Mean Sea Level data is too far from a specific site to be practically used.
Lowest Floor - means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished
or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements
described in Article VI.L. of this Ordinance.
Manufactured Home - means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to
the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term manufactured home also includes
park trailer, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than one hundred
eighty (180) consecutive days.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision - means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level - means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
Minor Development - means all development that is not new construction or a substantial improvement,
such as repairs, maintenance, renovations, or additions, whose value is less than 50% of the market
value of the structure. It also includes, but is not limited to: accessory structures as provided fir in Article
VI.J., mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or
materials, deposition or extraction of materials, public or private sewage disposal systems or water
supply facilities that do not involve structures; and non-structural projects such as bridges, dams, towers,
fencing, pipelines, wharves, and piers.
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) - means the national vertical datum, whose standard was
established in 1929, which is used by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). NGVD was based
upon mean sea level in 1929 and also has been called "1929 Mean Sea Level (MSL)".
New Construction - means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvement to such structures.
100-year Flood - see Base Flood.
Recreational Vehicle - means a vehicle which is ;
a. built on a single chassis;
b. 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection, not including slideouts;
c. designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a motor vehicle; and
d. designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
17
Regulatory Floodway -
a. Means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than one foot, and
b. When not designated on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map, it is considered to be the
channel of river or other water course and adjacent land areas to a distance of one-half the width
of the floodplain, as measured from the normal high water mark to the upland limit if the floodplain.
Riverine - means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area - see Area of Special Flood Hazard.
Start of Construction - means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, substantial improvement or other
improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of riles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation;
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, or modification of any construction element, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure - means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building. A gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above the ground is also a structure.
Substantial Damage - means, damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement - means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before
the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not however include either:
a. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
b. Any alteration of a Historic Structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure, and a variance is obtained from the community's
Board of Appeals.
Variance - means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation.
Violation - means the failure of a structure or development to comply with a community's floodplain
management regulations.
18
ARTICLE XIV - ABROGATION
This ordinance repeals and replaces any municipal ordinance previously enacted to comply with the
National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 (P.L. 90-488, as amended).
60.3 (d)
19
GENERAL
ASSISTANCE
ORDINANCE
Prepared by Maine Municipal Association
August 2018
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
The Municipality of FAIRFIELD, MAINE enacts the following General Assistance
Ordinance. This Ordinance is filed with the Department of Health & Human Services
(DHHS) in compliance with Title 22 M.R.S.A. §4305(4).
Signed the 12th day of DECEMBER, 2018, by the municipal officers:
(day) (month) (year)
__________________________
(Michael Taylor, Chair)
__________________________
(John Picchiotti, Vice Chair)
__________________________
(Aaron Rowden, Secretary)
__________________________
(Beverly Busque)
__________________________
(Courtney Chandler)
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
GENERAL ASSISTANCE ORDINANCE
Article I – Statement of Policy ......................................................................................... 1
Article II – Definitions ...................................................................................................... 3
Section 2.1 – Common Meaning of Words .................................................................... 3
Section 2.2 – Special Definitions ................................................................................... 3
Applicant .................................................................................................................. 3
Application Form ...................................................................................................... 3
Basic Necessities .................................................................................................... 3
Case Record............................................................................................................ 4
Categorical Assistance ............................................................................................ 4
Claimant .................................................................................................................. 4
Deficit ...................................................................................................................... 4
Disabled Person ...................................................................................................... 5
Dwelling Unit............................................................................................................ 5
Eligible Person ......................................................................................................... 5
Emergency .............................................................................................................. 5
General Assistance Program ................................................................................... 5
General Assistance Administrator ........................................................................... 6
Household ............................................................................................................... 6
Income ..................................................................................................................... 6
Initial Applicant ........................................................................................................ 8
Just Cause............................................................................................................... 8
Lump Sum Payment ................................................................................................ 8
Material Fact ............................................................................................................ 8
Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................................................................... 9
Misconduct .............................................................................................................. 9
ii
Municipality .............................................................................................................. 9
Municipality of Responsibility ................................................................................... 9
Need ........................................................................................................................ 9
Net General Assistance Costs ................................................................................. 9
Period of Eligibility ................................................................................................... 9
Pooling of Income .................................................................................................... 9
Real Estate ............................................................................................................ 10
Recipient ............................................................................................................... 10
Registered Domestic Partner ................................................................................ 10
Repeat Applicants ................................................................................................. 10
Resident ................................................................................................................ 10
Resources ............................................................................................................. 10
30-Day Need ......................................................................................................... 11
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants .............................................................................. 11
Unmet Need .......................................................................................................... 12
Work Requirements ............................................................................................... 12
Article III – Administrative Rules and Regulations ......................................................... 13
Section 3.1 – Confidentiality of Information ................................................................. 13
Release of Information .......................................................................................... 13
Information from Other Sources; Penalty .............................................................. 13
Misuse of Information ............................................................................................ 14
Section 3.2 – Maintenance of Records ....................................................................... 14
Case Records ........................................................................................................ 14
Retention of Records ............................................................................................. 15
Article IV – Application Procedure ................................................................................. 16
Section 4.1 – Right to Apply ........................................................................................ 16
Who May Apply ..................................................................................................... 16
Application Via Telephone ..................................................................................... 16
iii
Written Application Upon Each Request ................................................................ 16
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice ................................................................... 17
Section 4.2 – Application Interview ............................................................................. 17
Section 4.3 – Contents of the Application ................................................................... 17
Section 4.4 – General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time
of the Application ..................................................................................................... 18
Application Requirements ...................................................................................... 18
Eligibility Requirements ......................................................................................... 19
Applicant Rights ..................................................................................................... 19
Reimbursement/Recovery ..................................................................................... 19
Section 4.5 – Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application .................. 20
Section 4.6 – Action on Applications ........................................................................... 21
Written Decision ....................................................................................................... 21
Content ..................................................................................................................... 21
Section 4.7 – Withdrawal of an Application ................................................................. 22
Section 4.8 – Temporary Refusal to Accept Application ............................................. 22
Section 4.9 – Emergencies ......................................................................................... 23
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 23
Assistance Prior to Verification ................................................................................. 24
Telephone Applications ............................................................................................ 24
Limitation on Emergency Assistance ....................................................................... 24
Section 4.10 – Residence .......................................................................................... 26
Moving/Relocating ................................................................................................... 26
Institutions ............................................................................................................... 26
Temporary Housing ................................................................................................. 27
Disputes ................................................................................................................... 27
Article V – Eligibility Factors ............................................................................................ 28
Section 5.1 – Initial Application ................................................................................... 28
Initial Application ...................................................................................................... 28
iv
Subsequent Applicants............................................................................................. 28
Section 5.2 – Eligibility for Categorical Assistance ...................................................... 29
Section 5.3 – Personal Property ................................................................................. 29
a) Liquid Assets ........................................................................................................ 29
b) Tangible Assets ................................................................................................... 30
c) Automobile Ownership ......................................................................................... 30
d) Insurance ............................................................................................................. 31
e) Transfer of Property ............................................................................................. 31
Section 5.4 – Ownership of Real Estate ...................................................................... 31
a) Principal Residence ............................................................................................. 31
b) Other Property ..................................................................................................... 33
Section 5.5 – Work Requirement ................................................................................ 33
Employment; Rehabilitation ...................................................................................... 33
Verification ............................................................................................................... 34
Ineligibility ................................................................................................................. 34
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct ......................................... 35
Just Cause ............................................................................................................... 35
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause ........................................................ 36
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 36
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 37
Exemptions .............................................................................................................. 37
Section 5.6 – Municipal Work Program ....................................................................... 38
Consent .................................................................................................................... 38
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt ............................ 38
Limitations ................................................................................................................ 38
“Workfare First” Policy ............................................................................................. 40
Work-Related Expenses........................................................................................... 42
Disqualification ......................................................................................................... 42
Eligibility Regained ................................................................................................... 43
Reports ..................................................................................................................... 44
v
Section 5.7 – Use of Resources .................................................................................. 44
Minors ...................................................................................................................... 44
Mental or Physical Disability ..................................................................................... 45
Written Notice; Disqualification ................................................................................. 46
Forfeiture of Benefits ................................................................................................ 46
Section 5.8 – Period of Ineligibility .............................................................................. 46
Work Requirement ................................................................................................... 47
Fraud ........................................................................................................................ 47
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud ........................................................................... 47
Article VI – Determination of Eligibility ........................................................................... 48
Section 6.1 – Recognition of Dignity and Rights ......................................................... 48
Section 6.2 – Determination; Redetermination ............................................................ 48
Section 6.3 – Verification ............................................................................................ 49
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility ............................................................... 49
Applicant’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 49
Initial Applicants ....................................................................................................... 49
Repeat Applicants .................................................................................................... 50
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants ................................................................................. 50
Overseer’s responsibilities ....................................................................................... 50
Redetermination of eligibility .................................................................................... 51
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information ............................................................ 52
Section 6.4 – Fraud ..................................................................................................... 52
Period of Ineligibility ................................................................................................. 53
Right to a Fair Hearing ............................................................................................. 53
Reimbursement ........................................................................................................ 53
Dependents .............................................................................................................. 54
Section 6.5 – Period of Eligibility ................................................................................. 54
Section 6.6 – Determination of Need .......................................................................... 55
Income for Basic Necessities ................................................................................... 55
vi
Use-of-Income Requirements .................................................................................. 56
Calculation of Income and Expenses ....................................................................... 57
Consolidation of Deficit............................................................................................. 58
Section 6.7 – Income .................................................................................................. 58
Income Standards .................................................................................................... 58
Calculation of Income ............................................................................................... 59
Types of Income ....................................................................................................... 59
a) Earned income................................................................................................ 59
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs ......................... 60
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments .................................................................. 61
d) Income from Other Sources ............................................................................ 61
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter ....................................................................... 61
f) Income from Household Members ................................................................... 61
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income ........................................................... 62
h) Lump Sum Income .......................................................................................... 62
Section 6.8 – Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance ............................... 64
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance .................................................................... 64
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities ................................ 64
A) Food .............................................................................................................. 65
B) Housing ......................................................................................................... 66
Rental Payments to Relatives ....................................................................... 66
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives ................................................................ 67
Mortgage Payments ...................................................................................... 67
Liens .............................................................................................................. 69
Property Taxes .............................................................................................. 70
Housing Maximums ....................................................................................... 71
C) Utilities .......................................................................................................... 72
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water ................. 72
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated
Hot Water ................................................................................................. 73
vii
Non-Electric Utilities ...................................................................................... 73
D) Fuel ............................................................................................................... 73
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies ........................................................ 73
F) Other Basic Necessities ................................................................................ 74
1) Clothing ..................................................................................................... 74
2) Medical ...................................................................................................... 74
3) Hospital Bills .............................................................................................. 75
4) Dental ........................................................................................................ 76
5) Eye Care ................................................................................................... 76
6) Telephone Charge ..................................................................................... 77
7) Work-Related Expenses ............................................................................ 77
8) Travel Expenses ........................................................................................ 77
9) Burials, Cremations ................................................................................... 77
10) Capital Improvements ............................................................................... 78
Section 6.9 – Burials; Cremations ............................................................................... 78
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice ............................................................. 78
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased ........... 79
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members ...................................... 79
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members ......................... 80
Proration of Familial Responsibility ........................................................................ 80
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility ......................................................................... 81
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others
Can Contribute ................................................................................................ 81
Burial Expenses ..................................................................................................... 81
Cremation Expenses ............................................................................................. 82
Section 6.10 – Notice of Decision ............................................................................... 82
Written Decision .................................................................................................... 82
Contents ................................................................................................................ 83
Disbursement of General Assistance .................................................................... 83
viii
Article VII – The Fair Hearing........................................................................................ 84
Section 7.1 – Right to a Fair Hearing .......................................................................... 84
Section 7.2 – Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing ...................................................... 84
Written Request ..................................................................................................... 84
Scheduling the Fair Hearing .................................................................................. 85
Section 7.3 – The Fair Hearing Authority .................................................................... 85
Section 7.4 – Fair Hearing Procedure ......................................................................... 86
Claimant’s Failure to Appear ................................................................................. 87
Section 7.5 – The Fair Hearing Decision ..................................................................... 88
Article VIII – Recovery of Expenses ............................................................................. 90
Recipients ................................................................................................................... 90
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits ........................................... 90
Recipients of SSI ........................................................................................................ 91
Relatives ..................................................................................................................... 91
Article IX – Severability................................................................................................. 92
Appendixes
Appendix A – GA Overall Maximums
Appendix B – Food Maximums
Appendix C – GA Housing Maximums
Appendix D – Electric Utility Maximums
Appendix E – Heating Fuel
Appendix F – Household & Personal Items
Appendix G –Mileage Rate
Appendix H – Funeral Maximums
Appendix I – Definition of Misconduct (26 MRSA § 1043(23))
1
ARTICLE I
Statement of Policy
The Municipality of FAIRFIELD, MAINE administers a program of general assistance
(GA) available to all persons who are eligible to receive assistance in accordance with
the standards of eligibility as provided within this ordinance, Department of Health and
Human Services (DHHS) GA policy and in 22 M.R.S.A. § 4301 et seq.
Every effort will be made to recognize the dignity of the applicant while encouraging
self-reliance. The program will strive to help eligible persons achieve self-maintenance
by promoting the work incentive. When possible, it will seek to alleviate needs other
than financial through rehabilitative, preventive and protective services. The general
assistance program will place no unreasonable restrictions on the personal rights of the
applicant or recipient, nor will there be any unlawful discrimination based on sex, age,
race, nationality, religion, sexual orientation or disability. The municipality is committed
to including qualified individuals with disabilities in municipal services, programs, and
activities. As a result, the municipality will promote a GA program that when viewed in
its entirety, is readily accessible to and usable by individuals with disabilities. GA
applicants with physical or mental disabilities that require a reasonable accommodation
in order to access and/or utilize the municipal GA program are encouraged to provide
the municipality with advance notice regarding the accommodation request.
The general assistance administrator will act promptly on all applications for assistance
and requests for fair hearings. GA applicants will be provided information regarding
their rights and responsibilities under the GA program. Within 24 hours after receipt of
an application, the administrator will provide the applicant a written decision, whether or
not assistance is granted, that will state the specific reasons for the decision. The
administrator will also provide the applicant written notice that the applicant may appeal
to the municipal fair hearing authority if dissatisfied with the decision. When an
applicant is determined to be eligible, assistance appropriate to the need will be
2
furnished within 24 hours after the completed application is submitted except when the
administrator issues non-emergency assistance conditionally on the successful
completion of a workfare assignment (see section 5.6 of this ordinance).
The administrator will maintain complete and accurate records pertaining to each
applicant and recipient. These records are confidential as a matter of law (see 22
MRSA §4306).
The administrator will post notice stating the day(s) and hours the administrator will be
available. The administrator, or other designated person/entity, will be available to take
applications in the event of an emergency at all other times. A copy of this ordinance
and Maine General Assistance law will be readily available to any member of the public
upon request. Notice to this effect will be posted.
3
ARTICLE II
Definitions
Section 2.1—Common Meaning of Words
Unless otherwise apparent or defined, all words in this ordinance will have their
common meaning.
Section 2.2—Special Definitions
Applicant. A person who has submitted, either directly or through an authorized
representative, an application for general assistance or who has, in an emergency,
requested assistance without first completing an application. In addition, all persons on
whose behalf an authorized application has been submitted or on whose behalf benefits
have been granted shall be considered applicants.
Application Form. A standardized form used by the general assistance administrator for
the purpose of allowing a person to apply for general assistance and confirming the fact
that a person has made application. The application form must be signed by the
applicant to be considered complete.
Basic Necessities. Food, clothing, shelter, fuel, electricity, non-elective essential
medical services as prescribed by a physician, nonprescription drugs, basic telephone
service where it is necessary for medical reasons, property taxes when a tax lien placed
on the property threatens the loss of the applicant’s place of residence, and any other
commodity or service determined essential by the municipality.
“Basic necessities” do not include:
? Phone bills
? Cable or satellite dish
television
? Mail orders
? Vehicle payments
? Credit card debt**
? Furniture
? Loan re-payments**
4
? Cigarettes
? Alcohol
? Pet care costs
? Vacation costs
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Key deposits
? Security deposits for rental
property(except for those
situations where no other
permanent lodging is
available unless a security
deposit is paid, and a waiver,
deferral or installment
arrangement cannot be made
between the landlord and
tenant to satisfy the need for
the immediate payment of the
security deposit or payment in
full) (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(1)).
**Repayments of loans or credit will be treated as having been spent on basic
necessities when the applicant can provide verification of this fact.
Case Record. An official file containing application forms; correspondence; narrative
records and all other communications pertaining to an applicant or recipient; written
decisions regarding eligibility including reasons for those decisions as well as the types
and amounts of assistance provided; and all records concerning an applicant’s request
for fair hearing and those fair hearing decisions.
Categorical Assistance. All state and federal income maintenance programs.
Claimant. A person who has requested a fair hearing.
Deficit. An applicant’s deficit is the appropriate overall maximum level of assistance for
the household as provided in section 6.8 of this ordinance less the household income as
calculated pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a
positive number. If the household income is greater than the appropriate overall
maximum level of assistance, the household has no deficit.
5
Disabled Person. A person who is presently unable to work or maintain a home due to
a physical or mental disability that is verified by a physician or qualified mental health
provider.
Dwelling Unit. A building or part thereof used for separate living quarters for one or
more persons living as a single housekeeping unit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(2)).
Eligible Person. A person who is qualified to receive general assistance benefits from
the municipality according to the standards of eligibility set forth in this ordinance, Maine
General Assistance law (22 M.R.S.A. ch. 1161), and Maine Department of Health &
Human Services regulations (10-144 C.M.R. ch. 323). If otherwise qualified, “Eligible
Person” shall include U.S. citizens; non-U.S. citizens who are lawfully present in the
United States as described in 8 U.S.C. § 1621(a)(1)-(3); and non-U.S. citizens who are
pursuing a lawful process to apply for immigration relief. Assistance for non-citizens
pursuing a lawful process for immigration relief shall not exceed 24 months beginning
with assistance provided after July 1, 2015. “Eligible Person” does not include a fugitive
from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4).
Emergency. Any life threatening situation or a situation beyond the control of the
individual which, if not alleviated immediately, could reasonably be expected to pose a
threat to the health or safety of a person At the municipality’s option, a situation which is
imminent and which may result in undue hardship or unnecessary cost to the individual
or municipality if not resolved immediately. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(4), 4308(2), 4310).
General Assistance Program. A service administered by a municipality for the
immediate aid of persons who are unable to provide the basic necessities essential to
maintain themselves or their families. A general assistance program provides a specific
amount and type of aid for defined needs during a limited period of time and is not
intended to be a continuing “grant-in-aid” or “categorical” welfare program. This
definition shall not in any way lessen the responsibility of each municipality to provide
general assistance to a person each time that the person is in need and is found to be
otherwise eligible to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(5)).
6
General Assistance Administrator. A municipal official designated to receive
applications, make decisions concerning an applicant’s right to receive assistance, and
prepare records and communications concerning assistance. He or she may be an
elected overseer or an authorized agent such as a town manager, welfare director, or
caseworker (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12)).
Household. “Household” means an individual or a group of individuals who share a
dwelling unit. When an applicant shares a dwelling unit with one or more individuals,
even when a landlord-tenant relationship may exist between individuals residing in the
dwelling unit, eligible applicants may receive assistance for no more than their pro rata
share of the actual costs of the shared basic needs of that household according to the
maximum levels of assistance established in the municipal ordinance. The pro rata
share is calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire
household by the total number of household members. The income of household
members not legally liable shall be considered as available to the applicant only when
there is a pooling of income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Income. “Income” means any form of income in cash or in kind received by the
household including:
? Net remuneration for services
performed
? Cash received on either
secured or unsecured credit
? Payments received as an
annuity, retirement or
disability benefits
? Veterans’ pensions and/or
benefits
? Retirement accounts or
benefits
? Workers’ compensation
? Unemployment benefits
? Federal and/or state tax
returns
? Benefits under any state or
federal categorical assistance
program such as, TANF,
Supplemental Security
Income, Social Security and
any other payments from
governmental sources (unless
specifically prohibited by any
law or regulation)
7
? Court ordered support
payments, e.g., child support
? Income from pension or trust
funds
? Household income from any
other source, including
relatives or unrelated
household members
? Student loans
? Rental income
The following items shall not be considered as income or assets that must be liquidated
for the purposes of deriving income:
1) Real or personal income-producing property, tools of trade, governmental
entitlement specifically treated as exempt assets by state or federal law;
2) Actual work-related expenses, whether itemized or by standard deduction, such
as taxes, retirement fund contributions, union dues, transportation costs to and
from work, special equipment costs and child care expenses; or
3) Earned income of children below the age of 18 years who are full-time students
and who are not working full time.
In determining need, the period of time used as a basis for the calculation shall
be a 30-day period commencing on the date of the application. This prospective
calculation shall not disqualify an applicant who has exhausted income to
purchase basic necessities, provided that the income does not exceed the
income standards established by the municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
4) Certain public benefit programs are specifically exempt from being counted as
income for purposes of GA. These programs include:
? Food Stamps (7 USCS § 2017(b))
? Li-Heap (42 USCS § 8624)
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
8
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness
Credit program, only so long as the money is spent on basic
necessities. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
? Aspire Support Service Payments (10-144 CMR Chapter 323)
Initial Applicant. A person who has not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality is considered an initial applicant.
Just Cause. A valid, verifiable reason that hinders an individual from complying with
one or more conditions of eligibility or from attending a scheduled fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A(5)).
Lump Sum Payment. A one-time or typically nonrecurring sum of money issued to an
applicant or recipient. Lump sum payment includes, but is not limited to, retroactive or
settlement portions of social security benefits, workers' compensation payments,
unemployment benefits, disability income, veterans' benefits, severance pay benefits, or
money received from inheritances, lottery winnings, personal injury awards, property
damage claims or divorce settlements. A lump sum payment includes only the amount
of money available to the applicant after payment of required deductions has been
made from the gross lump sum payment. A lump sum payment does not include
conversion of a non-liquid resource to a liquid resource if the liquid resource has been
used or is intended to be used to replace the converted resource or for other necessary
expenses. (22 MRSA § 4301 (8-A)).
Material Fact. A material fact is a fact that necessarily has some bearing on the
determination of an applicant’s general assistance eligibility, and which would, if
disclosed to the administrator, have some determinable effect on the calculation of
eligibility or the issuance of a grant of assistance.
9
Maximum Levels of Assistance. The amount of financial assistance for a commodity or
service as established in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the actual cost of any such
basic necessity, whichever is less.
Misconduct. For purposes of the GA work requirement (see 22 MRSA §4316-A)
misconduct shall have the same meaning as misconduct defined in 26 MRSA §1043
(23). (See Appendix I of this ordinance for the official definition of misconduct.)
Generally, employees are guilty of misconduct when the employee violates his or her
duties or obligations to the employer. Employees who engage in a pattern of
irresponsible behavior to the detriment of the employer’s interest may also be found
guilty of misconduct.
Municipality. Any city, town or plantation administering a general assistance program.
Municipality of Responsibility. The municipality which is financially liable for the support
of an eligible person at the time of application (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(9), 4307).
Need. The condition whereby a person’s income, money, property, credit, assets or
other resources available to provide basic necessities for the individual and the
individual’s family are less than the maximum levels of assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §
4301(10), 4308).
Net General Assistance Costs. Those direct costs incurred by a municipality in
providing assistance to eligible persons according to standards established by the
municipal officers. These do not include the administrative expenses of the general
assistance program (22 M.R.S.A. §§ 4301(11), 4311).
Period of Eligibility. The time for which a person has been granted assistance. The
period of eligibility may vary depending on the type of assistance provided, however, in
no event shall this period extend beyond one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(1)).
Pooling of Income. “Pooling of income” means the financial relationship among
household members who are not legally liable for mutual support in which there occurs
10
any commingling of funds or sharing of income or expenses. Municipalities may by
ordinance establish as a rebuttable presumption that persons sharing the same dwelling
unit are pooling their income. Applicants who are requesting that the determination of
eligibility be calculated as though one or more household members are not pooling their
income have the burden of rebutting the presumed pooling of income.
Real Estate. Any land, buildings, homes, mobile homes and any other things affixed to
the land (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(13)).
Recipient. A person who has applied for and is currently receiving general assistance.
Registered Domestic Partner. An individual registered as the domestic partner of the
applicant pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 2710.
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. For purposes of this ordinance repeat and subsequent shall have
the same meaning.
Resident. A person who is physically present in a municipality with the intention of
remaining in that municipality in order to maintain or establish a home and who has no
other residence. A person who applies for assistance in a municipality who is not a
resident of that municipality or any other municipality is the responsibility of the
municipality where the person first applies. That municipality must take an application
and grant assistance to the applicant if he/she is eligible, until he/she establishes a new
residence in another municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Resources. Resources include any program, service, or other sources of support which
are an alternative to or supplement for general assistance. There are two kinds of
resources: “available” and “potential”. Potential resources are programs, services, nonliquid
assets, or trusts that typically require people to apply in writing and/or wait a
period of time before eligibility is determined or the potential income is released.
11
Potential resources include but are not limited to any state or federal assistance
program, employment benefits, governmental or private pension program, available
trust funds, support from legally liable relatives, child support payments, and jointly held
resources where the applicant or recipient share may be available to the individual
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4317). Potential resources include the TANF (previously known as
AFDC) program, Food Stamps, fuel assistance (HEAP), subsidized housing, and similar
programs.
Available resources include resources which are immediately available to the applicant
or which can be conveniently secured by the applicant without delay, such as cash on
hand or in bank accounts, assets for which there is an immediate and available market,
or support from relatives which is being made available at the time of application and for
which the applicant does not have to take any unreasonable steps to secure (e.g.,
relocation beyond the immediate region). At the discretion of the GA administrator a
necessary minimum balance required by a financial institution in order to obtain free
checking or in order to maintain the account shall not be considered an available
resource.
The municipal GA administrator reserves the right to inform GA clients of services,
commodities or facilities made available by private organizations or charities. Although
GA applicants/recipients may be informed of the existence of a charitable resource
and/or organization, GA eligibility shall not be based or conditioned on the use of a
private charitable resource(s).
30-Day Need. An applicant’s 30-day need is the sum of the household’s prospective
30-day costs, from the date of application, for the various basic necessities. For the
purpose of this calculation, the 30-day cost for any basic need shall be the household’s
actual 30-day cost for the basic necessity or the maximum 30-day cost for the basic
necessity as established by this ordinance, whichever is less.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Are repeat applicants who have not applied for
assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly employed or
12
receiving support from a public benefit or private source and who have unexpectedly
become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose benefits (e.g., through an
available resource) have ceased through no fault of their own.
Unmet Need. An applicant’s unmet need is the household’s 30-day need as
established by section 6.6 of the ordinance less the household income as calculated
pursuant to section 6.7 of this ordinance, provided such a calculation yields a positive
number. If the household income is greater than the household’s 30-day need, the
household does not have an unmet need.
Work Requirements. Work requirements are those obligations the municipal
administrator places on applicants for general assistance as directed and/or authorized
by 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A to the extent such obligations ensure a continuing potential
eligibility for general assistance when complied with, result in ineligibility when violated,
and are not merely optional, discretionary, or advisory. Work requirements include
registering for work, looking for work in good faith, accepting all suitable job offers,
maintaining employment, performing workfare, and participating in training, educational,
or rehabilitation programs that will assist the participant in securing employment.
13
ARTICLE III
Administrative Rules and Regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the administration of general assistance.
Section 3.1—Confidentiality of Information
Case records and all other information relating to an applicant or recipient of general
assistance are confidential and will not be disclosed to the general public, unless the
applicant or recipient states in writing what information is to be released (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4306).
Release of Information. Applicants, recipients and their legal representatives have the
right to review their case records. No record will be released to a third party, however,
unless the administrator receives a consent form signed by the applicant expressly
authorizing the release of his or her records to the specified parties. Whenever the
administrator releases any information, he/she will make a notation in the applicant’s file
stating to whom the record was released and the date. The administrator may charge a
reasonable fee for the reproduction of any records when appropriate.
Information from Other Sources; Penalty. Information furnished to the municipality by
the Department of Health and Human Services or any other agency or institution
pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4314, is confidential. The general assistance administrator
will also comply with laws relating to the confidentiality of vital statistic records such as
those concerning birth, marriage and death. (22 M.R.S.A. § 2706).
Any representative of a financial institution or any employer of a general assistance
applicant who, upon receipt of a written release signed by the depositor and a written
request from the Administrator, refuses to provide necessary information to the
administrator in order to verify an applicant’s eligibility must state in writing the reason
for the refusal. Effective November 1, 2017 national banks are also obligated to
disclose deposit information to the Administrator upon receipt of a written request and
14
release signed by the depositor. Additionally, effective November 1, 2017, when a
municipality or its agents are acting in accordance with section 4313(2) to verify
eligibility for funeral or cremation benefits, an officer of a financial institution must
disclose the amount deposited upon receipt of a written request from the municipality or
its agents and a notarized affidavit signed by the overseer of the municipality or its
agents stating that the named depositor is deceased. Any such person who refuses to
provide information, without just cause, may be subject to a civil penalty of not less than
$25 nor more than $100. Any person, including the applicant, who knowingly and
willfully makes a false representation of a material fact to the administrator is committing
a Class E crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314, 4315).
Misuse of Information. Misuse of any information relating to an applicant or recipient is
a punishable offense (22 M.R.S.A. § 42(2)).
Section 3.2—Maintenance of Records
The general assistance administrator will keep complete and accurate general
assistance records (22 M.R.S.A. § 4306). These records are necessary to:
a) provide a valid basis of accounting for municipal expenditures;
b) document and support decisions concerning an applicant or recipient; and
c) ensure the availability of all relevant information in the event of a fair hearing or
judicial review of a decision by the general assistance administrator.
Case Records. The administrator will establish and maintain a separate case record,
either in paper format or digital format for each applicant or recipient. Each case record
will include at least:
? household applications
? budget sheets
? information concerning the
types and amounts of
assistance provided
15
? narrative statements
describing the nature of the
emergency situation
whenever general assistance
is granted in amounts greater
than the applicant’s
mathematical eligibility (i.e.,
deficit or unmet need,
whichever is less)
? written decisions
? requests for fair hearings and
the fair hearing authority
decisions
? workfare participation records
? repayments to the
municipality
? narrative writings
documenting the need for
general assistance, the
results of home visits,
collateral information,
referrals, changes in status
? client authorization(s) for the
release of GA information
and/or reason(s) for the
release of confidential
information
? adjustments in aid, and
suspension or termination of
eligibility
? physician’s documentation
? Supplemental Security
Income (SSI) interim
assistance reimbursement
authorization forms
? vendor forms
Case records will not include information or material that is irrelevant to either the
applicant’s or recipient’s application or the administrator’s decisions.
Retention of Records. General assistance records shall be retained for a minimum of
three full years. The three year period shall coincide with the State’s fiscal year which
begins July 1 and ends on the following June 30. Records may be destroyed after three
years by one of the two preferred methods of destruction for confidential records, i.e.,
supervised shredding, burning or appropriate digital deletion/destruction process. In the
event a client’s records contain SSI reimbursement forms, the client’s records should be
maintained so that the municipality may seek reimbursement.
16
ARTICLE IV
Application Procedure
Section 4.1—Right to Apply
Who May Apply. Anyone may apply for general assistance. The head of the family,
any other responsible household member, or an authorized representative must apply in
person, except in special emergency situations as provided in section 4.9 of this
ordinance or except when the applicant is a resident of an emergency shelter and the
municipality has made an agreement with that emergency shelter to presume shelter
residents to be eligible for general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. §4304(3)). In such cases,
the administrator may require a representative to present a signed statement
documenting that he/she is in fact authorized to apply for general assistance on behalf
of the named applicant. The applicant or representative must complete a written
application and any other required forms so that the administrator can determine
eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4308). With notice, all members of the household
receiving general assistance may be required to physically present themselves to the
administrator. Note that fugitives from justice are ineligible for general assistance.
Application Via Telephone. When a person has an emergency but is unable to apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of child care, lack of transportation or other good
cause, and he/she cannot send an authorized representative, the administrator will
accept an application by telephone. The telephone application process will include the
administrator receiving written verification by mail and visiting the applicant’s home with
his or her permission (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Written Application Upon Each Request. Each request for assistance will be
administered in accordance with these guidelines. The administrator will make an
independent determination of eligibility for general assistance each time a person
applies (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4308, 4309).
17
Applications Accepted; Posted Notice. Application forms will be available during regular
business hours at the municipal office and when the general assistance administrator is
conducting interviews with applicants. Notice will be posted stating when and where
people may apply for assistance and the name of the administrator available to take
emergency applications at all other times. In addition, the posted notice shall include
the fact that the municipality must issue a written decision on all applications within 24
hours, and the DHHS toll-free telephone numbers for reporting alleged violations or
complaints. Completed applications will be accepted and interviews given only during
the regular hours established and posted by the administrator. In an emergency,
however, the administrator or his or her designee will be available to accept applications
for assistance whenever necessary (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
Section 4.2—Application Interview
Except when it is impractical, the general assistance administrator will interview each
applicant personally before making a decision. The interview will be conducted in
private, although the applicant may be accompanied by a legal representative, friend or
family member.
Section 4.3—Contents of the Application
At a minimum, the application will contain the following mandatory information:
a) applicant’s name, address, date of
birth, Social Security number or
appropriate United States Customs
and Immigration Services (USCIS)
documentation, and phone number;
b) names, date(s) of birth, and Social
Security number(s) or appropriate
USCIS documentation of other
household members for whom the
applicant is seeking assistance;
c) total number of individuals living with
the applicant;
d) employment and employability
information;
18
e) all household income, resources,
assets, and property;
f) household expenses;
g) types of assistance being requested;
h) penalty for false representation;
i) applicant’s permission to verify
information;
j) signature of applicant and date.
In the event an initial applicant is unable to provide identification records (e.g., Social
Security card/number) because the record may have been lost, stolen or misplaced, the
initial applicant may be provided a reasonable amount of time, e.g., five working days, in
order to obtain copies of identification records. Provided the initial applicant makes a
good faith effort to obtain the item/record sought, GA required to cure an immediate
and/or emergency need shall not be withheld. In such cases the municipality may elect
to provide only a prorated amount of GA, e.g., five day’s worth, while the applicant
proceeds to obtain the required information.
Section 4.4—General Assistance Administrator’s Responsibilities at the Time of the
Application
The administrator will make every effort to inform all applicants of their rights and
responsibilities as well as the general program requirements associated with applying
for and receiving general assistance, including application requirements, eligibility
guidelines, applicant rights, and applicant reimbursement obligations.
Application Requirements. The administrator will help the applicant fill out the
application form as described in the preceding section. The administrator will inform the
applicant of any other information or documentation that the applicant will have to
provide in order for the administrator to evaluate the applicant’s eligibility for assistance.
The administrator will fully explain the purpose of any release of information form or
reimbursement agreement before seeking to obtain the applicant’s signature or written
authorization.
19
Eligibility Requirements. The administrator will inform, either verbally or in writing, the
applicant of the eligibility requirements of the program, including:
? the income standard of need;
? the applicant’s ongoing use-of-income, work-related, and resource-related
responsibilities, as described in the section immediately below;
? the financial reduction in assistance that is the consequence of spending
household income on non-basic necessities;
? immigration status (see definition of “Eligible Person”); and
? the disqualification penalties associated with committing fraud, failing to perform
work-related assignments without just cause, or failing to make a good faith
effort to secure potential resources when the requirement to attempt to obtain
those resources has been explained to the applicant in writing.
Applicant Rights. The administrator will inform all applicants of their rights to:
? review the municipal General Assistance ordinance and Maine General
Assistance law;
? apply for assistance;
? receive a written decision concerning eligibility within 24 hours of applying for
assistance;
? confidentiality;
? contact the DHHS;
? challenge the administrator’s decision by requesting a fair hearing.
Reimbursement/Recovery. The administrator will inform the applicant that he/she must
reimburse the municipality for the amount of general assistance he/she has been
granted in the event of a subsequent ability to pay. The municipality may also, as
appropriate, contact the client’s legal representative to inform him or her of the client’s
obligation to repay the municipality under the GA program. In addition to seeking
20
repayment from a recipient, the municipality also may recover the amount of assistance
granted to a recipient during the previous 12 months from any relative legally liable for
the applicant’s support (spouses, parents of persons under the age of 25, see Article
VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”) (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4318, 4319). Whenever applicable, the
administrator will explain the various liens a municipality may place against a recipient’s
real or personal property, such as the mortgage or capital improvement lien, the
Workers’ Compensation lump sum payment lien, or the SSI “interim assistance
agreement” lien, as these liens are described in Article VIII, “Recovery of Expenses”.
Section 4.5—Responsibilities of the Applicant at the Time of Application
The applicant has the responsibility at the time of each application to provide accurate,
complete and current household information and verifiable documentation concerning:
? Income
? Resources
? Assets
? Employment
? Use of income
? Names and addresses of any relatives legally liable for the applicant’s
support
? Any change in this information from a previous application that would
affect household eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. §4309).
In addition, the applicant must accurately report and provide verifiable documentation
that shows the applicant:
a) has remained employed, if previously employed, and not quit work without
just cause or been discharged from employment for misconduct;
b) has been seeking employment, if previously unemployed or employed on a
part-time basis, has accepted any suitable offer of employment, and has
21
satisfactorily performed all workfare assignments or had just cause not to
perform those assignments;
c) has made use of all available and potential resources when directed in
writing to such a program by the administrator, including, but not limited to,
other government benefit programs or the assistance of liable relatives of
sufficient means; and
d) has participated in any training, retraining, educational or rehabilitative
program when appropriate and when directed in writing to such a program
by the administrator, in order to diminish the applicant’s need for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § §4316-A, 4317).
Section 4.6—Action on Applications
Written Decision. The general assistance administrator will give a written decision to
the applicant concerning his or her eligibility within 24 hours after the applicant submits
a written application. Assistance will be furnished to eligible applicants within that period
except when the municipality is permitted by law (and pursuant to section 5.6 of this
ordinance) to issue assistance conditionally on the successful completion of a workfare
assignment (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4305, 4316-A, 4321). A written decision will be given
each time a person applies, whether assistance is granted, denied, reduced or
terminated.
Content. The written decision will contain the following information:
a) the type and amount of aid the applicant is being granted or the applicant’s
ineligibility;
b) the period of eligibility if the applicant is eligible for assistance;
c) the specific reasons for the decision;
22
d) the applicant’s right to a fair hearing; and
e) the applicant’s right to notify the DHHS if he/she believes the municipality has
acted illegally (22 M.R.S.A. § 4321).
Section 4.7—Withdrawal of an Application
An application is considered withdrawn if:
a) the applicant requests in writing that his or her application be withdrawn; or
b) the applicant refuses to complete or sign the application or any other form
needed by the general assistance administrator.
Section 4.8—Temporary Refusal to Accept Application
Under special circumstances, the general assistance administrator may temporarily
refuse to accept applications. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
a) When the applicant’s conduct is abusive, disruptive, or harassing, or when the
applicant is under the influence of drugs or alcohol. In these situations, the
applicant will be asked to leave, and if the applicant refuses to leave, the police
may be summoned. The applicant will be informed that an application will only
be accepted when his or her conduct is under control.
b) If the administrator believes that an applicant’s behavior presents a threat to the
health or safety of the public or to a municipal employee, or if such behavior is
violent, or if an applicant has engaged in abusive, disruptive or harassing
behavior and has been required to leave on more than one occasion, then the
applicant may be required to designate a third party to apply for assistance on his
or her behalf and the applicant may be prohibited from entering the municipal
building;
23
c) When a third person applies for assistance on behalf of the applicant that person
may be required to provide written verification that he/she has been duly
authorized to act as a representative for the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
Section 4.9—Emergencies
An emergency is considered to be any life threatening situation or a situation beyond
the control of the applicant which if not alleviated immediately could reasonably be
expected to pose a threat to the health or safety of the applicant or a member of the
household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(4)). Although they may be considered otherwise
ineligible to receive general assistance, persons who apply for assistance to alleviate an
emergency may be granted assistance, except as provided below, if they do not have
sufficient income and resources to meet an actual emergency need and have not had
sufficient income and resources to avert the emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308).
A municipality may provide emergency assistance when the municipality determines
that an emergency is imminent and that failure to provide assistance may result in
undue hardship and unnecessary costs to either the client or the municipality.
Disqualification. A person who is currently disqualified from receiving General
Assistance due to a violation of sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9 or 6.4 of this ordinance is
ineligible to receive emergency assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)(A)). However,
dependents of a disqualified person may be eligible for assistance. For the purposes of
this section, “dependents” are defined as: 1) a dependent minor child; 2) an elderly, ill or
disabled person; or 3) a person whose presence is required to provide care for any child
under the age of 6 years or any ill or disabled member of the household (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4309(3)).
In the event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household
by the total number of household members.
24
Assistance Prior to Verification. Whenever an applicant informs the administrator that
he/she needs assistance immediately, the administrator will grant, pending verification,
the assistance within 24 hours, provided that:
a) after interviewing the applicant the administrator has determined that the
applicant will probably be eligible for assistance after a verification of information
is completed; and
b) the applicant submits documentation when possible, to verify his or her need.
The administrator may contact at least one other person to confirm the
applicant’s statements about needing emergency assistance. No further
assistance will be authorized until the applicant’s eligibility is confirmed (22
M.R.S.A. § 4310).
Telephone Applications. If a person has an emergency need and cannot apply in
person due to illness, disability, lack of transportation, or other good cause, and if there
is no authorized representative who can apply on behalf of the applicant, the
administrator shall accept an application over the telephone (22 M.R.S.A. § 4304).
The administrator will not grant any assistance as the result of a telephone application if
the applicant refuses to allow the administrator to verify the information either by visiting
his or her home or by mail and the administrator cannot determine his or her eligibility
through any other means.
Limitation on Emergency Assistance. Applicants are not automatically eligible for
emergency assistance. If applicants had income which could have been used to
prevent all or part of an emergency, but they spent that income on items which are not
basic necessities, they will not be eligible to receive general assistance to replace the
misspent money (22 MRSA § § 4308(2) & 4315-A).
All applicants have the responsibility to provide the administrator with verifiable
documentation demonstrating that the applicant did not have sufficient income to avert
25
the emergency situation. According to the following criteria, the administrator may limit
emergency assistance to cover only the difference between the amount of money
necessary for the household to avoid the emergency and the amount of income
available to the household during the applicable time period.
a) The applicable time period shall be the 30 days preceding the application for
emergency assistance, except in those cases where the emergency was created
by a negative account balance for a commodity or service (such as rent,
mortgage or utility payments), and the negative account balance was created
over a longer period of time. In such cases, the applicable time period shall be
the consecutive length of time the account balance has been in the negative.
b) The administrator shall seek from the applicant all information pertinent to the
applicant’s ability to provide for his or her basic necessities for the applicable
time period, including evidence of all income and resources received over that
period of time.
c) The administrator shall calculate all costs for the household’s basic necessities
during the applicable time period, per month, in accordance with the maximum
levels established by this ordinance for the specific basic necessity or the actual
monthly cost, whichever is less, including all costs associated with averting the
particular emergency situation for which the applicant is seeking assistance.
d) From the total household costs for basic necessities during the applicable time
period, the administrator shall subtract the total income and lump sum payments
available to the household for the applicable time period as well as the total
general assistance actually received during the applicable time period.
e) The administrator may restrict the issuance of emergency assistance to the
difference yielded by the computation in subsection (d), even when such a grant
will not totally alleviate the emergency situation.
26
f) The administrator may waive this limitation on emergency assistance in life
threatening situations or for initial applicants; that is, persons who have never
before applied for general assistance.
g) Nothing in these criteria may be construed as prohibiting a municipality from
electing to alleviate an emergency situation in the most cost-effective manner
available, provided such a determination of eligibility for emergency assistance is
in conformance with general assistance law.
Section 4.10—Residence
The administrator shall provide general assistance to all eligible persons applying for
assistance who are residents of this municipality. A resident is a person who has no
other residence and is physically present in this municipality and who intends to remain
here and establish a household.
The municipality also recognizes its responsibility to provide assistance to eligible
persons who apply here and who are not residents of this municipality or any other
municipality. If a person who is not a resident of any municipality applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until he/she establishes a residence in another municipality (22
M.R.S.A. § 4307).
Moving/Relocating. The municipality will not consider moving or transporting an
applicant or recipient into another municipality unless the person requests assistance to
relocate to another municipality. If the administrator determines the applicant is eligible
and grants financial assistance to help with the requested relocation, this municipality
will be responsible for providing assistance to the applicant for 30 days after he/she
moves provided the recipient remains eligible.
Institutions. If a resident of this municipality enters an institution located in another
municipality (such as a group home, shelter, rehabilitation center, nursing home, or
27
hospital) and requests assistance while at the institution, he/she will be the
responsibility of this municipality for up to 6 months after he/she enters the institution if
the conditions of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4307 and §4313 are met. The municipality thereafter
retains responsibility for an applicant in an institution only if the applicant has
maintained a home in this municipality to which he/she intends to return. The
municipality also recognizes its responsibility for applicants residing in an institution in
this municipality if such an applicant had no residence prior to entering the institution
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Temporary Housing. Hotels/motels and similar places of temporary lodging are
considered institutions if the municipality grants financial assistance for, makes
arrangements for, or advises or encourages an applicant to stay in temporary lodging.
Note: Municipalities which illegally deny housing assistance and, as a result of the
denial, the applicant stays in temporary lodging are responsible for the applicant for up
to 6 months and may be subject to other penalties (22 M.R.S.A. § 4307(4)).
Disputes. When the administrator believes that an applicant is a resident of another
municipality but that municipality disputes its responsibility the administrator will notify
the DHHS in Augusta (287-3654 or 1-800-442-6003). If the applicant applies in this
municipality first, the administrator will determine his or her eligibility and, if eligible, will
grant assistance until the DHHS has concluded which municipality is responsible for
providing assistance. If another municipality was responsible, the DHHS will recover
the amount due from the other municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4307(5), 4307(6)).
28
ARTICLE V
Eligibility Factors
A person will be eligible for general assistance if he/she is an “Eligible Person” as
defined in section 2.2, is in need, and has complied with the eligibility requirements set
forth below. For guidance in determining whether an applicant is an Eligible Person,
contact the Department of Health & Human Services at (800) 442-6003 (TTY: 287-
6948).
Section 5.1—Initial Application
Initial Application. For initial applicants, except as provided immediately below, need
will be the sole condition of eligibility. The exception to this general rule, as provided by
law, applies to all applicants, including initial applicants, who are disqualified for a
defined period for quitting employment without just cause or for being discharged from
employment for misconduct (22 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23)) (see section 5.5 of this
ordinance) and to fugitives from justice as defined in 15 M.R.S.A. § 201(4) (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4301(3)). An initial applicant is a person who has never before applied for general
assistance in any municipality in Maine (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(1)).
“Need” means that the applicant’s income (including prorated income, where
applicable), property, credit, assets or other resources are less than the overall
maximum level of assistance contained in section 6.8 of this ordinance or the
applicant’s 30-day need, whichever is less, and he/she does not have adequate income
or other resources available to provide basic necessities.
Subsequent Applicants. Persons who are not initial applicants are repeat
applicants. Repeat applicants are people who have applied for general assistance at
any time in the past. Repeat applicants are also people on whose behalf a general
assistance application was made at any time in the past, provided that at such a time
the applicant was not a dependent minor in the household. For repeat applicants to be
29
eligible for general assistance, they must be in need and meet all other eligibility
requirements. The eligibility of repeat applicants may also be adversely affected to the
extent they have not used their income and resources to secure basic necessities.
Section 5.2—Eligibility for Categorical Assistance
Receipt of categorical assistance will not disqualify a person from receiving general
assistance if the applicant is otherwise eligible. Benefits received from other assistance
programs will be considered as income when determining need, with the exception of
Food Stamps, which will not be counted as income or resources or otherwise taken into
consideration when determining need (7 U.S.C. § 2017 (b)).
In addition, any fuel assistance (HEAP/ECIP) received by an applicant will not be
considered as income; that is, the administrator will always compute the heating needs
of an applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid all costs
associated with his or her fuel needs (42 U.S.C. §8624(f)). The calculation of general
assistance for heating energy needs when an applicant has received HEAP or ECIP
shall be accomplished in accordance with subsection (c) under “Types of Income” at
section 6.7 of this ordinance. For several additional exceptions please refer to the
definition of “Income” in this ordinance (see page 7, subsection 4).
Applicants or recipients must apply for other program benefits within 7 days after being
advised in writing to do so by the general assistance administrator. Persons who,
without just cause, make no good faith effort to obtain a potential resource will be
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make a good faith effort to obtain the
benefit (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.3—Personal Property
a) Liquid Assets. No person owning assets easily convertible into cash, including
but not limited to, bank deposits, stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, retirement
accounts, life insurance policies and other marketable security, will be eligible for
30
general assistance unless and until he or she uses these assets to meet his or
her basic needs, and thereby exhausts them. At the discretion of the GA
administrator, liquid assets do not mean a reasonable minimum balance
necessary for obtaining free checking. Although one checking account per
household may be allowed, any monies over the minimum required to obtain free
checking are to be considered available liquid assets.
b) Tangible Assets. No person owning or possessing personal property, such as
but not limited to: a motor vehicle (except as provided immediately below in
subsection c), or a boat, trailer, recreation vehicle or other assets that are
convertible into cash and are non-essential to the maintenance of the applicant’s
household, will be eligible for general assistance. Exceptions may be made when
a person is making an initial application or is an unforeseeable repeat applicant
as defined in Section 2.2 or when reasonable efforts to convert assets to cash at
fair market value are unsuccessful. Tools of a trade, livestock, farm equipment
and other equipment used for the production of income are exempt from the
above category and are not considered available assets.
c) Automobile Ownership. Ownership of one automobile per household will not
make a person ineligible for assistance if such vehicle is essential for
transportation to employment or for seeking employment, obtaining medical care,
rehabilitation or training facilities, or for any other reason the GA administrator
determines reasonable for the maintenance of the applicant’s household.
Recipients of general assistance who own an automobile with a market value
greater than $8000 may be required, with written, 7-day notice, to make a good
faith effort to trade that automobile for an automobile with a market value of less
than $8000. Any income received by the applicant by virtue of such a trade
down must be used for his or her basic necessities. Failure to liquidate or trade
down the excess value of any automobile asset can result in disqualification (22
M.R.S.A. § 4317).
31
The municipality will neither pay nor consider as necessary any car payment or
vehicle maintenance cost including insurance for which the applicant is
responsible. However, provided the vehicle value is $8000 or less and the
applicant is utilizing the vehicle for any of the above mentioned “essential”
reasons, the municipality in its discretion may choose to not consider reasonable
car payments, reasonable car insurance and reasonable associated costs of
maintenance as “misspent” income. General assistance for travel-related needs
shall be computed in accordance with section 6.8(F)(7), (8) “Work Related/Travel
Expenses.”
d) Insurance. Insurance that is available to an applicant on a non-contributory basis
or that is required as a condition of employment will not be a factor in determining
eligibility for general assistance. Life insurance with a cash surrender value may,
at the discretion of the GA administrator, be considered as a tangible asset.
e) Transfer of Property. Applicants who transfer assets for less than fair market
value to someone else solely for the purpose of establishing eligibility for general
assistance will not be granted general assistance to replace the uncompensated
value of the transferred asset. Assistance will be denied within a 120-day limit up
to the uncompensated value of the asset which was transferred unless the
transfer of asset is fraudulently misrepresented, in which case a 120-day
disqualification will be issued. There will be a presumption that the applicant
transferred his or her assets in order to be eligible for general assistance
whenever property is sold for less than the fair market value or when the transfer
occurred within 30 days prior to applying for general assistance unless the
applicant can demonstrate the existence of a good faith transaction.
Section 5.4—Ownership of Real Estate
a) Principal Residence. For purposes of General Assistance solely, the applicant’s
principal residence, including any adjoining land, is considered an exempt
resource, even if temporarily unoccupied because of employment, job training,
32
education, illness or disaster, provided there is demonstrated an intent to
return. If the applicant owns land in excess of the minimum lot size for the zone
or district in which the home is located, then that land may be considered a
potential resource if:
1. The applicant has received General Assistance for the last 120
consecutive days; and
2. The applicant has the legal right to sell the land (e.g., any mortgagee will
release any mortgage, any co-owners agree to the sale, zoning or other
land use laws do not render the sale illegal or impracticable); and
3. The applicant has the financial capability to put the land into a
marketable condition (e.g., the applicant can pay for any necessary
surveys); and
4. The land is not utilized for the maintenance and/or support of the
household; and
5. A knowledgeable source (e.g., a realtor) indicates that the land in
question can be sold at fair market value, for an amount which will aid
the applicant’s financial rehabilitation; and
6. No other circumstances exist which cause any sale to be unduly
burdensome or inequitable.
If the above conditions are met, then the administrator may condition the receipt
of future assistance on the applicant’s good faith efforts to sell, or render
saleable, land which could be used to provide necessary support for the
applicant (e.g., the applicant owns 100 “excess” acres. Sale of 10 of the acres
would provide for the necessary support and therefore not all the land need be
sold at the present time.) Assistance shall not be denied during the time that the
33
applicant is making a good faith effort to sell or render saleable the land in
question.
Once the applicant ceases to receive assistance the obligations under this
section shall also cease.
b) Other Property. If the applicant or dependents own real property other than that
occupied as the principal residence, continued eligibility will depend on the
applicant making a reasonable effort to:
1. Dispose of the property at fair market value in order to convert the
property into cash which can be applied toward meeting present need; or
2. Obtain a loan against such property which may be used to meet present
need. Applicants who transfer their excess property to a third party in
order to become eligible for general assistance will be ineligible.
If an applicant is granted assistance in the form of a mortgage payment or capital
improvement payment, the municipality may claim a lien against the
property. The lien shall not be enforceable until the time of sale of the property
or upon the death of the recipient (see also section 6.8 of this ordinance) (22
M.R.S.A. § 4320).
Section 5.5—Work Requirement
All general assistance recipients are required to register for work, look for work, work to
the extent of available employment, and otherwise fulfill the work requirements, unless
the applicant is exempt from such requirements as provided below.
Employment; Rehabilitation. All unemployed applicants and members of their
households who are 16 years of age or older and who are not attending a full-time
primary or secondary school intended to lead to a high school diploma will be required
to accept any suitable job offer and/or meet with job counselors, attend employment
34
workshops and rehabilitative services, except as provided below (see “Exemptions” ).
Applicants must demonstrate to the administrator that they are available for work and
are actively seeking employment.
A “suitable job” means any job, which the applicant is mentally and physically able to
perform. “Available for work” means that applicants must make themselves available for
work during normal business hours prevailing in the area, and show that no
circumstance exists which would prevent them from complying with the work
requirement.
Verification. Unemployed applicants or applicants employed on a part-time basis will
be required to provide verifiable documentation of their pursuit of employment at the
time of each application. At a minimum, such documentation shall consist of a list of the
employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name of the
employer representative contacted. “Pursuit of employment” means actually submitting
a written application or applying for a job in person when reasonable, or submitting a
written application or letter of inquiry to employers.
For the duration of any repeat applicant’s period of unemployment or partial
employment, the administrator will establish the number of employers per week to
whom each non-exempt applicant shall be required to apply in order to fulfill his or her
work search requirements. The number of weekly employer contacts required by the
administrator shall be reasonably related to the number of potential employers in the
region and the number of hours in the week the applicant has available for work search
activities after considering all time the applicant must devote to existing employment
obligations, workfare obligations, and required classroom or on-site participation in job
training, educational, or rehabilitation programs. Fulfillment of these requirements will
not be expected at the time of the initial application, but will be a condition of eligibility
for subsequent assistance.
35
Ineligibility. After being granted assistance at the time of initial application, applicants
will be considered ineligible for further assistance for 120 days if they, without just
cause:
a) refuse to register for employment with the Maine Job Service;
b) refuse to search diligently for employment when the search is reasonable and
appropriate; recipients who unreasonably seek work at the same places
repeatedly will not be considered to be performing a diligent work search and will
be disqualified;
c) refuse to accept a suitable job offer;
d) refuse to participate in an assigned training, education or rehabilitation program
that would assist the applicant in securing employment;
e) fail to be available for work; or
f) refuse to participate or participate in a substandard manner in the municipal work
program (see section 5.6).
Ineligibility Due to Job Quit or Discharge for Misconduct. No applicant, whether an
initial or repeat applicant, who has quit his or her full-time or part-time job without just
cause or who has been discharged from employment for misconduct (see Appendix I,
26 M.R.S.A. § 1043 (23) for the definition) will be eligible to receive general assistance
of any kind for a 120-day period from the date of separation from employment (22
M.R.S.A. § § 4301(8), 4316-A (1-A)).
Just Cause. Applicants will be ineligible for assistance for 120 days if they refuse to
comply with the work requirements of this section without just cause. With respect to
any work requirement, just cause will be considered to exist when there is reasonable
and verifiable evidence that:
36
a) the applicant has a physical or mental illness or disability which prevents him/her
from working;
b) the work assignment pays below minimum wages;
c) the applicant was subject to sexual harassment;
d) the applicant is physically or mentally unable to perform required job tasks, or to
meet piece work standards;
e) the applicant has no means of transportation to or from work or a training or
rehabilitation program;
f) the applicant is unable to arrange for necessary child care or care of ill or
disabled family members; or
g) any reason found to be good cause by the Maine Department of Labor, or any
other verifiable reason the administrator considers reasonable and appropriate
will be accepted as just cause. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(5)).
Applicant’s Burden of Establishing Just Cause. If the administrator finds that the
applicant has violated a work-related rule without just cause, it shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to establish the presence of just cause (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A).
Eligibility Regained. Persons who are disqualified for 120 days because they violated a
work requirement may regain their eligibility if and only when they become employed or
otherwise satisfy the administrator that they are complying with the work requirement by
fulfilling the work requirement or requirements they violated.
For the purpose of regaining eligibility by becoming employed, “employment” shall mean
employment by an employer as defined in 26 M.R.S.A. § § 1043 et seq., or the
performance of a service for an employer who withholds from the employee a social
security tax pursuant to federal law.
37
The special provisions regarding the opportunity to regain eligibility after a
disqualification for workfare violations are detailed in section 5.6 of this ordinance, under
“Eligibility Regained”.
Dependents. Failure of an otherwise eligible person to comply with the work
requirements shall not affect the eligibility of any member of the person’s household
who is not capable of working, including:
a) a dependent minor child;
b) an elderly, ill, or disabled person; and
c) a person whose presence is required in order to provide care for any child
under 6 years of age or for any ill or disabled member of the household
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
In the event one (or more) member(s) of a household is disqualified and assistance is
requested for those remaining members of the household who are dependents, the
eligibility of those dependents will be calculated by dividing the maximum level of
assistance available to the entire household by the total number of household members.
Exemptions. The above work requirements do not apply to any person who is elderly,
physically or mentally ill or disabled. Any person whose presence is required to care for
any pre-school age child or for any ill or disabled member of the household is also
exempt from these requirements.
The requirements of this section will not be imposed so as to interfere with an
applicant’s existing employment, ability to pursue a bona fide job offer, ability to attend
an interview for possible employment, classroom participation in a primary or secondary
educational program intended to lead to a high school diploma, classroom or on site
participation in a training program which is either approved by the Department of Labor
or determined by the Department of Labor to be expected to assist the applicant in
38
securing employment, or classroom participation in a degree-granting program operated
under the control of the Department of Labor.
Section 5.6—Municipal Work Program
Each applicant and any member of the household who is capable of working may be
required to perform work for the municipality, including work for a non-profit
organization, as a condition of receiving assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)).
As part of the municipal work program, the municipality can require recipients to
participate in training, education, or rehabilitative programs that will assist the recipient
in securing employment. The work requirement provisions found in section 5.5
regarding just cause, dependents, and exemptions also apply to the municipal workfare
program.
Consent. Persons assigned to the work program are required to sign a form stating that
they understand the requirements of general assistance and the work program. Prior to
signing the form, the administrator will read it to the applicants or the applicants will read
it themselves. The form will also state the number of hours the applicants must work
and the hourly rate by means of which the duration of the work assignment is
calculated. In addition, the consent form shall describe the consequences of failing to
adequately perform part or all of the workfare or workfare-first assignment.
Subtracting Value of Workfare Performed from Client’s GA Debt. Pursuant to 22 MRSA
§ 4318 individuals owing the municipality funds for general assistance provided to them
are obligated to repay the municipality when and if they become able (see Article VIII).
However, persons performing workfare shall have the value of the workfare performed
deducted from any and all GA debt including GA liens (e.g., Workers’ Compensation
Settlement, SSI Retroactive Payment, Capital Improvement, Home Mortgage) that
might exist against their settlements, payments or other such property.
39
Limitations. The work requirement is subject to the following limitations (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4316-A(3)).
1) No person shall, as a condition of eligibility, be required to do any amount of work
that exceeds the value of the net general assistance that the person receives
under municipal general assistance standards. Any person performing work
under this subsection shall be provided with net general assistance, the value of
which is calculated at a rate of at least the prevailing minimum wage under state
or federal law at the time the workfare was performed.
2) No workfare participant shall be required to work for a nonprofit organization if
that work would violate the participant’s basic religious beliefs.
3) In no case shall eligible persons performing work under this subsection replace
regular municipal employees.
4) In no case will work performed under this subsection interfere with an eligible
person’s:
a) existing employment;
b) ability to follow up on a bona fide job offer;
c) attendance at an interview for possible employment;
d) classroom participation in a primary or secondary educational program
intended to lead to a high school diploma; or
e) classroom or on site participation in a training program which is approved by
the Department of Labor or determined by the Department of Labor to be
reasonably expected to assist the person in securing employment, or
classroom participation in a degree-granting program administered by the
DHHS or the Department of Labor.
5) In no case may an eligible person be required to work more than 40 hours per
week. An eligible person who has full or part-time employment shall be exempt
from the work requirement to the extent that the work requirement in combination
with his or her regular employment would result in the person working more than
40 hours per week.
40
6) In no case will an eligible person be required to perform work beyond his or her
capabilities. However, when an illness or disability is claimed, an eligible person
may be required as a condition of receiving assistance to present a doctor’s
statement detailing the extent of the disability or illness (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
If the administrator requires a doctor’s statement to verify an applicant’s illness or
disability and the applicant is not currently under the care of a provider, the
municipality may pay for the doctor’s evaluation if the applicant has no means to
pay for the exam. However in such a case the administrator will choose the
doctor. If there is a no-cost or low-cost health care option, the municipality may
elect to refer the client to such a resource. The administrator will not require
verification of medical conditions which are apparent or which are of such short
duration that a reasonable person would not ordinarily seek medical attention (22
M.R.S.A. § 4316(5)).
7) In no case may an eligible person with an immediate need (i.e., a person in an
emergency situation who has not been disqualified from receiving assistance for
committing a program violation) be required to perform work under this
subsection prior to receiving general assistance. The administrator shall meet
immediate needs upon receiving written assurance from the eligible person that
he/she is willing to work to maintain eligibility for general assistance. When the
recipient has no immediate need, workfare participation may be required prior to
receiving general assistance in accordance with the following “workfare first”
policy.
“Workfare First” Policy. Under the authority of 22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(D), the
administrator may, in accordance with the following guidelines, require a recipient of
general assistance to perform a workfare assignment prior to the actual issuance of the
general assistance benefit conditionally granted.
41
1) In no circumstance will emergency general assistance for which an applicant is
eligible be withheld pending the satisfactory performance of workfare.
2) All workfare participants under this policy will be provided a written decision, as
otherwise required by law, within 24 hours of submitting an application for
general assistance and prior to performing any workfare for the municipality
associated with that request for assistance. That written decision must include:
a) a specific description of the amount of general assistance being
conditionally granted to the household, and for which basic needs;
b) the period of eligibility for which the general assistance grant is being
issued (in days or weeks, but not to exceed 30 days);
c) the rate, at a dollar-per-hour basis (but not less than the prevailing
minimum wage), upon which the duration of the workfare assignment
is calculated;
d) the actual duration of the workfare assignment that must be performed,
in hours, before the general assistance grant will be actually issued;
e) the specifics of the workfare assignment(s), including the general
nature of the type of work being assigned, location(s) of work-site,
date(s) and time(s) of assigned workfare, workfare supervisors’ names
and contact telephone numbers; and
f) any other pertinent information related to the workfare assignment(s)
the recipient will be expected to perform.
3) As previously provided in this section, all workfare participants under this policy
must sign a consent form that informs the participant of his or her workfarerelated
rights and responsibilities, including the consequences of failing to
perform all or part of the workfare assigned without just cause.
42
4) If a portion of the workfare-first assignment is satisfactorily performed but there
has been a failure to perform the remainder of the assignment, without just
cause, the administrator shall issue a grant of general assistance in the amount
of the number of workfare hours satisfactorily performed times the hourly rate
used to calculate the duration of the workfare assignment. In addition to any
disqualification penalty that may apply, the remaining value of the conditionally
issued general assistance grant shall be terminated, and notice of the partial
termination, and the reasons therefore, will be issued to the workfare participant
in accordance with section 6.10 of this ordinance.
5) Any amount of the workfare assignment that is not performed because the
workfare participant was temporarily unable to perform the assignment for just
cause reasons shall be reassigned or excused at the discretion of the GA
administrator.
Work-Related Expenses. A participant’s expenses related to work performed under this
section will be added to the amount of net general assistance to be provided to the
person (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(2)(E)). The municipality will provide any special clothes
or equipment the recipient needs to perform his or her work assignment.
Disqualification. Any person who either willfully fails to perform or willfully performs
below average standards the work assigned by the municipality, will be ineligible for
assistance for 120 days (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-A(1)). As soon as the administrator
knows that a recipient failed to fulfill the work assignment, the administrator will notify
the recipient in writing that he/she is disqualified for 120 days starting from the last date
of authorized assistance unless the recipient can show just cause. The burden of
demonstrating a just cause failure to perform a workfare assignment falls on the
workfare participant.
43
Eligibility Regained. Recipients who are disqualified from receiving assistance because
they have violated the requirements of the municipal work program may regain their
eligibility under the following conditions.
Recipients who fail to complete the first municipal work assignment they have been
given will be disqualified from receiving assistance during the next 120 days, although
dependents in the household may be eligible (see section. 5.5, “Dependents”) .
If during the 120-day disqualification period the recipient requests an opportunity to
perform the work assignment which he or she, without just cause failed to perform, the
disqualified recipient will be given one opportunity to regain eligibility. The administrator
will give the recipient a work assignment as soon as possible.
If under such a set of circumstances the recipient has an emergency need and the
administrator is unable to schedule a work assignment in time to alleviate the
emergency, the administrator will provide sufficient assistance to the recipient to avert
the emergency. However, the provision of such emergency assistance will not bar the
administrator from subsequently enforcing the previously issued 120-day disqualification
if the recipient fails to regain eligibility by satisfactorily performing the work
assignment. The amount of emergency assistance granted will be considered in the
computation of the total number of hours the recipient must work.
Recipients who have asked for the opportunity to regain their eligibility during a 120 day
disqualification period and who agreed to fulfill the assignment which they previously
failed to perform and who, without just cause, fail to fulfill their municipal work
assignment will be considered to have acted in bad faith. In such a circumstance, the
administrator will enforce the 120-day disqualification for the term of its initial duration.
If a workfare participant regains eligibility under this section but is subsequently
disqualified within the initial 120-day period of ineligibility for failing to comply with the
44
municipal work program, that participant will be ineligible for a new 120-day period
beginning with the new disqualification date, but will be provided no opportunity to
requalify.
Any recipient who intentionally causes damage to property, harasses or harms other
employees or who otherwise conducts themselves in a disruptive manner and is
discharged by the work supervisor will not be entitled to regain eligibility by returning to
the work program. Eligibility may be regained by otherwise becoming employed and
meeting the definition of need.
Reports. The administrator will itemize the assistance that has been provided to
persons who work for the municipality in reports to the DHHS (22 M.R.S.A. § 4316-
A(2)).
Section 5.7—Use of Resources
Each applicant has the responsibility to make a good faith effort to utilize every available
or potential resource that may reduce his or her need for general assistance (see
section 2.2 for definition of “Resources”) . People who refuse or fail to make a good faith
effort to secure a potential resource after receiving written notice to do so are
disqualified from receiving assistance until they make an effort to secure the
resource. Applicants are required to prove that they have made a good faith effort to
secure the resource (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Minors. A minor under the age of 18 who has never married and is applying
independently for general assistance and who is pregnant or has a dependent child or
children will be eligible to receive general assistance only if the minor is residing in the
home of his or her parent, legal guardian or other adult relative, in which case the entire
household will be evaluated for eligibility. Exceptions to this limitation on eligibility will
be made when:
1) the minor is residing in a foster home, maternity home, or other adult-supervised
supportive living arrangement; or
45
2) the minor has no living parent or the whereabouts of the both parents are
unknown; or
3) no parent will permit the minor to live in the parent’s home; or
4) the minor has lived apart from both parents for at least one year before the birth
of any dependent child; or
5) the DHHS determines that the physical or emotional health or safety of the minor
or the minor’s dependent child or children would be jeopardized if the minor and
his or her child or children lived with a parent; or
6) the DHHS determines, in accordance with its regulation, that there is good cause
to waive this limitation on eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(4)).
Any person under the age of 25 who is applying independently from his or her parents
for general assistance will be informed that until he or she reaches the age of 25, the
applicant’s parents are still legally liable for his or her support and the municipality has
the right to seek recovery from the parents of the cost of all assistance granted to such
a recipient to the extent his or her parents are financially capable of repaying the
municipality (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
With regard to such application, the municipality may seek verification of the applicant’s
need for general assistance by contacting his or her parents. If the applicant’s parents
declare a willingness to provide the applicant with his or her basic needs directly, and
there is no convincing evidence that the applicant would be jeopardized by relying on
his or her parents for basic needs, the administrator may find the applicant not to be in
need of general assistance for the reason that his or her needs can be provided by a
legally liable relative.
Mental or Physical Disability. Any applicant who has a mental or physical disability
must make a good faith effort to utilize any medical or rehabilitative services which have
been recommended by a physician, psychologist or other professional retraining or
46
rehabilitation specialist when the services are available to the applicant and would not
constitute a financial burden or create a physical risk to the individual.
Written Notice; Disqualification. The administrator will give each applicant written notice
whenever the applicant is required to utilize any specific potential resource(s). Any
applicant who refuses to utilize potential resources, without just cause, after receiving
written 7-day notice will be ineligible for further assistance until he/she has made a good
faith effort to utilize or obtain the resources. General assistance will not be withheld
from the applicant pending receipt of a resource if the applicant has made, or is in the
process of making, a good faith effort to obtain the resource.
Forfeiture of Benefits. Any applicant who forfeits receipt of or causes a reduction in
benefits from another public assistance program due to fraud, misrepresentation, a
knowing or intentional violation of program rules or a refusal to comply with that
program’s rules without just cause will be ineligible to receive general assistance to
replace the forfeited benefits. To the extent the forfeited benefits can be considered
income under general assistance law, the worth of the forfeited benefits will be
considered income that is available to the applicant for the duration of the forfeiture.
To the extent the forfeited benefits were provided not in the form of income but, rather,
in the form of a specific, regularly issued resource of a calculable value, that resource,
up to its forfeited value, need not be replaced with general assistance for a period of
120 days from the date of the forfeiture—unless the municipality is prohibited by federal
or state law from considering the forfeited resource as available with respect to local
public assistance programs (22 M.R.S.A. § 4317).
Section 5.8—Period of Ineligibility
No one will have his or her assistance terminated, reduced, or suspended prior to being
given written notice and an opportunity for a fair hearing (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4321-
4322). Each person will be notified in writing of the reasons for his or her ineligibility,
47
and any person disqualified for not complying with the ordinance will be informed in
writing of the period of ineligibility.
Work Requirement. Applicants/recipients who do not comply with a work requirement
are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period of 120 days (unless they regain
their eligibility) (see sections 5.5, 5.6). If an applicant/recipient is provided assistance
and does not comply with the work requirement, the applicant/recipient shall be
disqualified for 120 days following the end of the period covered by the grant of
assistance. The administrator shall give recipients written notice that they are
disqualified as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and information to
render a decision of ineligibility.
Fraud. People who commit fraud are disqualified from receiving assistance for a period
of 120 days (see section 6.4, “Fraud”). The administrator shall give recipients written
notice that they are ineligible as soon as the administrator has sufficient knowledge and
information to render a decision. If the disqualification for fraud is issued before the
expiration of a grant of assistance, the period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance. If fraud is discovered
after the period covered by the grant of assistance has expired, the period of ineligibility
will commence on the day of the written notice of ineligibility.
Section 5.9 – Unemployment Fraud
An applicant who is found ineligible for unemployment compensation benefits because
of a finding of fraud by the Department of Labor pursuant to 26 M.R.S.A. § 1051(1) is
ineligible to receive general assistance to replace the forfeited unemployment
compensation benefits for the duration of the forfeiture established by the Department of
Labor. 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317.
48
ARTICLE VI
Determination of Eligibility
Section 6.1—Recognition of Dignity and Rights
Any determination or investigation into an applicant’s eligibility will be conducted in a
manner that will not violate the applicant’s privacy or personal dignity or violate his or
her individual rights.
Section 6.2—Determination; Redetermination
The administrator will make an individual, factual determination of eligibility each time a
person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The administrator will make a
redetermination of eligibility at least monthly but may do so as often as necessary to
administer the program efficiently and meet the needs of the applicants. Upon any
application, the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis, but may elect to disburse that applicant’s assistance
periodically, e.g., weekly, throughout a 30-day period of eligibility pursuant to that initial
eligibility determination.
The administrator may redetermine a person’s eligibility at any time during the period he
or she is receiving assistance if the administrator is notified of any change in the
recipient’s circumstances that may alter the amount of assistance the recipient may
receive. Once a recipient has been granted assistance, the administrator may not
reduce or rescind the grant without giving prior written notice to the recipient explaining
the reasons for the decision and offering the recipient an opportunity to appeal the
decision to the fair hearing authority (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309).
49
Section 6.3—Verification
Eligibility of applicant; duration of eligibility. The overseer shall determine eligibility each
time a person applies or reapplies for general assistance. The period of eligibility will
not exceed one month. At the expiration of this period applicants/recipients may
reapply for assistance and the person's eligibility will be redetermined.
Applicant's responsibilities. Applicants and recipients for general assistance are
responsible for providing to the overseer all information necessary to determine
eligibility. If further information or documentation is necessary to demonstrate eligibility,
the applicant must have the first opportunity to provide the specific information or
documentation required by the overseer. When information required by the overseer is
unavailable, the overseer must accept alternative available information, which is subject
to verification.
Each applicant and recipient has the responsibility at the time of application and
continuing thereafter to provide complete, accurate and current information and
documentation concerning his/her:
? Need
? Income
? Employment
? Use of income
? Expenses
? Assets & liabilities
? Use of available resources
? Household composition
Initial Applicants. Persons who have not applied for assistance in this or any other
municipality are considered initial applicants and must have their eligibility determined
solely on the basis of need. Initial applicants are not subject to eligibility conditions
placed on repeat applicants (see below). However, such applicants are still responsible
for providing the GA administrator with reasonably obtainable documentation adequate
50
to verify that there is a need for assistance. In addition, initial applicants must also
comply with both lump sum and relevant work rules (i.e. job quit).
Repeat Applicants. All applicants for general assistance that are not initial applicants
are repeat applicants. The eligibility of repeat applicants must be determined on the
basis of need and all other conditions of eligibility established by law and this municipal
ordinance.
The administrator will require documentation of a repeat applicant’s income, use of
income, assets and resources plus actual bills and receipts for rent, utilities, fuel,
telephone, medical services and other basic necessities. In addition, repeat applicants
instructed to seek employment shall verify their work search results, e.g., provide a list
of the employers contacted, the date and time of the application contact, and the name
of the employer representative contacted, as required by the GA administrator.
Repeat applicants are also responsible for providing any changes of information
reported on previous applications including changes in his/her household or income that
may affect his/her eligibility.
Unforeseen Repeat Applicants. Unforeseen repeat applicants are applicants who have
not applied for assistance within the last twelve months and who have been regularly
employed or receiving support from a public benefit or private source who have
unexpectedly become unemployed through no fault of their own or whose income
and/or benefits (e.g., through an available resource) have ceased through no fault of
their own. Such unforeseen repeat applicants may be considered initial applicants for
purposes of verification requirements and misspent income if the administrator finds that
imposing the general verification requirements and misspent income rules imposed on
repeat applicants would be unreasonable or inappropriate.
Overseer's responsibilities. In order to determine an applicant's eligibility for general
assistance, the overseer first must seek information and documentation from the
applicant. Once the applicant has presented the necessary information, the overseer is
51
responsible for determining eligibility. The overseer will seek verification necessary to
determine eligibility. In order to determine eligibility, the overseer may contact sources
other than the applicant for verification only with the specific knowledge and consent of
the applicant, except that the overseer may examine public records without the
applicant's knowledge and consent.
Appropriate sources, which the overseers may contact, include, but are not limited to:
? DHHS and any other
department/agency of the
state or non-profit
organizations
? financial institutions
? creditors
? utility companies
? employers
? landlords
? physicians
? persons with whom the
applicant/recipient is a
cohabitant
? legally and non-legally liable
relatives
Assistance will be denied or terminated if the applicant is unwilling to supply the
overseer with necessary information, documentation, or permission to make collateral
contacts, or if the overseer cannot determine that eligibility exists based on information
supplied by the applicant or others.
Redetermination of eligibility. The overseer may redetermine a person's eligibility at any
time during the period that person is receiving assistance if the overseer is informed of
any change in the recipient's circumstances that may affect the amount of assistance to
which the recipient is entitled or that may make the recipient ineligible, provided that
once a determination of eligibility has been made for a specific time period, a reduction
in assistance for that time period may not be made without prior written notice to the
recipient with the reasons for the action and an opportunity for the recipient to receive a
fair hearing upon the proposed change.
52
Penalty for Refusing to Release Information. Any person governed by 22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4314 who refuses to provide necessary information to the administrator after it has
been requested must state in writing the reasons for the refusal within 3 days of
receiving the request. Any such person who refuses to provide the information, without
just cause, commits a civil violation and may be subject to a fine of not less than $25
nor more than $100 which may be adjudged in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any
person who willfully renders false information to the administrator is guilty of a Class E
crime (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4314(5), 4314(6), 4315).
Section 6.4—Fraud
It is unlawful for a person to knowingly and willfully make a false representation of a
material fact to the administrator in order to receive general assistance or cause
someone else to receive general assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315). A person who
commits fraud in an effort to receive general assistance benefits may be prosecuted for
this offense.
False representation shall consist of any individual knowingly and willfully:
a) making a false statement to the general assistance administrator, either
orally or in writing, in order to obtain assistance to which the applicant or
the applicant’s household is not entitled;
b) concealing information from the general assistance administrator in order
to obtain assistance to which the applicant or applicant’s household is not
entitled; or
c) using general assistance benefits for a purpose other than that for which
they were intended.
No person may be denied assistance solely for making a false representation prior to
being given an opportunity for a fair hearing.
53
Period of Ineligibility. When the general assistance administrator finds that a person
has knowingly and willfully misrepresented material facts for the purpose of making
himself or herself eligible for general assistance, the administrator shall notify that
applicant in writing that he or she must reimburse the municipality for the assistance he
or she was not entitled to receive and that he/she is ineligible for assistance for the
longer of: (a) a period of 120 days; (b) until he or she reimburses the municipality for the
assistance; or (c) until he or she enters a reasonable written agreement to reimburse
the municipality. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315)
For the purpose of this section, a material misrepresentation is a false statement about
eligibility factors in the absence of which some or all of the assistance would not be or
would not have been granted.
The notification of ineligibility issued by the administrator shall inform the applicant of his
or her right to appeal the administrator’s decision to the fair hearing authority (FHA)
within 5 working days of receipt. The period of ineligibility shall commence on the day
following the end of the period covered by the grant of assistance fraudulently received
or upon the date of notification of ineligibility, whichever is later.
Right to a Fair Hearing. Any applicant who is denied assistance for making a false
representation will be afforded the opportunity to appeal the decision to the fair hearing
authority (FHA) in accordance with Article VII of this ordinance. No recipient shall have
his or her assistance reduced or revoked during the period of eligibility before being
notified and given the opportunity to appeal the decision. Any person who is dissatisfied
with the decision of the FHA may appeal that decision to the Superior Court pursuant to
Rule 80-B of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)).
Reimbursement. If a recipient does not appeal the decision or if the fair hearing
authority determines that a recipient did make a false representation, the recipient will
be required to reimburse the municipality for any assistance received to which he/she
54
was not entitled. The recipient may enter a reasonable written agreement to reimburse
the municipality over a period of time.
Dependents. In no event will the ineligibility of a person under this section serve to
disqualify any eligible dependent in that household (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309(3)). In the
event one or more members of a household are disqualified and assistance is
requested for the remaining dependents, the eligibility of those dependents will be
calculated by dividing the maximum level of assistance available to the entire household
by the total number of household members.
Section 6.5—Period of Eligibility
The administrator will grant assistance to all eligible persons for a period that is
sufficient to meet their need but in no event may a grant of assistance cover a period in
excess of one month (22 M.R.S.A. § 4309). Upon receiving a completed and signed
application the administrator will determine the applicant’s eligibility on the basis of a
30-day prospective analysis.
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator shall render
a notice of “ineligibility” and advise the applicant that he or she has a right to reapply as
soon as he or she has the necessary information and/or as soon as is practicable for
the applicant.
Although eligibility is determined on a 30-day basis, for reasons of administrative
efficiency the administrator may elect to disburse an applicant’s assistance for shorter
periods of time, such as weekly, throughout the 30-day period of eligibility. When the
administrator elects to disburse general assistance for a period of time less than 30
days, subsequent grants of assistance during that 30-day period may be issued
pursuant to the initial determination of need unless the applicant’s financial situation
changes substantially enough to warrant a redetermination of eligibility.
55
Section 6.6—Determination of Need
The period of time used to calculate need will be the next 30-day period from the date of
application (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)). The administrator will calculate applicants’
expenses according to the actual expense of the basic necessity or the maximum levels
for the specific necessities allowed in section 6.8, whichever is less. The sum of these
expenses, as calculated for a prospective 30-day period, is the applicant’s 30-day
need. Applicants will not be considered eligible if their income and other resources
exceed this calculation except in an emergency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section
4.9 of this ordinance).
Applicants will also not be considered in need of general assistance if their income,
property, credit, assets or other resources available to provide basic necessities for their
household are greater than the applicable overall maximum level of assistance set forth
in the beginning of section 6.8 (22 M.R.S.A. § § 4301(10), 4305(3-B)). The difference
between the applicant’s income and the overall maximum levels of assistance
established by this ordinance is the applicant’s deficit.
Once an applicant’s deficit has been determined, the specific maximum levels of
assistance for each basic necessity (see Appendixes A-H of this ordinance) shall be
used by the administrator to guide the distribution of assistance for which the applicant
is eligible. The specific maximum levels of assistance for each basic necessity are
intended to be reasonable and sufficient to help recipients maintain a standard of health
and decency (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-A)).
Income for Basic Necessities. Applicants are required to use their income for basic
necessities. Except for initial applicants, no applicant is eligible to receive assistance to
replace income that was spent within the 30-day period prior to an application for
assistance on goods and services that are not basic necessities. All income spent on
56
goods and services that are not basic necessities will be considered available to the
applicant and combined with the applicant’s prospective 30-day income for the
purposes of computing eligibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4315-A). Applicants who have
sufficient income to provide their basic necessities but who use that income to purchase
goods or services which are not basic necessities will not be considered eligible for
assistance. Persons who exhaust their income on basic necessities and who still need
assistance with other basic necessities will be eligible, provided that their income does
not exceed the overall maximum level of assistance.
Use-of-Income Requirements. The administrator may require that anyone applying for
general assistance provide documentation of his or her use of income. This
documentation can take the form of cancelled checks and/or receipts which
demonstrate that the applicant has exhausted all household income received over the
last 30-day period. Except as is deemed appropriate by the GA administrator for
“unforeseen” repeat applicants (See Section 6.3 of this ordinance), repeat applicants
may be required to verify that expenditure of income was for basic necessities. Income
expended that cannot be verified will generally be considered available and in such
case will be added to the 30-day prospective income.
Allowable expenditures include reasonable shelter costs (rent/mortgage); the cost of
heating fuel, electricity, and food up to the ordinance maximums; telephone costs at the
base rate if the household needs a telephone for medical reasons, the cost of nonelective
medical services as recommended by a physician which are not otherwise
covered by medical entitlement, Hospital Free Care or insurance; the reasonable cost of
essential clothing and non-prescription drugs, and the costs of any other commodity or
service determined essential by the administrator.
Items not considered to be basic necessities and thus will not be allowed in the budget
computation include:
? Internet services ? Cable or satellite television
57
? Cellular phones
? Cigarettes/alcohol
? Gifts purchased
? Pet care costs
? Costs of trips or vacations
? Paid court fines
? Repayments of unsecured
loans
? Legal fees
? Late fees
? Credit card debt.
The municipality reserves the right to apply specific use-of-income requirements to any
applicant, other than an initial applicant, who fails to use his or her income for basic
necessities or fails to reasonably document his or her use of income (22 M.R.S.A.
§ 4315-A). Those additional requirements will be applied in the following manner:
1) The administrator may require the applicant to use some or all of his or her
income, at the time it becomes available, toward specific basic necessities. The
administrator may prioritize such required expenditures so that most or all of the
applicant’s income is applied to housing (i.e., rent/mortgage), energy (i.e.,
heating fuel, electricity), or other specified basic necessities;
2) The administrator will notify applicants in writing of the specific use-of-income
requirements placed on them;
3) If upon subsequent application it cannot be determined how the applicant’s
income was spent, or it is determined that some or all of the applicant’s income
was not spent as directed and was also not spent on basic necessities, the
applicant will not be eligible to receive either regular or emergency general
assistance to replace that income; and
4) If the applicant does not spend his or her income as directed, but can show with
verifiable documentation that all income was spent on basic necessities up to
allowed amounts, the applicant will remain eligible to the extent of the applicant’s
eligibility and need.
58
Calculation of Income and Expenses. When determining eligibility, the administrator will
subtract the applicant’s net income from the overall maximum level of assistance found
at the beginning of section 6.8. If income is greater than the overall maximum level of
assistance, the applicant will not be eligible except in an emergency (see section
4.9). If income is less than the overall maximum level of assistance, the applicant has a
deficit.
The municipality will provide assistance in an amount up to the deficit to the extent the
applicant also has an unmet need and is in need of basic necessities. The municipality
will not grant assistance in excess of the maximum amounts allowed in section 6.8 of
this ordinance for specific basic necessities except in an emergency or when the
administrator elects to consolidate the applicant’s deficit, as provided immediately
below.
Consolidation of Deficit. As a general rule and to the extent of their deficit, applicants
will be eligible for assistance for any basic necessity up to, but not exceeding, the
maximum amount allowed for that necessity in this ordinance or the actual 30-day cost
of the necessity, whichever is less. Under certain circumstances, however, and in
accordance with the following conditions, the administrator may consolidate the
applicant’s deficit and apply it toward a basic necessity in an amount greater than the
ordinance maximum for that necessity.
1) The practice of consolidating the deficit and applying it toward a basic necessity
in amounts greater than the ordinance maximum shall be the exception rather
than the rule;
2) The total general assistance grant cannot exceed the total deficit unless the
applicant is in an emergency situation; and
3) The need for the application of the recipient’s consolidated deficit toward a basic
necessity was not created by the recipient misspending his or her income or
resources in violation of the use-of-income requirements of this ordinance.
59
Section 6.7—Income
Income Standards. Applicants whose income exceeds the overall maximum level of
assistance provided in section 6.8 shall not be eligible for general assistance except in
an emergency. The administrator will conduct an individual factual inquiry into the
applicant’s income and expenses each time an applicant applies.
Calculation of Income. To determine whether applicants are in need, the administrator
will calculate the income they will receive during the next 30-day period commencing on
the date of application, and identify any assets or resources that would alleviate their
need. For all applicants other than initial applicants, the administrator will also consider
as available income any income that was not spent during the previous 30-day period
on basic necessities, as well as any income that was spent on basic necessities in
unreasonable excess of the ordinance maximums for specific basic necessities. If a
household’s income exceeds the amount of the household’s need for basic necessities,
up to the maximum levels contained in section 6.8, applicants will not be considered in
need.
Exceptions will be made in emergency situations, which may necessitate that the
maximum levels be exceeded (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308) (see section 4.9 of this
ordinance). To calculate weekly income and expenses, the administrator will use actual
income received or actual anticipated income.
Types of Income. Income that will be considered in determining an applicant’s need
includes:
a) Earned income. Income in cash or in kind earned by the applicant through
wages, salary, commissions, or profit, whether self-employed or as an employee,
is considered earned income. If a person is self-employed, total income will be
computed by subtracting reasonable and actual business expenses from gross
income. When income consists of wages, the amount computed will be the
60
income available after taxes, social security and other payroll deductions
required by state, federal, and local law. Rental income and profit from produce
that is sold is considered earned income. Income that is held in trust and
unavailable to the applicant or the applicant’s dependents will not be considered
as earned income.
Note: Actual work-related expenses such as union dues, transportation to and
from work, special equipment or work clothes, and child care costs will be
deducted from an applicant’s income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
b) Income from Other Assistance or Social Services Programs. State/federal
categorical assistance benefits, SSI payments, Social Security payments, VA
benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and payments from other
government sources will be considered as income, unless expressly prohibited
by federal law or regulation. Federal law prohibits Food Stamps and fuel
assistance payments made by the Home Energy Assistance Program (HEAP
and EPIC) from being considered income. The value of the food stamps or fuel
assistance will not be used to reduce the amount of general assistance the
applicant is eligible to receive. Although applicants may have only a limited or
reduced need for general assistance for heating fuel or electricity if a recently
received HEAP/ECIP benefit has sufficiently credited their account or otherwise
prevented the fuel-related costs for the prospective 30-day period.
The administrator’s obligation is to always compute the heating needs of an
applicant who has received HEAP or ECIP as if that applicant paid for his or her
total fuel costs. Accordingly, in such cases, the administrator will budget for the
household’s heating energy needs according to actual usage, up to the
ordinance maximums, but the administrator may, with written notice to the
applicant, hold in reserve the heating energy portion of the applicant’s deficit until
such a time during the period of eligibility that the applicant has a demonstrable
61
need for the disbursement of heating energy assistance; that is, the applicant’s
fuel tank can accept a minimum fuel delivery or the applicant no longer has a
positive credit balance with his or her utility company. The municipality is not
obligated to divert any recipient’s heating energy allowance toward non-heating
purposes solely on the basis of the recipient’s receipt of HEAP/ECIP.
Other programs whose income cannot be counted for purposes of GA eligibility
include:
? Family Development Accounts (22 M.R.S. § 3762)
? Americorp VISTA program benefits (42 USCS § 5044 (f))
? Property tax rebates issued under the Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit
program, only so long as the money is spent on basic necessities. (22
M.R.S.A. § 4301(7))
c) Court-Ordered Support Payments. Alimony and child support payments will be
considered income only if actually received by the applicant. The general
assistance administrator will refer cases where support payments are not actually
received to the State Department of Health and Human Services’ Child Support
Enforcement Unit. In order to be eligible for future GA, applicants being referred
to DHHS for such enforcement services shall be required to follow-through with
such services. Because child support payments are considered a resource,
applicants must make a good faith effort to secure such payments.
d) Income from Other Sources. Payments from pensions and trust funds will be
considered income. Payments from boarders or lodgers will be considered
income as will cash or in-kind contributions provided to the household from any
other source, including relatives (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7)).
e) Earnings of a Son or Daughter. Earned income received by sons and daughters
below the age of 18 who are full-time students and who are not working full-time
62
will not be considered income. The unearned income of a minor in the household
will be considered available to the household.
f) Income from Household Members. Income from household members will be
considered available to the applicant, whether or not the household member is
legally obligated for the support of the applicant, if the household members pool
or share their income and expenses as a family or intermingle their funds so as
to provide support to one another.
g) The Pooling or Non-Pooling of Income. When two or more individuals share the
same dwelling unit but not all members of the household are applying for general
assistance, the administrator shall make a finding under a rebuttable
presumption that the entire household is pooling income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(12-
A)).
One or more applicants for assistance can successfully rebut the presumption
that all household income is being pooled by providing the administrator with
verifiable documentation affirmatively demonstrating a pattern of non-pooling for
the duration of the shared living arrangement. Such documentation would
include evidence of the entire household expenses as well as bank statements,
cancelled checks, receipts, landlord statements or other vendor accounts clearly
supporting a claim that the applicant has been and is presently solely and entirely
responsible for his or her pro-rata share of household costs.
If the applicant is unable to successfully rebut the municipality’s presumption that
all household income is being pooled, eligibility of the entire household will be
determined based on total household income. If the applicant successfully
rebuts the municipality’s presumption that all household income is being pooled,
the applicant’s eligibility will be determined on the basis of his or her income and
his or her pro-rata share of actual household expenses.
63
h) Lump Sum Income. A lump sum payment received by any GA applicant or
recipient prior or subsequent to the date of application for general assistance will
be considered as income available to the household. However, verified required
payments (i.e., any third party payment which is required as a condition of
receiving the lump sum payment, or any payments of bills earmarked for the
purpose for which the lump sum payment was made) and any amount of the
lump sum payment which the applicant can document was spent on basic
necessities, as described below, will not be considered available income.
Where a household receives a lump sum payment at any time prior or
subsequent to the date of application for general assistance, the administrator
will assess the need for prorating an applicant’s eligibility for general assistance
according to the following criteria (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A)):
1) identify the date the lump sum payment was received;
2) subtract from the lump sum payment all required payments;
3) subtract from the lump sum any amount the applicant can demonstrate was
spent on basic necessities, including all basic necessities as defined by the
general assistance program such as: reasonable payment of funeral or
burial expenses for a family member; any reasonable travel costs related to
the illness or death of a family member; repair or replacement of essentials
lost due to fire, flood or other natural disaster; repair or purchase of a motor
vehicle essential for employment, education, training or other day-to-day
living necessities. Repayments of loans or credit, the proceeds of which
can be verified as having been spent on basic necessities; and payment of
bills earmarked for the purpose for which the lump sum is paid must also be
subtracted. (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(7), (8-A));
64
4) add to the remainder all income received by the household between
the date of receipt of the lump sum payment and the date of
application for general assistance; and
5) divide the sum created in subsection (4) by the verified actual
monthly amounts for all of the household's basic necessities. 22
M.R.S.A. § 4305(3-B)
This dividend represents the period of proration determined by the
administrator to commence on the date of receipt of the lump sum payment.
The prorated sum for each month must be considered available to the
household for 12 months from the date of application or during the period of
proration, whichever is less.
The household of an initial applicant that is otherwise eligible for emergency
assistance may not be denied emergency assistance to meet an immediate
need solely on the basis of the proration of a lump sum payment. (22 MRSA
§ 4308)
Section 6.8—Basic Necessities; Maximum Levels of Assistance
Overall Maximum Levels of Assistance. Notwithstanding any of the maximum levels of
assistance for specific basic necessities listed in Appendices B-H of this ordinance, an
applicant’s eligibility for general assistance will be first determined by subtracting his or
her income from the overall maximum level of assistance designated in Appendix A for
the applicable household size (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305 (3-B)). The difference yielded by
this calculation shall be the applicant’s deficit.
Applicants will be eligible for general assistance up to the calculated deficit to the extent
the applicant is unable to otherwise provide the basic necessities essential to maintain
themselves or their families. Applicants with no deficit shall be found ineligible for
general assistance unless they are in an emergency, in which case eligibility for
65
emergency general assistance will be determined according to section 4.9 of this
ordinance.
Maximum Levels of Assistance for Specific Basic Necessities. The municipality will
grant assistance to eligible applicants for basic necessities according to the maximum
levels for specific types of assistance set forth below. The administrator, in consultation
with the applicant, may apply the amount of the applicant’s deficit toward assistance
with any one or combination of necessities not to exceed the total deficit. These
maximum levels will be strictly adhered to unless the administrator determines that
there are exceptional circumstances and an emergency is shown to exist, in which case
these absolute levels will be waived in order to meet immediate needs. In all cases
either the actual expenses the applicant incurs for basic necessities or the maximum
amount allowed in each category, whichever is less, will be used in determining need.
In roommate situations, the applicant’s need for common living expenses for rent, fuel,
electricity, etc., will be presumed to be reduced by an amount equal to the other
household members’ proportionate fair share of the common living expenses. No
applicant will be allowed to claim a need for any expense which has been or will be paid
by another person. In addition, as a general rule the municipality will not provide a
benefit toward a basic need by paying a bill that is issued to a person not living with the
applicant’s household or that has otherwise been incurred by a person who has not
been found eligible to receive assistance.
Temporary exceptions to this general rule may be made by the administrator in the
following circumstances: (1) a recent, unplanned separation has occurred in the
household resulting in the sustained or permanent absence of a former household
member in whose name the bill was customarily issued; (2) the applicant and members
of the applicant’s household were or will be the sole recipients of the commodities or
services covered by any bill to be paid or partially paid with general assistance; and (3)
the applicant will make a good faith effort to direct the vendor to issue future bills in the
name of the applicant or other responsible person residing in the household.
66
A) Food. The administrator will provide food assistance to eligible persons up to the
allowed maximum amounts designated by the U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan for the
appropriate household size.
For this purpose, the municipality hereby incorporates by reference the U.S.D.A.
Thrifty Food Plan, as distributed by the Maine Department of Health and Human
Services on or about October of each year. See Appendix B of this ordinance for
the current year’s food maximums.
In determining need for food the administrator will not consider the value of the food
stamps an applicant receives as income (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301.7(A); 7 U.S.C.
§2017(b)). The municipality will authorize vouchers to be used solely for approved
food products.
The administrator will exceed the maximums when necessary for households having
members with special dietary needs. The administrator may require a doctor’s
statement verifying there is a special dietary need requiring an expenditure for food
that is greater than the ordinance maximums.
B) Housing. The administrator will provide assistance with rent or mortgage payments
that are reasonable and/or within the allowed maximum levels. See Appendix C of
this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to find suitable housing, although the administrator may help the
applicant find housing when appropriate. The administrator will inform the applicant
of the allowed housing maximums to assist the applicant in his or her search for
housing. The allowed maximum for any applicant will be the categorical housing
maximum representing the minimum dwelling unit space necessary to adequately
shelter the applicant household. Applicants requesting assistance for housing that
contains more bedrooms than are necessary for the number of household members
67
will be provided assistance according to the maximum level for the number of rooms
actually needed.
Rental Payments to Relatives. The municipality may elect to not issue any rental
payment to an applicant’s relatives unless the rental relationship has existed for at
least three months and the applicant’s relative(s) rely on the rental payment for their
basic needs. For the purpose of this section, a “relative” is defined as the applicant’s
parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, siblings, parent’s siblings, or any of
those relative’s children (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319(2)).
Rental Payments to Non-Relatives. When applicants are living in private homes
with the owner or sharing dwelling units with people who are not pooling income or
who are not legally liable relatives, the amount allowed as the applicant’s shelter
expense will be the applicant’s pro rata share of the actual, total shelter cost, up to
the ordinance maximum (22 M.R.S.A. § 4301(6)).
Any housing assistance issued to a recipient in such a circumstance will be issued,
whenever reasonably possible, to the landlord or property owner with the most
superior interest in the property; i.e., to a landlord before a tenant, or to a mortgagee
before a mortgagor.
When the municipality issues in aggregate more than $600 in rental payments to any
landlord in any calendar year, a 1099 form declaring the total amount of rental
payments issued during the calendar year will be forwarded to the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) pursuant to IRS regulation (see section 6041(a) of Internal Revenue
Code).
Any landlord wishing to regularly receive rental payments from the municipality on
behalf of applicants renting rooms from the landlord’s own residence must, at a
minimum, make a good faith effort to obtain a lodging license from the Department
68
of Health and Human Services, Division of Health Engineering, pursuant to 10-144A
Code of Maine Regulations, Chapter 201, as a condition of that landlord receiving
future general assistance payments on behalf of his or her tenants.
Mortgage Payments. In the case of a request for assistance with a mortgage
payment, the general assistance administrator will make an individual factual
determination of whether the applicant has an immediate need for such aid. In
making this determination, the administrator will consider the extent and liquidity of
the applicant’s proprietary interest in the housing. Factors to consider in making this
determination include:
(1) the marketability of the shelter’s equity;
(2) the amount of equity;
(3) the availability of the equity interest in the shelter to provide the applicant
an opportunity to secure a short-term loan in order to meet immediate
needs;
(4) the extent to which liquidation may aid the applicant’s financial
rehabilitation;
(5) a comparison between the amount of mortgage obligations and the
anticipated rental charges the applicant would be responsible for if he/she
were to be dislocated to rental housing;
(6) the imminence of the applicant’s dislocation from owned housing because
of his or her inability to meet the mortgage payments;
(7) the likelihood that the provision of housing assistance will prevent such
dislocation; and
(8) the applicant’s age, health, and social situation.
69
These factors shall be considered when determining whether the equity in the
shelter is an available asset which may be substituted for the assistance the
municipality would otherwise be required to provide.
The administrator shall consider issuing a benefit in response to the applicant’s
request for mortgage assistance to the extent the applicant is otherwise eligible for
general assistance if after reviewing the above criteria the administrator determines
that:
(1) the monthly mortgage obligation is in accordance with the maximum levels
of assistance available for housing appropriate to the applicant’s
household size;
(2) there is no capacity in the accumulated equity in the property, when
considered in the context of the applicant’s borrowing capacity with the
mortgagee or the general lending community, to suspend the mortgage
obligation temporarily or reamortize the mortgage in such a way as to
suspend or reduce the mortgage obligation; and
(3) the failure to provide a mortgage payment in a timely manner could
jeopardize the applicant’s continued right of possession of the property.
If a mortgage payment is necessary, the administrator will pay the actual amount
due, up to the amount allowed according to the maximum levels listed below. After
an initial application, assistance with such payments will be given only after the
applicant has made all reasonable efforts to borrow against the equity of his or her
home. If there is not sufficient equity in the home with which to secure a loan, and if
the monthly mortgage payments are not realistically in line with the rental rates for
similar housing in the area that could meet the applicant’s needs, the administrator
will inform the applicant that he/she is responsible for finding alternative housing
within his or her ability to pay and will be obligated to make all reasonable efforts to
secure such housing.
70
Liens. The municipality may place a lien on the property in order to recover its costs
of granting assistance with mortgage payments. In addition, a municipality may claim
a lien against the owner of real estate for the amount of money spent by it to make
capital improvements to the real estate (22 M.R.S.A. § 4320). No lien may be
enforced against a recipient except upon his or her death or the transfer of the
property. Further, no lien may be enforced against a person who is currently
receiving any form of public assistance, or who would again become eligible for
general assistance if the lien were enforced.
If the municipality determines that it is appropriate to place a lien on a person’s
property to recover its costs of providing general assistance for a mortgage payment
or capital improvement it must file a notice of the lien with the county registry of
deeds where the property is located within 30 days of making the mortgage
payment. That filing shall secure the municipality’s or the state’s interest in an
amount equal to the sum of that mortgage or capital improvement payment and all
subsequent mortgage or capital improvement payments made on behalf of the same
eligible person, plus interest and costs.
Not less than 10 days prior to filing the lien in the registry, the municipal officers
must send notice to the owner of the real estate, the general assistance recipient,
and any record holder of the mortgage by certified mail, return receipt requested,
that a lien on the property is going to be filed with the registry. This notice must
clearly inform the recipient of the limitations upon enforcement plus the name, title,
address and telephone number of the person who granted the assistance. The
municipal officers must also give written notice to the recipient each time the amount
secured by the lien is increased because of an additional mortgage payment. This
notice must include the same information that appeared on the original intent-to-file
notice sent to the recipient.
71
The municipality may charge interest on the amount of money secured by the
lien. The municipal officers will establish the interest rate not to exceed the
maximum rate of interest allowed by the State Treasurer to be charged against
delinquent taxes. The interest will accrue from the date the lien is filed.
Property Taxes. In the event an applicant requests assistance with his or her
property taxes, the administrator will inform the applicant that there are two
procedures on the local level to request that relief: the poverty abatement process
(36 M.S.R.A. § 841(2)) and General Assistance. If the applicant chooses to seek
property tax assistance through General Assistance, or if the applicant is denied a
poverty tax abatement, the administrator may consider using general assistance to
meet this need only if:
a) the property tax in question is for the applicant’s place of residence;
b) there is a tax lien on the property which is due to mature within 60 days of the
date of application;
c) as a matter of municipal policy or practice, or on the basis of information
obtained from the applicant’s mortgagee, if any, it is reasonably certain that a
tax lien foreclosure will result in subsequent eviction from the residential
property; and
d) the applicant, with sufficient notice, applies for property tax relief through the
Maine Property Tax Fairness Credit program, when available.
Housing Maximums. The maximum levels of housing assistance contained in this
ordinance have been derived either from a locally accomplished fair market rental
survey or the fair market rental values developed by the United States Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). If the maximum levels of housing are
derived from the HUD values made effective as of every October 1, and adjusted to
disregard the current and averaged utility allowances as developed by the Maine
72
State Housing Authority, those levels are hereby incorporated by reference. See
Appendix C of this ordinance for the current year’s housing maximums.
If and when the maximum levels of housing contained in this ordinance are derived
from a locally developed fair market rental survey, a record of that survey will be
submitted to the DHHS, General Assistance Unit, and the maximum levels of
housing assistance will be incorporated into this ordinance pursuant to the ordinance
adoption and amendment procedures found at 22 M.R.S.A. § 4305.
C) Utilities. Expenses for lights, cooking, and hot water will be budgeted separately if
they are not included in the rent. Applicants are responsible for making
arrangements with the utility company regarding service, including entering into a
special payment arrangement if necessary.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent
bill. The municipality is not obligated to pay back bills or utility security
deposits. Exceptions may be made in emergency situations pursuant to section
4.9.
Disconnection of utility service will not be considered an emergency in all
cases. The administrator will make an individual, factual analysis to determine if the
termination of utility service constitutes an emergency. The administrator will
consider the household composition, the time of year, the age and health of the
household members, and other appropriate factors in reaching a decision.
Applicants who had sufficient income, money, assets or other resources to pay their
utility bill when it was received, but who spent all or part of their income on items
which were not basic necessities, will not be eligible to receive general assistance to
replace those funds.
73
Applicants have the burden of providing evidence of their income and use of income
for the applicable time period (22 M.R.S.A. § 4308(2)) (see section 4.9 and
6.3). The administrator will notify applicants in writing that they must give the
administrator prompt notice if their utility service is to be terminated or if their fuel
supply is low. It is the applicant’s responsibility to attempt to make arrangements
with the utility company to maintain their service and to notify the administrator if
assistance is needed with a utility bill prior to service being terminated.
Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water. See Appendix D of
this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Electricity Maximums for Households that Use Electrically Heated Hot Water. See
Appendix D of this ordinance for the current year’s electricity maximums.
Non-Electric Utilities. The allowed amount for water and sewer utility service will be
budgeted at a 30-day reasonable usage rate.
D) Fuel. Expenses for home heating will be budgeted according to the actual need for
fuel during the heating season (September through May) provided such expenses
are reasonable, and at other times during the year when the administrator
determines the request for fuel assistance is reasonable and appropriate.
Assistance will be granted to eligible applicants on the basis of their most recent
bill. The municipality is not responsible for back bills except in an emergency as
provided in section 4.9. Applicants are responsible for monitoring their fuel supply
and requesting assistance prior to depleting their fuel supply. When applicants who
have been informed of this responsibility run out of fuel nonetheless, and can show
no just cause for failing to give the administrator timely notice of their need for fuel,
the administrator shall find that the emergency was not beyond the applicants’
74
control, and process the emergency request accordingly, pursuant to section 4.9 of
this ordinance.
See Appendix E of this ordinance for the current year’s fuel maximums.
E) Personal Care and Household Supplies. Expenses for ordinary personal and
household supplies will be budgeted and allowed according to the applicant’s actual
need for these items. Personal and household supplies include: hand soap,
toothpaste, shampoo, shaving cream, deodorant, dish detergent, laundry supplies
and costs, household cleaning supplies, razors, paper products such as toilet paper,
tissues, paper towels, garbage/trash bags light bulbs and supplies for children under
5 years of age. See Appendix F of this ordinance for the current year’s personal
care and household supplies maximums.
F) Other Basic Necessities. Expenses falling under this section will be granted when
they are deemed essential to an applicant’s or recipient’s health and safety by the
general assistance administrator and, in some cases, upon verification by a
physician. Assistance will be granted only when these necessities cannot be
obtained through the utilization of available resources.
1) Clothing. The municipality may assist a household with the purchase of
adequate clothing. Before assistance will be granted for clothing, the general
assistance administrator must be satisfied that the applicant has utilized all
available resources to secure the necessary clothing. In some circumstances,
clothing will be a postponable item. Exceptions to this would be, for example, if
fire, flood or unusually cold weather makes extra clothing an immediate
necessity, special clothing is necessary for the applicant’s employment, or a
household member is without adequate clothing.
75
2) Medical. The municipality will pay for essential medical expenses, other than
hospital bills (see below), provided that the municipality is notified and approves
the expenses and services prior to their being made or delivered. Medical
expenses include prescriptions, devices, treatments, or services that are
determined to be ‘medically necessary’ by a licensed physician. The
municipality will grant assistance for medical services only when assistance
cannot be obtained from any other source and the applicant would not be able
to receive necessary medical care without the municipality’s assistance. The
applicant is required to utilize any resource, including any federal or state
program, that will diminish his or her need to seek general assistance for
medical expenses. The municipality will grant assistance for non-emergency
medical services only if a physician verifies that the services are
essential. Provided there is no cost to the applicant, the administrator may
require a second medical opinion from a physician designated by the
municipality to verify the necessity of the services.
Generally, the municipality will issue general assistance at the established
Medicaid rates for all medical services, prescriptions, or other medical
commodities. Before authorizing general assistance for any medical expenses,
the administrator will inform the pharmacy or medical service provider of the
municipality’s intention to pay for the medical service at the Medicaid rate, and
ask to be billed accordingly.
Ordinary medical supplies/non-prescription drugs will be budgeted at the actual
amount when the applicant can demonstrate a need for such items. Allowable
supplies include bandages, aspirin, cough syrup, and other generic brand, nonprescription
medicines. In addition, the basic monthly rate for telephone
service will be budgeted when a telephone is essential to the health and safety
of the household. In order for telephone service to be considered an allowable
76
expense the applicant must provide a written statement from a physician
certifying that the telephone is essential.
3) Hospital Bills. In the event of an emergency admission to the hospital, the
hospital must notify the administrator within 5 business days of the
admission. Notification must be by telephone, confirmed by certified mail, or by
certified mail only. If a hospital fails to give timely notice to the administrator,
the municipality will have no obligation to pay the bill.
Any person who cannot pay his or her hospital bill must apply to the hospital for
consideration under the Hospital’s Free Care Program as provided in Title 22
M.R.S.A. § 1716. Anyone who is not eligible for the hospital’s free care
program may apply for general assistance. Applicants must apply for
assistance within 30 days of being discharged from the hospital and provide a
notice from the hospital certifying that he or she is not eligible for the hospital’s
free care program.
Before the administrator will consider whether to allow a hospital bill as a
necessary expense, the applicant must enter into a reasonable payment
arrangement with the hospital. The payment arrangement will be based upon
the Medicaid rate. In determining an applicant’s eligibility, the municipality will
budget the monthly payment to the hospital the applicant has agreed to
pay. The applicant’s need for assistance with a hospital bill will be considered
each time he/she applies by including the amount of the bill in the applicant’s
monthly budget, but the recipient will be responsible for making any necessary
payments to the hospital pursuant to the use-of-income requirements found at
section 6.6 of this ordinance.
4) Dental. The municipality will pay for medically necessary dental services
only. As is the case with medical services generally, the municipality will issue
77
general assistance for dental services at the established Medicaid rates for
those services, and before authorizing the general assistance benefit for dental
services, the administrator will inform the dentist or dental surgeon of the
municipality’s intention to pay at the Medicaid rate. If full mouth extractions are
necessary, the municipality will pay for dentures provided the applicant has no
other resources to pay for the dentures. The applicant will be referred to a
dental clinic in the area whenever possible. The administrator will expect the
applicant to bear a reasonable part of the cost for dental services, including
extractions and dentures, taking into account the applicant’s ability to pay.
5) Eye Care. In order to be eligible to receive general assistance for eyeglasses,
an applicant must have his or her medical need certified by a person licensed
to practice optometry. The general assistance administrator will provide
assistance for eyeglasses to eligible persons only after the applicant has
exhausted all other available resources and generally only at the Medicaid rate.
6) Telephone Charge. A payment for basic telephone will only be allowed if a
telephone is necessary for medical reasons as verified by a physician. At the
discretion of the GA administrator, minimum/basic telephone services may be
allowed for households with children, for households where job search or job
related reasons exist and/or for any other reasons the administrator deems
necessary.
7) Work-Related Expenses. In determining need, reasonable and actual workrelated
expenses will be deducted from earned income. These expenses
include childcare costs, work clothes, supplies and transportation at the actual
costs not to exceed the ordinance maximum (see Appendix G for this year’s
maximum mileage allotment) . The applicant is required to provide
documentation substantiating the costs and that the expenses were necessary.
78
8) Travel Expenses. In determining need, necessary travel which is not workrelated
will be budgeted if the applicant can satisfy the administrator that the
prospective need for travel is necessary. For applicants in rural areas, weekly
transportation to a supermarket will be considered, as will any medically
necessary travel. See Appendix G for the current rate at which such necessary
travel will be budgeted. This rate shall be construed to subsidize all costs
associated with automobile ownership and operation, including gas/oil, tires,
maintenance, insurance, financing, licensing/registration, excise tax, etc.
9) Burials, Cremations. Under the circumstances and in accordance with the
procedures and limitations described below (see section 6.9), the municipality
recognizes its responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of eligible
persons. See Appendix H for the current maximums.
10) Capital Improvements. The costs associated with capital improvements/repairs
(e.g., heating/water/septic system repair) will generally not be budgeted as a
basic necessity. Exceptions can be made only when the capital
improvement/repair has been pre-approved by the administrator as a
necessary expense and the monthly cost of the capital improvement/repair has
been reduced as far as reasonably possible; for example, by means of the
applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement with the
contractor. The administrator may grant general assistance for capital
improvements when:
1) the failure to do so would place the applicant(s) in emergency
circumstances;
2) there are no other resources available to effect the capital repair; and
3) there is no more cost-effective alternative available to the applicant or
municipality to alleviate an emergency situation.
79
In some cases, the entire immediate cost of the capital improvement can be
mitigated by the applicant entering into an installment payment arrangement
with a contractor. The municipality reserves the right to place a lien on any
property pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4320 when general assistance has been
used to effect a capital improvement. The lien process shall be accomplished
in the same manner as for mortgage payments, as described in subsection
(B) “Liens”, above.
Section 6.9—Burials; Cremations
Funeral Director Must Give Timely Notice. In order for the municipality to be liable for a
burial or cremation expense, the funeral director must notify the administrator prior to
the burial or cremation or by the end of three business days following the funeral
director’ receipt of the body, whichever is earlier (22 M.R.S.A. §4313(2)). This contact
by the funeral director shall begin the process of developing an application for
burial/cremation assistance on behalf of the deceased. It is the funeral director’s
responsibility to make a good-faith effort to determine if the family or any other persons
are going to pay all or part of the burial expenses. If family members or others are
unable to pay the expenses, and the funeral director wants the municipality to pay all or
part of the expenses, the funeral director must make timely contact to the municipal
administrator. In addition, the funeral director may refer legally liable relatives to the
administrator so that a timely determination of financial capacity may be accomplished.
Application for Assistance Shall be Calculated on Behalf of the Deceased. For the
purposes of determining residency, calculating eligibility and issuing general assistance
for burial or cremation purposes, an application for assistance shall be completed by the
administrator on behalf of the deceased.
With regard to residency, the municipality of responsibility for burial expenses shall be
the municipality in which the eligible deceased person was a resident at the time of
death as residency is determined under section 4.10 of this ordinance.
80
Although legally liable relatives may be asked to provide information regarding their
income, assets, and basic living expenses, that information will not be construed as an
application for general assistance inasmuch as living persons are not eligible for burial
assistance. To clarify this point of law, although legally liable relatives have a financial
responsibility to pay for the burial or cremation of their relatives, that financial
responsibility only exists to the extent the legally liable relatives have a financial
capacity to do so. Therefore, legally liable relatives who are eligible for general
assistance, by virtue of their eligibility, have no legal obligation to pay for the burial or
cremation of their relatives. For these reasons, all general assistance issued for burial
or cremation purposes shall be issued on behalf of, and in the name of, the deceased.
The Financial Responsibility of Certain Family Members. Effective November 1, 2017,
grandparents, parents, children and grandchildren of the deceased whether or not living
in or owning property in Maine, and the spouse or registered domestic partner of the
deceased, are financially responsible for the burial or cremation of the deceased to the
extent those relatives, individually or as a group, have a financial capacity to pay for the
burial or cremation either in lump sum or by means of a budgeted payment arrangement
with the funeral home. Accordingly, at the request of the administrator, all legally liable
relatives must provide the municipal administrator with any reasonably requested
information regarding their income, assets, and basic living expenses. The
Administrator may also seek information from financial institutions holding assets of the
deceased. Effective November 1, 2017, Maine law requires a financial institution to
disclose the amount deposited in the corporation or association when the municipality or
its agents are acting in accordance with section 4313(2) and provide a written request
and a notarized affidavit signed by the overseer of the municipality or its agents stating
that the named depositor is deceased.
Consideration of the Financial Responsibility of Family Members. Generally, when the
administrator can make a finding that one or more of the deceased’s legally liable
81
relatives have an obvious and demonstrable financial capacity to pay for the burial or
cremation, by lump sum payment or by means of a reasonable payment arrangement,
the municipality will not grant the requested burial or cremation assistance. When the
administrator is unable to make such a finding, the following proration of familial
responsibility will be implemented.
Proration of Familial Responsibility. A proration of familial financial responsibility will be
used when no legally liable relative possesses an obvious and demonstrable capacity to
pay for the burial or cremation, but one or more of the financially liable relatives is found
to have a financial capacity to make a partial financial contribution, or the administrator
is unable to determine the financial capacity of one or more of said relatives.
Under these circumstances, each legally liable relative is considered to be responsible
for his or her pro rata share of the total municipal contribution that would exist if no
legally liable relatives had a financial capacity to contribute. Furthermore, and as long
as all other eligibility factors have been satisfied, the municipality will provide as a burial
or cremation benefit the aggregate of all pro rata shares less the share of any legally
liable relative who refuses to cooperate with the administrator by providing information
or documentation reasonably necessary to determine that relative’s financial capacity,
and less any share or part of a share attributable to a legally liable relative who can
financially contribute or partially contribute toward the burial or cremation to the extent
of that relative’s share.
Eight Days to Determine Eligibility. The administrator may take up to 8 days from the
date of an application for burial/cremation assistance to issue a written decision
regarding the amount of the municipal contribution toward the burial or cremation. The
8-day eligibility determination period from the date of application shall be used as
necessary to make third-party collateral contacts, verify the listing of legally liable family
members and determine their respective financial capacities to contribute to the burial
or cremation, contact the personal representative of the deceased’s estate, if any, and
82
other related administrative tasks. The administrator shall not use this 8-day period
allowed by law to unreasonably delay the municipality’s decision.
The Municipal Obligation to Pay When Legally Liable Relatives or Others Can
Contribute. The figures provided in this section are the maximum benefits provided by
the municipality when no contributions toward the burial or cremation are available from
any other source. To the extent any legally liable relatives of the deceased have a
financial capacity to pay for the burial or cremation, that financial capacity shall be
deducted from the maximum burial costs allowed by this section. In addition, any other
benefits or resources that are available, such as Social Security burial benefits,
veterans’ burial benefits, or contributions from other persons, will be deducted from the
maximum amount the municipality will pay, except there will be no deduction from the
municipal benefit level with respect to any contribution provided for the purpose of
publishing an obituary notice up to an aggregate contribution limit for this purpose of
$75 when a paid receipt demonstrating the purchase of an obituary notice is provided to
the administrator.
Burial Expenses. The administrator will respect the wishes of family members with
regard to whether the deceased is interred by means of burial or cremated. See
Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the purpose of burials.
Cremation Expenses. In the absence of any objection by any family members of the
deceased, or when neither the administrator nor the funeral director can locate any
family members, the administrator may issue general assistance for cremation
services. See Appendix H for the maximum levels of assistance granted for the
purpose of cremations.
Section 6.10—Notice of Decision
Written Decision. The administrator will give a written decision to each applicant after
making a determination of eligibility each time a person applies. The decision will be
83
given to the applicant within 24 hours of receiving a completed and signed application
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(3)) (see Article IV, section 4.6).
When an applicant submits an incomplete or unsigned application, due to the 24-hour
decision requirement placed on the GA administrator, the GA administrator may decide
to render a notice of “ineligibility” and provide the applicant with another application to
submit as soon as is practicable for the applicant.
In order to ensure that applicants understand their rights, it is the responsibility of the
general assistance administrator to explain the applicants’ right to a fair hearing in the
written notice of decision.
Contents. After an application has been completed, applicants will be given written
notice of any decision concerning their eligibility for assistance. In addition to the
contents of a written decision listed in section 4.6 of this ordinance, the notice will state
that applicants:
a) have the right to a fair hearing and the method by which they may obtain a fair
hearing and;
b) have the right to contact the DHHS if they believe the municipality has violated
the law. The decision will state the method for notifying the department.
Disbursement of General Assistance. Except when determined impractical by the
administrator, all general assistance will be provided in the form of a voucher or
purchase order payable to a vendor or through direct municipal payment to a provider of
goods or services. General assistance will not be issued in the form of a cash payment
to an applicant unless there is no alternative to making such a cash payment, in which
case the administrator shall document the circumstances for issuing general assistance
in the form of cash (22 M.R.S.A. § 4305(6)).
84
ARTICLE VII
The Fair Hearing
Section 7.1—Right to a Fair Hearing
Within 5 working days of receiving a written notice of denial, reduction or termination of
assistance, or within 10 working days after any other act or failure to act, the applicant
or his or her authorized representative has the right to request a fair hearing (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322). The right to review a decision of the general assistance administrator
is a basic right of the applicant to a full evidentiary hearing and is not limited solely to a
review of the decision.
Section 7.2—Method of Obtaining a Fair Hearing
Upon receiving notification of the decision of the general assistance administrator, all
claimants will be informed of the method of obtaining a fair hearing. All complaints that
are not clear requests for a fair hearing will be answered by a personal interview or in
writing by the general assistance administrator. If the client is satisfied with the
adjustment or explanation, the administrator will make an entry in the case record and
file any correspondence involved.
Written Request. To obtain a fair hearing, the claimant, or his or her authorized
representative, must make a written request within 5 working days of receiving the
administrator’s decision to grant, deny, reduce or terminate assistance, or within 10
working days after any other act or failure to act. The administrator will make available
a printed form for requesting a fair hearing and will assist the claimant in completing it if
necessary. On the printed form, the claimant will give the following information:
a) the decision on which review is sought;
b) the reason(s) for the claimant’s dissatisfaction and why the claimant believes
he/she is eligible to receive assistance; and
85
c) the relief sought by the claimant.
The administrator cannot deny or dismiss a request for a hearing unless it has been
withdrawn (in writing) by the claimant.
Scheduling the Fair Hearing. Upon receipt of the completed written request the fair
hearing authority must meet and hold the hearing within 5 working days. The
administrator will notify the claimant in writing when and where the hearing will be held
(22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In addition to the date, time and place of the hearing, the notice
of fair hearing sent to the claimant shall include, at a minimum, the claimant’s rights to:
a) be his or her own spokesperson at the fair hearing, or be represented by legal
counsel or other spokesperson at the hearing, at the claimant’s own expense;
b) confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing against the
claimant; and
c) present witnesses on his or her own behalf.
Arrangements for the date, time, and place of the hearing will take into consideration the
convenience of the claimant and hearing authority. The claimant will be given timely
notice to allow for preparation and will also be given adequate preliminary information
about the hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case.
Section 7.3—The Fair Hearing Authority
The municipal officers will appoint a fair hearing authority (FHA) that will determine,
based on all the evidence presented at the fair hearing, whether the claimant(s) were
eligible to receive assistance at the time they applied for GA. The FHA is charged with
the responsibility of ensuring that general assistance is administered in accordance with
the state law and local ordinance.
86
The fair hearing authority may consist of the municipal officers, one or more persons
appointed by the municipal officers to act as the FHA , or, if designated, the board of
appeals created under 30-A M.R.S.A. § 2691 (22 M.R.S.A. § 4322). In determining the
organization of the fair hearing authority, the municipal officers will use the following
criteria. The person(s) serving as FHA must:
a) not have participated in the decision which is the subject of the appeal;
b) be impartial;
c) be sufficiently skilled in interviewing techniques to be able to obtain evidence and
the facts necessary to make a fair determination; and
d) be capable of evaluating all evidence fairly and realistically, explaining to the
claimant the laws and regulations under which the administrator operated, and
interpreting to the administrator any evidence of unsound, unclear, or inadequate
policies, practices or actions.
Section 7.4—Fair Hearing Procedure
When a claimant requesting a fair hearing is notified of the date, time, and place of the
hearing in writing, he/she will also be given adequate preliminary information about the
hearing procedure to allow for effective preparation of his or her case. The claimant
shall be permitted to review his or her file prior to the hearing. At a minimum, the
claimant will be told the following information, which will govern all fair hearings. All fair
hearings will:
a) be conducted privately, and will be open only to the claimant, witnesses, legal
counsel, or others whom the claimant wants present, and the general assistance
administrator, his or her agents, counsel and witnesses;
b) be opened with a presentation of the issue by the fair hearing authority;
c) be conducted informally, without technical rules of evidence, but subject to the
requirements of due process;
87
d) allow the claimant and the administrator the option to present their positions for
themselves or with the aid of others, including legal counsel;
e) give all participants an opportunity to present oral or written testimony or
documentary evidence, offer rebuttal; question witnesses presented at the
hearing; and examine all evidence presented at the hearing;
f) result in a decision, based exclusively on evidence or testimony presented at the
hearing; and
g) be tape recorded, and result in a written decision that is given to the claimant and
filed with evidence introduced at the hearing. The fair hearing authority will allow
the claimant to establish all pertinent facts and circumstances, and to advance any
arguments without undue interference. Information that the claimant does not
have an opportunity to hear or see will not be used in the fair hearing decision or
made part of the hearing record. Any material reviewed by the fair hearing
authority must be made available to the claimant or his or her representative. The
claimant will be responsible for preparing a written transcript if he/she wishes to
pursue court action.
The fair hearing authority shall admit all evidence if it is the kind of evidence upon which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs (22
M.R.S.A. § 4322).
Claimant’s Failure to Appear. In the event the claimant fails to appear, the FHA will
send a written notice to the claimant that the GA administrator’s decision was not
altered due to the claimant’s failure to appear. Furthermore, the notice shall indicate
that the claimant has 5 working days from receipt of the notice to submit to the GA
administrator information demonstrating “just cause,” for failing to appear.
For the purposes of a claimant’s failure to appear at a fair hearing, examples of “just
cause” include:
a) a death or serious illness in the family;
88
b) a personal illness which reasonably prevents the party from attending the
hearing;
c) an emergency or unforeseen event which reasonably prevents the party from
attending the hearing;
d) an obligation or responsibility which a reasonable person in the conduct of his or
her affairs could reasonably conclude takes precedence over the attendance at
the hearing; or
e) lack of receipt of adequate or timely notice; excusable neglect, excusable
inadvertence, or excusable mistake.
If the claimant (or their attorney) establishes just cause, the request for the hearing will
be reinstated and a hearing rescheduled.
In the event a claimant who is represented by legal counsel fails to appear at a fair
hearing, legal counsel shall not testify in place of the claimant on matters of ‘fact’ but
may cross examine witnesses and make ‘legal’ arguments on behalf of the claimant.
Section 7.5—The Fair Hearing Decision
The decision of the fair hearing authority will be binding on the general assistance
administrator, and will be communicated in writing to the claimant within 5 working days
after completion of the hearing. Written notice of the decision will contain the following:
a) a statement of the issue;
b) relevant facts brought out at the hearing;
c) pertinent provisions in the law or general assistance ordinance related to the
decision; and
d) the decision and the reasons for it.
A copy of the notice of the decision will be given to the claimant. The hearing record and
the case record will be maintained by the general assistance administrator.
89
The written notice of the decision will state that if the claimant is dissatisfied with the fair
hearing decision, he/she has a further legal right to appeal the decision pursuant to the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 80B. To take advantage of this right, the claimant
must file a petition for review with the Superior Court within 30 days of receipt of the fair
hearing decision.
When the decision by the fair hearing authority or court authorizes assistance to the
claimant, the assistance will be provided within 24 hours.
90
ARTICLE VIII
Recovery of Expenses
Recipients. The municipality may recover the full amount of assistance granted to a
person from either the recipient or from any person liable for the recipient, or his or her
executors or administrators in a civil action. However, prior to recovering assistance
granted, the municipality shall “offset” the value of any workfare performed by a GA
recipient, at a rate not less than minimum wage.
Prior to taking a recipient to court to recover the amount of assistance, the municipality
will seek voluntary repayment from the recipient by notifying him/her in writing and
discussing it with the recipient. The municipality shall not attempt to recover such costs
if, as a result of the repayment, the person would again become eligible for general
assistance (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Recipients Anticipating Workers’ Compensation Benefits. The municipality shall claim a
lien for the value of all general assistance payments made to a recipient on any lump
sum payment made to that recipient under the Workers’ Compensation Act or similar
law of any other state (22 M.R.S.A. § 4318, 39-A M.R.S.A. § 106). After issuing any
general assistance on behalf of a recipient who has applied for or is receiving Workers’
Compensation, the municipality shall file a notice of the municipal lien with the general
assistance recipient and the Office of Secretary of State, Uniform Commercial Code
division.
The notice of lien shall be filed on a UCC-1 form which must be signed by the recipient
of general assistance who has applied for or is receiving Workers’ Compensation. Any
general assistance applicant who has applied for or who is receiving Workers’
Compensation benefits and who refuses to sign a properly prepared UCC-1 form will be
found ineligible to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required
91
signature. The municipality shall also send a photocopy of that filing to the recipient’s
Worker’s Compensation attorney, if known, the applicant’s employer or the employer’s
insurance company, and, at the administrator’s discretion, to the Workers’
Compensation Board. The lien shall be enforced at the time any lump sum Workers’
Compensation benefit is issued.
Recipients of SSI. All applicants who receive general assistance while receipt of their
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) assistance is pending or suspended, and which
therefore may be retroactively issued to the applicant at a later date, will be required to
sign a statement on an Interim Assistance Agreement form distributed by the DHHS that
authorizes the Social Security Administration to direct a portion of any retroactive SSI
payment to the municipality and/or the state in repayment for the general assistance
granted. Any general assistance applicant who has applied for or who may be applying
for SSI, or who may be required to apply for SSI pursuant to 22 M.R.S.A. § 4317, and
who refuses to sign the Interim Agreement SSI authorization form will be found ineligible
to receive general assistance until he or she provides the required signature (22
M.R.S.A. § 4318).
Relatives. The spouse of an applicant, and the parents of any applicant under the age
of 25, are liable for the support of the applicant (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319). In addition, the
grandchildren, children, parents, grandparents, and effective November 1, 2017, the
spouse and a registered domestic partner, are liable for the burial costs of each other.
The municipality considers these relatives to be available resources and liable for the
support of their relatives in proportion to their respective ability. The municipality may
complain to any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any expenses made on the
behalf of a recipient if the relatives fail to fulfill their responsibility (22 M.R.S.A. § 4319).
92
ARTICLE IX
Severability
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the ordinance.
Appendix A
Effective: 10/1/18 – 9/30/19
2018-2019 GA Overall Maximums
Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Bangor HMFA:
Bangor, Brewer, Eddington, Glenburn, Hampden,
Hermon, Holden, Kenduskeag, Milford, Old Town,
Orono, Orrington, Penobscot Indian Island
Reservation, Veazie
733
814
1,032
1,294
1,748
Penobscot County HMFA:
Alton, Argyle UT, Bradford, Bradley, Burlington,
Carmel, Carroll plantation, Charleston, Chester,
Clifton, Corinna, Corinth, Dexter, Dixmont, Drew
plantation, East Central Penobscot UT, East
Millinocket, Edinburg, Enfield, Etna, Exeter,
Garland, Greenbush, Howland, Hudson, Kingman
UT, Lagrange, Lakeville, Lee, Levant, Lincoln,
Lowell town, Mattawamkeag, Maxfield, Medway,
Millinocket, Mount Chase, Newburgh Newport,
North Penobscot UT, Passadumkeag, Patten,
Plymouth, Prentiss UT, Seboeis plantation,
Springfield, Stacyville, Stetson, Twombly UT,
Webster plantation, Whitney UT, Winn, Woodville
693
697
908
1,137
1,297
Lewiston/Auburn MSA:
Auburn, Durham, Greene, Leeds, Lewiston,
Lisbon, Livermore, Livermore Falls, Mechanic
Falls, Minot, Poland, Sabattus, Turner, Wales
669
736
932
1,193
1,461
Portland HMFA:
Cape Elizabeth, Casco, Chebeague Island,
Cumberland, Falmouth, Freeport, Frye Island,
Gorham, Gray, Long Island, North Yarmouth,
Portland, Raymond, Scarborough, South Portland,
Standish, Westbrook, Windham, Yarmouth;
Buxton, Hollis, Limington, Old Orchard Beach
1,058
1,159
1,483
1,986
2,303
York/Kittery/S.Berwick HMFA:
Berwick, Eliot, Kittery, South Berwick, York
989 1,039 1,382 1,749 2,433
Cumberland County HMFA: Baldwin,
Bridgton, Brunswick, Harpswell, Harrison, Naples,
New Gloucester, Pownal, Sebago
784
831
1,091
1,593
1,820
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Sagadahoc HMFA:
Arrowsic, Bath, Bowdoin, Bowdoinham,
Georgetown, Perkins UT, Phippsburg, Richmond,
Topsham, West Bath, Woolwich
786
875
1,017
1,345
1,636
York County HMFA:
Acton, Alfred, Arundel, Biddeford, Cornish,
Dayton, Kennebunk, Kennebunkport, Lebanon,
Limerick, Lyman, Newfield, North Berwick,
Ogunquit, Parsonsfield, Saco, Sanford, Shapleigh,
Waterboro, Wells
766
884
1,098
1,487
1,515
*Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Non-Metropolitan Areas
Persons in Household
COUNTY 1 2 3 4 5*
Aroostook County 622 662 773 1,016 1,112
Franklin County 650 680 807 1,005 1,431
Hancock County 698 798 1,009 1,274 1,397
Kennebec County 727 756 944 1,241 1,326
Knox County 759 765 944 1,210 1,344
Lincoln County 788 845 1,004 1,259 1,503
Oxford County 694 699 839 1,221 1,426
Piscataquis County 615 681 843 1,115 1,238
Somerset County 679 714 859 1,156 1,219
Waldo County 696 761 903 1,231 1,389
Washington County 679 683 840 1,062 1,212
* Please Note: Add $75 for each additional person.
Appendix B
Effective: 10/01/18 to 09/30/19
2018-2019 Food Maximums
Please Note: The maximum amounts allowed for food are established in accordance with the
U.S.D.A. Thrifty Food Plan. As of October 1, 2018, those amounts are:
Number in Household Weekly Maximum Monthly Maximum
1 44.65 192
2 82.09 353
3 117.44 505
4 149.30 642
5 177.21 762
6 212.56 914
7 235.12 1,011
8 268.60
1,155
Note: For each additional person add $144 per month.
Appendix C
Effective: 10/01/18 to 09/30/19
2018-2019 GA Housing Maximums
(Heated & Unheated Rents)
NOTE: NOT ALL MUNICIPALITIES SHOULD ADOPT THESE SUGGESTED
HOUSING MAXIMUMS! Municipalities should ONLY consider adopting the following
numbers, if these figures are consistent with local rent values. If not, a market survey should be
conducted and the figures should be altered accordingly. The results of any such survey must be
presented to DHHS prior to adoption. Or, no housing maximums should be adopted and
eligibility should be analyzed in terms of the Overall Maximum—Appendix A. (See Instruction
Memo for further guidance.)
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Aroostook County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 112 483 131 565
1 115 496 140 600
2 133 572 163 700
3 180 776 217 932
4 192 826 236 1,016
Franklin County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 119 511 138 593
1 120 514 144 618
2 141 606 171 734
3 178 765 214 921
4 266 1,145 310 1,335
Hancock County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 124 535 147 633
1 140 602 169 726
2 183 788 215 924
3 230 988 273 1,175
4 246 1,058 299 1,285
Kennebec County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 131 564 154 662
1 131 564 159 684
2 168 724 200 859
3 222 955 266 1,142
4 230 987 282 1,214
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Knox County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 139 596 161 694
1 139 596 161 694
2 168 724 200 859
3 215 924 258 1,111
4 234 1,005 287 1,232
Lincoln County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 145 625 168 723
1 151 649 180 773
2 182 783 214 919
3 226 973 270 1,160
4 271 1,164 323 1,391
Oxford County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 123 528 146 629
1 123 528 146 629
2 140 600 175 754
3 218 935 261 1,122
4 253 1,087 306 1,314
Piscataquis County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 110 474 130 559
1 119 512 144 619
2 149 640 179 771
3 203 871 240 1,032
4 220 946 266 1,142
Somerset County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 120 517 143 614
1 121 519 149 642
2 147 631 180 774
3 202 870 246 1,057
4 205 880 257 1,107
Non-Metropolitan FMR Areas
Waldo County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 123 530 147 631
1 131 565 160 689
2 159 683 190 818
3 220 945 263 1,132
4 244 1,050 297 1,277
Washington County Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 119 513 143 614
1 119 513 143 614
2 140 601 176 755
3 181 776 224 963
4 203 873 256 1,100
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Bangor HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 132 567 155 668
1 144 618 173 742
2 185 793 220 947
3 234 1,008 278 1,195
4 328 1,409 380 1,636
Penobscot Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 123 527 146 628
1 123 527 146 628
2 156 669 191 823
3 198 851 241 1,038
4 223 958 276 1,185
Lewiston/Auburn MSA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 117 503 140 604
1 125 540 154 664
2 165 711 197 847
3 211 907 254 1,094
4 261 1,122 314 1,349
Metropolitan FMR Areas
Portland HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 208 892 231 993
1 224 963 253 1,087
2 289 1,244 325 1,398
3 395 1,700 439 1,887
4 457 1,964 510 2,191
York/Kittery/S. Berwick
HMFA
Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 192 824 215 924
1 196 843 225 967
2 266 1,143 302 1,297
3 340 1,463 384 1,650
4 487 2,094 540 2,321
Cumberland Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 144 618 167 719
1 148 635 177 759
2 202 868 234 1,006
3 304 1,307 347 1,494
4 344 1,481 397 1,708
Sagadahoc Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 145 623 168 721
1 158 679 187 803
2 185 795 217 932
3 246 1,059 290 1,246
4 302 1,297 354 1,524
York Cty. HMFA Unheated Heated
Bedrooms Weekly Monthly Weekly Monthly
0 140 600 163 701
1 160 688 189 812
2 203 875 236 1,013
3 274 1,201 323 1,388
4 274 1,201 326 1,403
Appendix D
Effective: 10/01/18 to 09/30/19
2018-2019- ELECTRIC UTILITY MAXIMUMS
NOTE: For an electrically heated dwelling also see “Heating Fuel” maximums below. But
remember, an applicant is not automatically entitled to the “maximums” established?applicants
must demonstrate need.
1) Electricity Maximums for Households Without Electric Hot Water: The maximum
amounts allowed for utilities, for lights, cooking and other electric uses excluding electric hot
water and heat:
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $14.00 $60.00
2 $15.70 $67.50
3 $17.45 $75.00
4 $19.90 $86.00
5 $23.10 $99.00
6 $25.00 $107.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $7.50 per month.
2) Electricity Maximums for Households With Electrically Heated Hot Water: The
maximum amounts allowed for utilities, hot water, for lights, cooking and other electric uses
excluding heat:
Number in Household Weekly Monthly
1 $20.65 $89.00
2 $23.75 $102.00
3 $27.70 $119.00
4 $32.25 $139.00
5 $38.75 $167.00
6 $41.00 $176.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $10.00 per month.
NOTE: For electrically heated households, the maximum amount allowed for electrical utilities
per month shall be the sum of the appropriate maximum amount under this subsection and the
appropriate maximum for heating fuel as provided below.
Appendix E
Effective: 10/01/18 to 09/30/19
2018-2019 HEATING FUEL MAXIMUMS
Month Gallons Month Gallons
September 50 January 225
October 100 February 225
November 200 March 125
December 200 April 125
May 50
NOTE: When the dwelling unit is heated electrically, the maximum amount allowed for
heating purposes will be calculated by multiplying the number of gallons of fuel allowed
for that month by the current price per gallon. When fuels such as wood, coal and/or
natural gas are used for heating purposes, they will be budgeted at actual rates, if they are
reasonable. No eligible applicant shall be considered to need more than 7 tons of coal per
year, 8 cords of wood per year, 126,000 cubic feet of natural gas per year, or 1000
gallons of propane.
APPENDIX F
Effective: 10/01/18 to 09/30/19
2018-2019 PERSONAL CARE & HOUSEHOLD SUPPLIES
MAXIMUMS
Number in Household Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1-2 $10.50 $45.00
3-4 $11.60 $50.00
5-6 $12.80 $55.00
7-8 $14.00 $60.00
NOTE: For each additional person add $1.25 per week or $5.00 per month.
SUPPLEMENT FOR HOUSEHOLDS WITH CHILDREN UNDER 5
When an applicant can verify expenditures for the following items, a special supplement will be
budgeted as necessary for households with children under 5 years of age for items such as cloth
or disposable diapers, laundry powder, oil, shampoo, and ointment up to the following amounts:
Number of Children Weekly Amount Monthly Amount
1 $12.80 $55.00
2 $17.40 $75.00
3 $23.30 $100.00
4 $27.90 $120.00
APPENDIX G
Mileage Rate
This municipality adopts the State of Maine travel expense reimbursement rate as set by the
Office of the State Controller. The current rate for approved employment and necessary medical
travel etc. is 44 cents (44¢) per mile.
Please refer to the Office of State Controller for changes to this rate: Telephone: 626-8420 or
visit: http://www.state.me.us/osc/
Appendix H
Effective: 10/01/17 to 09/30/18
Funeral Maximums
Burial Maximums
The maximum amount of general assistance granted for the purpose of burial is $1,125.
Additional costs may be allowed by the GA administrator, where there is an actual cost, for:
? the wholesale cost of a cement liner if the cemetery by-laws require one;
? the opening and closing of the grave site; and
? a lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery. If the municipality is able
to provide a cemetery lot in a municipally owned cemetery or in a cemetery
under municipal control, the cost of the cemetery lot in any other cemetery
will not be paid by the municipality.
The municipality’s obligation to provide funds for burial purposes is limited to a reasonable
calculation of the funeral director’s direct costs, not to exceed the maximum amounts of
assistance described in this section. Allowable burial expenses are limited to:
? removal of the body from a local residence or institution
? a secured death certificate or obituary
? embalming
? a minimum casket
? a reasonable cost for necessary transportation
? other reasonable and necessary specified direct costs, as itemized by the
funeral director and approved by the municipal administrator.
Cremation Maximums
The maximum amount of assistance granted for a cremation shall be $785. Additional costs may
be allowed by the GA administrator where there is an actual cost, for:
? a cremation lot in the least expensive section of the cemetery
? a reasonable cost for a burial urn not to exceed $50
? transportation costs borne by the funeral director at a reasonable rate per mile
for transporting the remains to and from the cremation facility.
Appendix I
26 MRSA §1043 (23)
Misconduct. “Misconduct” means a culpable breach of the employee’s duties or obligations
to the employer or a pattern of irresponsible behavior, which in either case manifests a disregard
for a material interest of the employer. This definition relates only to an employee’s entitlement
to benefits and does not preclude an employer from discharging an employee for actions that are
not included in this definition of misconduct. A finding that an employee has not engaged in
misconduct for purposes of this chapter may not be used as evidence that the employer lacked
justification for discharge. [1999, c. 464, §2 (rpr).]
A. The following acts or omissions are presumed to manifest a disregard for a material
interest of the employer. If a culpable breach or a pattern of irresponsible behavior is shown,
these actions or omissions constitute “misconduct” as defined in this subsection. This does
not preclude other acts or omissions from being considered to manifest a disregard for a
material interest of the employer. The acts or omissions included in the presumption are the
following:
(1) Refusal, knowing failure or recurring neglect to perform reasonable and proper
duties assigned by the employer;
(2) Unreasonable violation of rules that are reasonably imposed and communicated and
equitably enforced;
(3) Unreasonable violation of rules that should be inferred to exist from common
knowledge or from the nature of the employment;
(4) Failure to exercise due care for punctuality or attendance after warnings;
(5) Providing false information on material issues relating to the employee’s eligibility
to do the work or false information or dishonesty that may substantially jeopardize a
material interest of the employer;
(6) Intoxication while on duty or when reporting to work or unauthorized use of alcohol
while on duty;
(7) Using illegal drugs or being under the influence of such drugs while on duty or when
reporting to work;
(8) Unauthorized sleeping while on duty;
(9) Insubordination or refusal without good cause to follow reasonable and proper
instructions from the employer;
(10) Abusive or assaultive behavior while on duty, except as necessary for self-defense;
(11) Destruction or theft of things valuable to the employer or another employee;
(12) Substantially endangering the safety of the employee, coworkers, customers or
members of the public while on duty;
(13) Conviction of a crime in connection with the employment or a crime that reflects
adversely on the employee’s qualifications to perform the work; or
(14) Absence for more than 2 work days due to incarceration for conviction of a crime.
Appendix I
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]
B. “Misconduct” may not be found solely on:
(1) An isolated error in judgment or a failure to perform satisfactorily when the
employee has made a good faith effort to perform the duties assigned;
(2) Absenteeism caused by illness of the employee or an immediate family member if
the employee made reasonable efforts to give notice of the absence and to comply with
the employer’s notification rules and policies; or
(3) Actions taken by the employee that were necessary to protect the employee or an
immediate family member from domestic violence if the employee made all reasonable
efforts to preserve the employment.
[1999, c. 464, §2 (new).]









HEDGES & SHRUBBERY
No hedges, shrubbery, fences, walls, or other obstructions of more than 36” in
height (measured from the surface of the traveled way laterally adjacent to said
obstruction) shall be permitted at intersections of public ways nearer than thirty
(30) feet either way.
Any person found guilty of violating this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of
not more than $25.00 for each offense.
Town of Fairfield
Land Use Ordinance
The effective adoptive date of this Ordinance is the 14th day of April, 1999.
Amended November 10, 1999
Amended December 13, 2000
Amended July 10, 2002
Amended March 9, 2005
Amended June 22, 2005
Amended July 6, 2005
Amended October 26, 2005
Amended April 12, 2006
Amended May 10, 2006
Amended August 9, 2006
Amended March 10, 2010
Amended April 14, 2010
Amended June 15, 2011
Amended October 5, 2011
Amended March 13, 2013
Amended June 12, 2013
Amended August 12, 2015
Amended August 24, 2016
Amended September 26, 2018
Amended April 10, 2019
A True Copy I Attest:
_________________
Town Clerk
Town of Fairfield
Land Use Ordinance
Contents:
ARTICLE TITLE PAGE
1 General Provisions .......................................................................................... 1
2 Definitions of Terms Used in this Ordinance ................................................... 3
3 Permitting, Enforcement, Appeals ................................................................. 12
4 Amendments ................................................................................................. 21
5 Non-conformance .......................................................................................... 23
6 Land Use Districts ......................................................................................... 25
7 Environmental and Neighborhood Protection Standards ............................... 31
8 Site Design and Public Facilities Impact Standards....................................... 36
9 Development Standards Applicable to Specific Activities .............................. 45
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 1
ARTICLE 1: General Provisions
1.1 Authority
The regulations contained in this Land Use Ordinance are enacted under the Home Rule Authority granted
by the State of Maine (30-A M.R.S.A. as 3001) and other specific authority, pursuant to the Fairfield
Comprehensive Plan, as revised in 2015.
1.2 Short Title
This ordinance and the Official Land Use Map hereby incorporated, shall be known and may be cited as
the "Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Fairfield."
1.3 Purpose
This ordinance is enacted for the general purpose of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of
the citizens of the Town of Fairfield, and for other, specific purposes, including:
? provision of adequate and cost-effective public facilities and services;
? conservation of valuable natural resources;
? promotion of local economic development and property values;
? preservation of safety and convenience on public roads;
? revitalization of the town's downtown commercial area;
? protecting the rural character of certain portions of the town; and
? maintaining in all cases clean, safe, and comfortable neighborhoods for inhabitants of the town.
1.4 Jurisdiction
The provision of this ordinance shall govern the use of all land and structures within the Town of Fairfield
and, more specifically, the location and development of residential, commercial, industrial and public
property within the Town.
1.5 Application of Terms and Requirements
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, said provisions shall be deemed to be the
minimum required to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. Captions and headings
contains in this ordinance are considered an integral part of the ordinance, and shall be used to help
determine applicability of sections to which they apply.
1.6 Conflict with Other Laws
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision of this
Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the provision imposing the greater restriction
upon the use of land, buildings, or structures shall control.
1.7 Severability.
Should any section or part of a section or any provision of this Ordinance be declared by a court of
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as
a whole or any part thereof other than the affected part.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 2
1.8 Repeal of Prior Ordinance
The prior Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Fairfield, together with all amendments currently in force, is
hereby repealed and replaced, as of the effective date of this ordinance.
1.9 Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from the date of its adoption.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 3
ARTICLE 2: Definitions of Terms Used in this Ordinance
2.1 Construction of Language
In the interpretation and enforcement of this Ordinance, all words other than those specifically defined in the Ordinance
shall have their ordinarily accepted meaning, except to the extent that another meaning is clearly implied by their
context in this Ordinance. In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this Ordinance
and any map, illustration, or table, the test shall control.
The word "person" includes firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an
individual or any other legal entity. The words "he", (s)he," or "they" when used shall refer to the person or persons so
designated regardless of gender.
If clearly implied by the context in which they appear, the present tense includes the future tense, the singular number
includes the plural, and the plural numbers includes the singular.
The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, the word "may" is permissive. The word ''lot" includes the words "plot" and
"parcel".
The words "used" or "occupied", as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended,
arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
The words "town" or "municipality" mean the Town of Fairfield, Maine.
2.2 Definitions
In this Ordinance the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Abutter: The owner of property adjoining or located within 200 feet of a boundary of the parcel proposed to be
developed.
Accessory dwelling unit: A second dwelling unit located on the same lot or within the same building as the principal
dwelling unit intended for use as a complete and independent dwelling including kitchen and bathroom.
Accessory use or structure: A use or structure which is customarily and in fact both incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the structure. The term "incidental" in reference to the principal use or structure shall mean subordinate
and minor in significance to the principal use or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the
principal use of the lot.
Acre: A measurement of area equivalent to 43,560 square feet.
Administrative Review: The process by which the Board of Appeals is authorized to hear an appeal of a decision of
the Code Enforcement Officer. An Administrative Review shall be only conducted through the procedures described in
Section 3.1O.D of this ordinance.
Adult Businesses: Any commercial enterprise, including but not limited to bookstores and theaters, which as a
substantial or significant portion of its enterprise rents, sells, or keeps for display books, videos, motion pictures or any
other form of representation of sexually explicit material or activities or which features live entertainment in which
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 4
performers have exposed genitals at any point during the performance. "Sexually explicit" means the depiction or display
of human genitals.
Agriculture (Agricultural Operation): The production, keeping, or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants, animals, or
products thereof, including ornamental and greenhouse products. Agriculture does not include forest management and
timber harvesting activities.
Alteration: Any change, addition, or modification in construction, other than cosmetic or decorative, or any change in the
structural members of buildings such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
Authorized Agent: Any person having written authorization to act in behalf of a property owner, signed by the property
owner.
Automobile Graveyard: The term as defined in 30-A M.R.S.A. sec. 3752, as amended.
Base Flood: Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, alternately
referred to as the 100 year flood.
Basement: Any portion of a building with at least 50 percent of its volume below ground level, typically having a masonry
floor and walls which comprise the structure's foundation, and where the clear height between floor and joists supporting
the floor directly above is six feet or greater.
Bed and Breakfast: A type of overnight accommodation based within the permanent dwelling of the person or family
acting as proprietor and that provides accommodations for a fee for stays of limited duration. A bed and breakfast shall
contain fewer than ten rental rooms and shall provide food only to registered guests, except that a bed and breakfast may
be separately licensed to host special functions.
Body of Water: Shall mean a free flowing river or stream, with a defined channel lacking terrestrial vegetation, and
flowing water for more than three months during the year, or a pond with no less than 20,000 square feet of water
surface.
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns, walls, or other framework intended for the housing or
enclosure of persons, animals or personal property.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured between the average finished grade of the ground at the front of
a building and the highest point of the roof, not including chimneys, spires, towers, or similar auxiliary attachments.
Business or Personal Services: A commercial enterprise which provides services but not goods, including but not
limited to: beauty shops, secretarial services, real estate brokers, and janitorial services. The term
shall not be interpreted to include motor vehicle sales and services but may include certain professional offices.
Campground: Any area or tract of land improved to accommodate temporary living quarters for two or more parties,
including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles, or other shelters, for which a fee is charged.
Change of Use: A change from one category in the land use table, as found in Section 6.4, to another or the addition of
a new category of use to an existing use.
Child Care: An establishment, including a private residence, where three or more children under the age of six (6) are
cared for in return for compensation. Child care is considered to be "public or private schools" when it does not qualify
as home occupation.
Code Enforcement Officer (CEO): A person appointed by the Town of Fairfield to administer and enforce this
ordinance. Reference to functions ordinarily performed by the Code Enforcement Officer may be construed to include
those of Building Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Health Officer, and the like where applicable.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 5
Communication Tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or
more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, and monopoles, for the purpose of transmitting or
relaying radio frequency signals, including, but not limited to, radio, television, cellular, and personal communication
service frequencies. Towers established for personal use purposes, such as citizen band and ham radio operations, and
which are less than 50 feet in height, shall not be included in this definition.
Conditional Use: A use that is likely to have significant effects on neighboring land uses or public services and is
therefore subject to review and approval by the planning board, which will ensure that all performance standards and
other requirements of this ordinance are met.
Congregate Housing: A multi-family development with central dining facilities serving functionally impaired persons.
Constructed: Includes built, erected, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises
which are required for construction. Excavation, fill, paving, drainage, and the like, shall be considered as part of
construction.
Controlled Substance Facility: A business, any part of which is engaged in the production or distribution of substances
controlled by the Maine Department of Health and Human services. This term includes marijuana dispensaries, grow
operations, and methadone clinics, for example, but excludes licensed hospitals, pharmacies, or physician’s offices.
Critical Natural Area: Any area identified and listed by the Natural Areas Program of the Maine Department of
Conservation as containing rare or unique botanical features or habitat for rare, threatened, or endangered plant species
or rare and unique natural communities.
Deck: An uncovered structure with a floor, elevated above ground level.
Developed Area: The portion of a lot which is disturbed for the intended use, including all areas used for structures,
parking, circulation, and drainage.
Dimensional Standards: Numerical standards relating to spiral relationships including but not limited to setback, lot
coverage, lot area, frontage, and height.
District: A specified portion of the Town of Fairfield, delineated on the Official Land Use Map, within which certain
regulations apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Dwelling: A room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as permanent, seasonal, or temporary
living quarters. The term shall include mobile homes, but not recreational vehicles.
Single-Family Dwelling: A building containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
Two-Family Dwelling: A building containing only two (2) dwelling units.
Multi-Family Dwelling: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units, such buildings being designed for
residential use and occupancy by three (3) or more households; with the number of households not exceeding the
number of dwelling units.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary
facilities designed for use by a single household or family.
Eating or Drinking Establishment: An establishment where food and/or beverages are prepared and served to the
general public for immediate consumption in exchange for compensation. The sale of pre-packaged meal items or
preparation of food intended exclusively for consumption off the premises (delivery or take-out) are considered retail
sales and are not to be included within this definition.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 6
Sit-down Restaurant: An eating or drinking establishment in which significant interior building space is devoted to
seating area for patrons. The term includes fast food restaurants which provide indoor seating, even if there is
drive-through or walk-up service.
Snack Bar: A place where food is prepared for consumption on or off the premises, where all of the consumption is
intended to take place outside of the confines of the building, and where ordering and pickup of food may take place
from a motor vehicle. The term includes businesses commonly referred to as food trucks, ice cream stands, coffee
shacks, and drive-ins.
Essential Facility: Gas, electrical, or communication structures such as steam, fuel, power, or water transmission or
distribution lines, telephone cables, poles, and related equipment, pipelines, sewage lines, and associated storage
equipment. Such systems may include poles, wires, drains, conduits, fire alarms, hydrants, visual and audible signals
and similar accessories. The term does not include wireless communication towers, power substations, and accessory
buildings.
Expansion: In relation to a building, expansion shall mean: enlargement of floor area, or enlargement of building
enclosure. In relation to a use: the addition of weeks or months to a business operating season; the addition of hours to
a business day; the use of more floor area or ground area; or the provision of additional seating capacity.
Farm Stand: A booth, stall, or building located on the farm on which the produce and products being sold are available
to the general public. Items not produced on the farm shall not comprise a significant proportion of sales merchandise.
Flood Map: The official map on which the Dept. of Housing and Urban Development or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable
to the Town.
Floodplain: The lands adjacent to a body of water which have been or may be covered by the 100-year flood.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Floor Area, Gross: The sum, in square feet of the floor areas of all roofed portions of a building, as measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls.
Forest Operations: The planting, thinning, cutting or removal of trees from their growing site, including the operation of
mechanical chippers or portable sawmills associated with such operations, but not to include the clearing of land for
approved construction.
Foundation: The supporting structure of a building or other structure including but not limited to basements, slabs, sills,
posts or frost walls.
Fueling Station (Fuel Sales): Buildings and structures required for the retail sale of petroleum products (propane,
gasoline, diesel fuel), including any fuel storage and delivery systems.
Historic or Archeological Resource: Are identified by a governmental agency such as the Maine Historic Preservation
Commission as having significant value as a historic or archeological resource as well as areas identified in the Town of
Fairfield Comprehensive Plan.
Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a residential structure or
property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of the property and surrounding
residential uses; 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons other than family members residing in the home, and 3)
occupies no more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of all buildings on the lot.
Hospital: An institution providing, but not limited to, overnight health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical or
surgical care for the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories,
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 7
out-patient departments, training facilities, and staff offices.
Impervious Surface: All portions of a development which are disturbed and not re-vegetated, including gravel surfaces
and compacted earth surfaces.
Industrial: Connected with the assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, or processing of goods or
the extraction of natural resource products.
Junkyard: A yard, field or other area used as place for storage for:
A. Discarded, worn-out, junked plumbing, heating supplies, household appliances, and furniture;
B. Discarded, scrap, and junk lumber;
C. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, plastic debris, waste, and scrap
iron, steel, and other scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material, and
D. Garbage dumps, waste dumps, and sanitary landfills.
Kennels/Boarding: Any place, building, tract of land, abode, enclosure, or vehicle where three or more domestic
animals, owned singly or jointly are kept for a commercial purpose, including but not limited to breeding, hunting, show,
field trials or exhibition, or where one or more domestic animals are kept for their owners in return for a fee. Dogs or cats
under the age of six months shall not be counted for the purpose of this definition.
Level of Service: A term used by traffic engineers, indicating a scale of "A" to "F", measuring the volume of vehicular
traffic in relation to the capacity of an intersection or road segment. Levels of Service "E" or "F" describe road situations
with severe problems attributable to traffic congestion.
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by buildings or uses, including required setbacks, and
requiring frontage upon a public street, right-of-way or private way.
Lot, Corner: A lot with at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a street or right of way.
Lot, Interior: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot Area: The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, not including land below the normal high-water
line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas within road right-of-way.
Lot Coverage: The percentage of the lot covered by all buildings.
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot, as defined below:
Front Lot Line: On an interior lot the line separating the lot from the street or right of way. On a corner lot, the line
separating the lot from the street along the longest frontage distance.
Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land, a legal description of which or the dimensions of which are recorded on a document or
map on file in the Somerset County Registry of Deeds.
Manufactured Housing Unit (also Mobile Home): Structures, transportable in one or two sections, which are
constructed in a manufacturing facility and transported to a building site, and which are designed to be used as dwellings
when connected to suitable electrical, water supply, and sewage facilities.
Manufacturing: The making of goods and articles by hand or machinery. Manufacturing shall include assembling,
fabricating, finishing, packaging or processing operations. A manufacturing activity includes warehousing, power
generation, waste disposal and other functions directly associated with the activity.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 8
Mobile Home Park: A lot of land designed and/or used to accommodate three or more manufactured housing units or
mobile homes, and where the land is under unitary ownership.
Motor Vehicle Sales and Service: An establishment which engages in the sale, rental, leasing, or repair of motor
vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, and boats. This term shall not include
sales of manufactured housing units, sales of gasoline, diesel or other fuel without associated service facilities, or small
engine repair shops.
MUBEC: The Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code adopted pursuant to 10 MRSA §9271.
Non-Conforming Use: Use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not permitted in the District
in which it is situated or which does not meet the performance standards prescribe for it by this Ordinance, but which is
allowed to remain solely because it was lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took
effect.
Non-Conforming Structure: A structure which does not meet any one or more of the following dimensional
requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was in lawful existence at the time
this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-Conforming Lot of Record: A lot shown on a plan or deed recorded prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or
amendment which, does not meet the area or frontage requirements of the District in which it is located.
Nursing Home: Any facility which provided meals, lodging and nursing care for compensation.
Open Space Subdivision: A subdivision reviewed and approved under the provisions of the Town of Fairfield
Subdivision Ordinance in which at least fifty (50) percent of the total area is reserved for open space use.
Open Space Use: A use not involving a structure, an earth-moving activity, or the removal or destruction of vegetative
cover, spawning grounds, or fish, aquatic life, bird and other wildlife habitat.
Outdoor Recreation Facility: Any land use which is primarily devoted to participating in or watching outdoor recreation
activities and which is operated as a commercial facility.
Overnight Accommodation: A commercial enterprise in which rooms or suites of rooms are offered for a fee to
travelers and transient guests. Overnight accommodations may qualify as subdivisions if rental units are a dwelling unit,
as defined, and are leased or rented monthly.
Permit: An official document of the Town of Fairfield, issued by the Code Enforcement Officer and authorizing a specific
activity in accordance with an approval by the CEO or Planning Board.
Place of Public Assembly: A land use in which the principal intent is to provide a place for an association or persons
organized for social, religious, benevolent, or academic purposes; whose facilities are open to members and guests. The
term shall include grange halls, bottle clubs, theaters, auditoriums, religious buildings, and similar uses, and includes
auxiliary uses such as kitchens, offices, meetings rooms.
Principal Structure: The building enclosing or serving the principal use of the premises.
Principal Use: The use which fulfills the primary purpose of the person in possession of the premises.
Private Road: A private way meeting the road construction standards as specified in the Town's Subdivision
Ordinance.
Professional Offices: The place of business for professional service providers except for medical, dental, veterinary or
chiropractic providers.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 9
Professional Service Provider: A person who practices a profession subject to licensing and regulation under the
authority of the Maine Department of Professional and Financial Regulation.
Recreational Facility: A public or privately owned commercial enterprise designed and equipped for the conduct of
sports, leisure time activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, or the viewing thereof.
Recreational Vehicle (RV): A vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle, designed for temporary sleeping or living quarters
for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor
home. In order to be considered as a vehicle and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground and
must be currently registered as a motor vehicle or trailer.
Repairs: Routine, ordinary maintenance of a structure for the purpose of maintaining its useful life. Examples include
painting, papering, tiling, carpeting and replacement of plumbing, electrical, or mechanical parts. “Repairs” does not
include activities such as removal of any wall, partition or portion thereof, removal of any structural support, changing of
any means of egress, or addition to any water, waste disposal, gas, venting, electrical or mechanical system.
Residential Use: Any land use which includes a dwelling unit.
Restaurant: see Eating or Drinking Establishment.
River: The Kennebec River, together with its associated floodplain and wetlands.
Satellite Receiving Dish: An antenna designed to receive signals from satellites. A free-standing Satellite Receiving
Dish is considered a structure under the terms in this ordinance.
School: An institution for education or instruction where any branch or branches of knowledge is imparted and which
satisfies either of the following requirements:
Public or Private School: A school which is not operated for a profit or a gainful business; or which teaches
courses of study which are sufficient to qualify attendance there as in compliance with State compulsory education
requirements.
Commercial School: A school which is commercial or profit-oriented. Examples thereof are nursery, dancing,
music, correspondence, driving, beauty, or business schools.
Seasonal Use: The occupation of a dwelling or recreational vehicle for residential purposes between April 1 and
December 1, and not otherwise.
Setback: The horizontal distance from a lot line to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space, or other regulated
object or area.
Sight Distance: The visible distance available to a motorist at an access point to a public road, sufficient to allow a
vehicle to enter the road without inhibiting the progress of other vehicles. For the purpose of calculation, sight distance is
measured from the height of a hypothetical driver 3 and 1/2 feet above the driveway at a point 15 feet behind the street
line, to an object 4 and 1/2 feet above the street.
Sign: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure containing a message, graphic illustration, or insignia erected or inscribed
for public view for the purpose of identifying a person or activity or communicating information.
Sign Area: The surface area of that portion of the sign containing the advertising matter. Signs which have no separate
sign surface shall be measured by taking the smallest area of a rectangle or circle which encloses the advertising matter.
For two-sided signs, only one side of the sign shall be counted towards sign area.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 10
Site Plan: A scale drawing depicting the geographical area if the lot together with an accurate representation of existing
and prospective structure, roads, parking area, utilities, and other elements of a development.
Solar Energy System (SES): An area of land or building principally used to capture solar energy, convert it to
electrical energy or thermal power and supply electrical or thermal power primarily for off-site use. A solar energy system
consists of one or more free-standing ground or roof mounted solar collector devices, related equipment and other
accessory structures and buildings including light reflectors, concentrators, and heat exchangers; substations; electrical
infrastructure; transmission lines and appurtenant structures. The term includes commercial and community solar
installations, but not installations that are clearly accessory to existing principal uses.
Storage Containers: A prefabricated, metal container with roof and walls placed and used for the storage of
goods, materials, or merchandise. The term includes, but is not limited to, boxcars, semi-trailers, and “piggyback”
containers, but does not include garages or pre-assembled storage sheds or containers placed temporarily for
collection of wastes.
Stream: A free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2) perennial streams as
depicted on the most recent edition of the United States Geological Survey 7.5 minute series topographic map, or if not
available, a 15 minute series topographic map, to the point where the body of water becomes a river, or flows to another
water body or wetland within a shoreland zone.
Street: An existing state, county, or town way; a street dedicated for public use and shown upon a plan duly approved by
the Planning Board and recorded in the County Registry of Deeds; or a street dedicated for public use and shown on a
plan duly recorded in the County Registry of Deeds prior to the establishment of the Planning Board and the grant to the
Planning Board of its power to approve plans. The term ''street" shall not include those ways which have been
discontinued or abandoned.
Street Frontage: The horizontal distance, measured in a straight line, between the intersections of the side lot lines with
the front lot line.
Structure: Anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property, constructed or erected
with a fixed location on or in the ground. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently located, such as
decks, tents, and satellite dishes, but does not include sidewalks, patios, driveways, or parking lots.
Substantial Expansion: Floor space increase of 25% or new materials or processes not normally associated with the
existing use.
Subdivision: The term as defined by the Town of Fairfield Subdivision Ordinance.
Subsurface Wastewater Disposal System: A collection of treatment tank(s), disposal area(s), holding tank(s) and
pond(s), surface spray system(s), cesspool(s), well(s), surface ditch(es), alternative toilet(s), or other devices and
associated piping designed to function as a unit for the purpose of disposing of wastes or wastewater on or beneath the
surface of the earth. The term shall not include any wastewater discharge system licensed under Title 38 MRSA §414,
any surface wastewater disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal sewer or wastewater treatment system.
Throat: That portion of an access way into a commercial development devoted to holding vehicles preparing to enter or
exit the development, containing no additional access points or directly accessing parking spaces.
Trailer, Utility: A vehicle without motive power, designed to be towed by a passenger automobile but not designed for
human occupancy and which may include a flatbed, boat trailer, horse trailer or snowmobile trailer.
Undue Hardship: The condition necessary for the granting of a variance, which shall include:
A. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is granted.
B. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and not to the general
conditions in the neighborhood.
C. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality; and
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 11
D. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or prior owner.
Urban Compact Area: An area within a municipality designated by the Maine Department of Transportation for
municipal maintenance and control of access. Within Fairfield, the urban compact area includes ME Route 139 east of
the I-95 interchange and US Route 201 south of the I-95 interchange.
Utilities: Public and private facilities intended for common or community use, such as water wells, pumping stations,
water storage tanks, power, cable, and communication transmission lines, microwave relays, gas regulation stations, and
sewage disposal plants.
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this Ordinance. Variances permissible under this Ordinance are
limited to dimensional standards. No variance shall be granted for the establishment of any use otherwise prohibited, nor
shall a variance be granted on nonconformities in the immediate or adjacent areas.
Veterinary Hospital or Clinic: A building used for the diagnosis, care and treatment of ailing or injured animals which
may include overnight stays. The overnight boarding of healthy animals shall be considered a kennel.
Warehousing: The use of structures for the purpose of providing space for secure storage of household or business
goods, including freight terminals, and moving and transfer companies, as well as that portion of structures established
for long-term storage of inventory or business-related items. "Self-storage" or "miniwarehouse"
uses in which spaces
are available to the public for rent or lease shall be classified as "business services."
Waste and Scrap Storage/Processing Facility: A business in which the principal activity is the storage or processing
for reuse, waste or scrap materials including, but not limited to glass, plastic, metal, tires, white goods, wood waste, or
chemical compounds.
Wetland: An area which is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration sufficient
to support, and which under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in
saturated soils and which is not part of a river, stream, or pond.
Wind Energy Generation Facility: A structure or machinery capable of converting the kinetic energy of wind into
electrical energy for residential or commercial purposes. A wind energy generation facility includes all structures, utilities,
and connections associated with the conversion and delivery of energy.
Written Notice: A notification in writing delivered in person to the individual or parties intended, or delivered by certified
or regular US Mail to the last residential or business address of record in the Town of Fairfield.
Yard: The area between a structure and the property boundary.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 12
Article 3: Permitting, Enforcement, and Appeals
3.1 Permit Requirements
A permit is required prior to commencement of development activities, as follows:
A. Building Permit: This permit is required for the erection, alteration, rebuilding, repair, remodel, enlargement,
demolition, or relocation of any proposed or existing building and shall be obtained from the Code Enforcement
Officer (CEO).
B. Development Permit by Rule: For land use activities so designated in the Land Use Table (Section 6.4),
notification of the Town is required to assure that the standards of this Ordinance will be met. A Development
permit by rule is also required for the erection of any new sign.
C. Conditional Use Permit: A Conditional Use Permit shall be issued by the Planning Board. This permit is required
for land use activities which by their nature involve uses with significant impacts on neighboring land uses, and
which have unusual characteristics which must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.
D. Activities which require a permit-by-rule or conditional use permit are listed in the Land Use Table in Section 6.4
of this Ordinance. No permits shall be required for normal maintenance or decorative changes in existing
structures or buildings, landscaping, or the ordinary conduct of agricultural and forest operations.
E. Rights not Vested: Use rights under this Ordinance do not arise by the mere filing of a notice of intent to build, an
application for building permits, or an application for required permits and approvals. Such rights may arise when
actual substantial construction has begun, or, in the case of pending applications, when the substantive review
process on a complete application commences. Such construction must be legal at the time it is commenced and
the owner must be in possession of and in compliance with all validly issued permits, both State and local.
3.2 Building Permit Procedure
A. Building permits are required in the Town of Fairfield prior to the start of construction, when any owner or
authorized agent intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, remodel, move, demolish or change the occupancy of
a building or structure which is regulated pursuant to Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC), as
adopted by the Maine Bureau of Building Codes and Standards in M.R.S. Title 25, § 2371-2374, pursuant to Title
10, Chapter 1103, § 9721-9725. The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall serve as the building official as
defined in 25 MRSA §2371 and codes adopted pursuant thereto. The CEO shall be responsible for issuing
building permits and certificates of occupancy, for inspecting all permitted construction for compliance with
MUBEC or successor codes.
B. The CEO shall receive the written Building Permit Application during normal office hours, and shall determine
whether all required elements of the application have been submitted. Upon determining that a complete
application has been submitted, the CEO shall approve or deny the application, issue the permit, if approved,
within three (3) working days.
C. Building permits issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180
days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180
days after the time the work is commenced. The CEO is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of
time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause
demonstrated.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 13
D. When plumbing or septic work is required to make a building habitable, no building permit shall be issued unless a
plumbing permit has first been secured. All sewage and water connections for all structures must comply with the
requirements of the Maine State Plumbing Code.
E. Following substantial completion of the activity permitted in conformance with the appropriate codes, the CEO
shall issue a certificate of occupancy. No structure shall be utilized for the purpose for which it was permitted
without a certificate of occupancy issued.
F. An appeal from the decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may be made to the Board of Appeals, in
accordance with section 3.10 of this ordinance, and must be filed within thirty (30) days of the decision.
3.3 Development Permit-by-Rule (PBR) procedure
A. The permit-by-rule procedure is established as an expedited approval activity for new or expanded signs and for
certain uses identified in the Land Use Table (Section 6.4 of this ordinance), to the extent that they will not
significantly affect the purposes of this Ordinance or create nuisances. A PBR does not relieve the developer of
the obligation to comply with the appropriate development standards in Articles 7-9 of this Ordinance.
B. An applicant must file notice of the activity with the Town prior to beginning work on the activity. The notification
must be on a form provided by the Town. The applicant must keep a copy to serve as the permit. The
notification form must be sent to the Town by certified mail (return receipt requested), or hand delivered and date
stamped by the Town. By signing the notification form, the applicant is representing that the activity will meet the
applicability requirements and standards of this Ordinance. In addition, by signing the notification form the
applicant represents that (s)he has sufficient title, right, or interest in the property where the proposed activity is
to take place.
C. The PBR becomes effective fourteen (14) calendar days after the Town receives the notification form, unless the
Town approves or denies the PBR prior to that date. If the Town does not speak with or write to the applicant
within this 14 day period regarding the PBR notification, the applicant may proceed to carry out the activity.
D. Notwithstanding compliance with the PBR applicability requirements and standards set forth in this Ordinance, the
Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) may require a permit application to be reviewed by the Planning Board in any
case where credible evidence indicates that the activity may require interpretation of the standards of this
Ordinance or could lead to significant nuisances, such as impacts on road use, traffic safety or environmental
impacts. The CEO shall notify the applicant in writing within the 14 calendar day waiting period described in subsection
(C) above. When the CEO so notifies an applicant, no work may be conducted unless and until the
permit is obtained.
E. A permit application referred to the planning board shall be reviewed as a conditional use permit and may require
additional submissions.
3.4 Conditional Use Permit
A. Pre-application Meeting: Every applicant for a conditional use permit is expected to meet informally with the Code
Enforcement Officer prior to submitting a formal application. The purpose of the meeting will be to familiarize the
Town with the proposed project so that it may be reviewed quickly and efficiently. The pre-application meeting is
an opportunity for the applicant to ask questions about submission requirements, review processes, and
development standards. The CEO may also act upon any request for waiver of submission requirements, as
provided in section 3.5.A.
B. Application Requirements: An applicant shall submit nine (9) copies of all written application materials to The
Code Enforcement Officer, including the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant, land owner (if different), and applicant's agent (if different).
2. The street address, and map and lot number of the property.
3. A site plan showing, at a minimum, the location of existing and proposed structure(s) with respect to lot lines
and water bodies. The site plan shall show existing topographic contour and proposed grading at contour
intervals of not greater than five (5) feet.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 14
4. The site plan shall show the location and essential features of site improvements, including, but not limited to,
pedestrian and vehicle travel ways and parking areas, landscaping and buffer areas, storm water and erosion
control structures, water, sewer, and power lines, and outside installations of any machinery or materials.
5. An HHE-200, or subsequent revision, if a subsurface wastewater treatment system will be used.
6. Specification of the dimensions of the proposed structure(s), including length, width, height, and (if property
subject to flooding) elevation of the lowest floor.
7. A statement as to whether the proposed structure(s) is located on land subject to the Town's Shoreland
Zoning Ordinance, or Floodplain Management Ordinance.
8. The proposed use of the structure(s).
9. A copy of plans and specifications for all structures shall be required.
10. An estimate of the traffic to be generated by the development, and any modifications to public roads which
may be necessary to absorb the traffic. If the development is estimated to generate more than 50 vehicles
per hour at its peak hour of usage, an analysis of traffic impacts and the need for traffic control devices,
prepared by a qualified registered professional engineer, together with a statement from the Town's Public
Works Director that any proposed improvements to public roads are adequate and acceptable.
11. If located on a State Highway not within the urban compact area, evidence that an application for DOT
Entrance or Driveway Permit or Traffic Movement Permit has been applied for.
12. A statement from the Town of Fairfield Fire Chief that suitable provisions for fire protection have been
included.
13. An estimate of the value of all public improvements associated with the development. If any alterations or
improvements to public facilities are proposed, a financial performance guarantee, in accordance with Section
3.9, must be submitted prior to permit issuance.
14. A list of names and addresses of all landowners within 200' of the property boundaries.
15. An analysis of potential environmental impacts, including effects on surface and ground water bodies, air
quality, and wildlife resources, together with a proposal for mitigating any negative impacts.
16. An estimate of demand on public water supply and sewage disposal systems, together with statements from
the General Manager of the Kennebec Water District and Superintendent of the Kennebec Sanitary
Treatment District, concerning the ability of their respective systems to accommodate the development.
17. An erosion control plan prepared by a registered professional engineer.
18. A storm water management plan prepared by a registered professional engineer.
19. A statement regarding the use, storage, or disposal of any dangerous, toxic, special, or hazardous wastes,
whether solid, liquid, or gaseous, and special measures available to deal with them appropriate fashion.
C. Upon receipt of a permit application the Code Enforcement Officer shall decide whether the information in the
application is provided as required. If the CEO finds the application is insufficient or incomplete, (s)he shall within
five (5) working days, notify the applicant in writing, indicating what necessary information is required to complete
the application. The CEO shall take no further action on an incomplete application.
D. Upon determination that an application is complete, the Code Enforcement Officer shall distribute the application
materials for consideration by the Planning Board. If there is sufficient time for advertisement and notification, the
Board shall schedule the public hearing required under subsection D, below, for the next regular meeting. From
the date of the public hearing, the Board shall have thirty-five (35) calendar days in which to act on the application,
unless said time period is continued by mutual consent of the Board and the applicant.
E. A public hearing shall be held on all Conditional Use Permit applications.
1. The Town shall cause to be placed a notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within
the Town of Fairfield at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing. Notice shall also be posted in the
Town Office at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
2. The Town shall notify by regular mail all landowners within 200 feet of the boundaries of the parcel to be
developed, to be postmarked at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be sent to the address
provided on tax assessment records. Failure of property owners to receive notice in a timely manner shall not
invalidate a decision of the Board.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 15
3. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with established rules of parliamentary procedure for
hearings. All parties shall be granted an opportunity to speak. All comments and evidence shall be directed
through the Chair of the Board.
F. The Board may, at its discretion, retain expert independent technical assistance to evaluate or supplement the
evidence presented by the applicant and in the public hearing. The cost of such expertise shall be borne by the
applicant in accordance with the terms of the escrow account set up at the time of application as provided in
section 3.6.D.
G. The Board shall prepare findings of fact and shall act to approve or deny the Conditional Use Permit application.
The following criteria shall be used in considering whether to approve the application:
1. The development will not create unsafe or unhealthful conditions within the neighborhood in which it is
located, and shall not create or exacerbate effects upon neighboring properties.
2. The development will not create or add to traffic congestion at or below Level of Service "D", as defined, and
will not create unsafe traffic movements on public roads.
3. The development will not result in undue reduction of air or water quality or wildlife habitat, and will not cause
undue flooding or soil erosion.
4. The development will to the greatest extent feasible, preserve historic, prehistoric, or archeological resources.
5. The development will not cause an undue strain on public facilities or services, including public roads, water
supply, sewage disposal, solid waste systems, police, educational, or other services.
6. The applicant has sufficient financial and technical capacity to complete the development.
7. The development is consistent with the Fairfield Comprehensive Plan, and in compliance with state and
federal law, as well as all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the Town, including the performance standards
of this ordinance, unless the Board acts to waive said standard.
H. In approving the application, the Board may attach any conditions which it feels are necessary to meet the criteria
of this ordinance. All conditions shall become a part of the permit, and any violation or failure to adhere to the
conditions shall be considered a violation of this ordinance. Any financial performance guarantee imposed as a
condition of approval shall be in place before the Code Enforcement Officer may issue the permit.
I. An appeal from the decision of the Board may be made to the Somerset County Superior Court pursuant to Rule
80-b of the Maine Rules of Civil Procedure, and must be filed within thirty (30) days of the date of issuance of the
decision.
J. No substantial change shall be made in any approved conditional use without approval of the change by the
Board. Any change which would result in an increase in either building area or developed area of more than ten
(10) percent shall be reviewed as a new permit application.
K. Granting of a Conditional Use Permit does not relieve the applicant of the requirement to obtain a building permit
as provided in Section 3.2, where one would be required.
3.5 Waiver Provisions
A. Waiver of submission requirements. The Code Enforcement Officer is authorized to waive the submission of items
required for a Conditional Use Permit (section 3.4.A) upon a showing by the applicant that the item requested has
no bearing on the application. A written record of the request for and granting of the waiver must be appended to
the application materials.
B. Waiver of design and performance standards. The Board is authorized in its review of applications for a
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 16
Conditional Use Permit to waive requirements of Articles 7, 8, and 9 of this Ordinance. Waivers shall only be
granted upon a showing by the applicant that the intent of the standard can be met with alternative designs or
approaches. Any waiver granted shall be listed as a condition of approval in writing on the final site plan.
3.6 Permit Administration
A. All time periods, including those for appeals for issuance or denial of a permit, shall be counted from the date of
written notification of the decision.
B. If no substantial start is made on construction within 180 days of the date of the permit, it shall lapse and become
void. Thereafter no further work on such construction can be made until a new application has been made and
approved as aforesaid. The fee for such permit shall be charged as a renewal fee.
C. Any permit issued which is found by the Board of Appeals or a Court of Jurisdiction not to be in conformity with
the provisions of this Ordinance confers no right and is void.
D. The Council shall set and may, from time to time amend, a fee structure for permits required under this
ordinance. The fees shall be sufficient to pay for the Town's direct expenses incurred in processing the
application. The Council shall also set a structure for collecting from applicants for conditional use permits a sum
sufficient to cover anticipated technical review assistance, said sum to be deposited in an escrow account, with
balance remaining to be returned to the applicant following completion of the review.
3.7 Duties of the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO)
A. It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. If the CEO shall
find that any provision of this Ordinance is being violated, (s)he shall immediately notify, in writing, the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violations and the action necessary to correct it. (S)he
is authorized to order immediate cessation of a construction activity, pending action of the Town Council, as
provided in Section 3.8.A, below.
B. The CEO shall maintain a current file of all pertinent Federal, State and local statutes, ordinances, regulations,
codes, and plans relating to land-use regulation including local subdivision plans.
C. The CEO shall have the following authority and duties to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance, and may have
other duties as assigned:
• Examine preliminary plans;
• Act upon all applications and collect any fees due, and refer or process applications as required;
• Inspect sites where building permits have been issued to ensure compliance with all local, state, and federal
laws, codes and/or ordinances, and to monitor activities under the jurisdiction of this ordinance at all times;
• Investigate complaints and reported violations;
• Keep written inspection reports and thorough records;
• Issue violation notices;
• Participate in appeal procedures;
• Process or act on consent agreements involving violations of this Ordinance and to appear in court when
necessary;
• Offer advice and opinions to members of the public upon request;
• Attend meetings of the Planning Board and Board of Appeals.
D. The CEO shall have the authority to designate an assistant or agent.
E. When there is a question concerning the interpretation of this Ordinance, the CEO may refer the matter to the
board of appeals for interpretation.
F. Stop-work order: Should the CEO find that information supplied in applying for a building permit is in error, or the
work permitted has been exceeded he or she shall issue a stop-work order and revoke the permit. This action
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 17
shall be accomplished by means of a verbal notification, to the responsible person or work crew, or by posting of
the order at the entrance to the site or attaching the notice to the structure itself. This action shall be followed up
by legal notice as provided in section 3.8.A.
3.8 Legal Action and Violations
A. Notice of Violation: If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this Ordinance is being
violated, he or she shall provide written notice of the violation by hand or by certified mail to the person
responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation, the penalty for violation, and the action
necessary to correct it. He or she shall order discontinuance of any illegal use of land, buildings, structures,
additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto, or discontinuance of any illegal activity.
B. Legal Action: When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the violation, the Town
Council is hereby directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, legal and equitable, including the
seeking of injunctions of violations and imposition of fines that may be appropriate. The Town Council is
authorized to enter into an administrative consent agreement for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and collecting fines due the Town without the necessity of court action.
C. Fines: Any person, firm or corporation being the owner, contractor or having control or use of any structure or
premises who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall upon conviction be fined in accordance with
provisions of 30-A MRSA §4452. Each day such a violation is permitted to exist after written notification by the
Code Enforcement Officer shall constitute a separate offense. Fines shall be payable to the Town.
D. Administrative consent agreements: Upon recommendation of the Town Attorney, certain violations of this
Ordinance may be resolved through an administrative consent agreement executed between the violator and the
Town Council. An Administrative consent agreement shall require that:
1) The violation shall be corrected in all respects;
2) The violator admits to the violation, and
3) The violator pays an appropriate monetary penalty of not less than $100, plus the Town’s legal costs.
3.9 Performance Guarantees
A. Performance guarantees, when required, shall be tendered for all improvements to public facilities required under
this Ordinance, including but not limited to, sidewalks, drainage facilities, traffic control devices, roadway and
curbing within the public right-of-way, street lights, and water and sewer facilities.
B. At the time of approval of the permit application, the applicant shall tender either a certified check payable to the
Town, an irrevocable letter of credit from a lending institution, or a performance bond payable to the Town issued
by a surety company in an amount adequate to cover the total costs of all required improvements and municipal
inspection thereof, taking into account the time-span of the bond and the effects of inflation upon costs. The
conditions and amount of the certified check or performance bond shall be determined by the Planning Board with
advice from the town staff.
C. Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) shall
determine that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that
portion of the improvements for which the release is requested. The cost of inspections shall be deducted from the
amount to be returned. Any interest accumulated by the performance guarantee shall be returned to the
developer.
D. The CEO may retain the services of a qualified individual or firm to inspect the construction of the required
improvements. If the appointed inspector finds, upon inspection of the improvements performed before release of
the guarantee, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with plans and
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 18
specifications filed by the applicant, (s)he shall so report to the CEO. The CEO shall then notify the applicant,
and, if necessary, the bonding company or lending institution, and take all necessary steps to preserve the Town's
rights under the guarantee.
3.10 Board of Appeals
A. Establishment and Organization
1. A Board of Appeals for the Town of Fairfield is established in accordance with the provisions of 30-A M.R.S.A.
section 2691. It shall consist of five (5) regular members and two (2) associate members. When a regular
member of the Board is unable to act because of interest, physical incapacity, or absence, an associate
member shall act in their stead.
2. The term of office of a member or associate is five (5) years, staggered so that one term expires each
calendar year. Members of the Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the Town Council. A Councilor or
their spouse may not be a member or associate member of the Board of Appeals. When there is a
permanent vacancy, the Town Council shall appoint a new member to serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
3. Members of the Board of Appeals may be removed from office by Town Council for cause upon written
charges and after public hearing.
4. The Board of Appeals shall elect a chairperson and secretary from its own membership.
B. Proceeding of the Board of Appeals.
The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs, in keeping with the provisions of this
Ordinance and Title 30-A, MRSA, §2691. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson or when requested
by a majority of the members, or by order of the Town Council. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings and
be the official spokesperson of the Board of Appeals. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Board of
appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote or absence of each member upon each question,
and shall keep records of its official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be files in the town offices. A
quorum shall consist of three members.
C. Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals
The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
1. Administrative Review: To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is a violation or error in any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board in
the administration of this ordinance.
2. Variances: To authorize relief from dimensional standards upon appeal in specific cases of hardship, within
the limitations set forth in this ordinance.
a. Variances may be obtainable only for height, minimum lot size, frontage, lot coverage, setbacks, and
open space requirements. Variances cannot, under any circumstances, be obtainable for establishment
of prohibited uses.
b. The Board shall not grant a variance unless it makes a finding of undue hardship as defined by this
ordinance. Mere inconvenience to the property owner, financial hardship, or pleading that a greater value
may be realized from the applicant's property were a variance granted shall not be sufficient evidence of
undue hardship.
c. The variance granted shall be the minimum necessary to make possible the use of the property and will
preserve the terms of the ordinance as much as possible. The Board of Appeals may impose such
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 19
conditions to a variance as it deems necessary, to this end.
D. Appeal Procedure
1. An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an aggrieved person. Such appeal shall be filed within
thirty (30) days of the decision appealed from.
2. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the Town Clerk a written notice of appeal, specifying ordinance
section being appealed and the grounds for such appeal. For a variance appeal, the appellant shall submit:
a. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing building, and other physical features
pertinent to the variance request.
b. A concise written statement stating what variance is requested and why it should be granted.
3. Each appeal shall be accompanied by the required fee to cover advertising and administrative costs. If the
actual cost of advertising and notification exceeds the fee paid, the appellant shall pay the balance.
4. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on the appeal within twenty-five (25) days of the filing of the
appeal with the Town Clerk. Upon being notified of an appeal, the Code Enforcement Officer shall transmit to
the Board all records of the decision being appealed. At least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing,
the Town Clerk shall cause to be published in one issue in a newspaper of general circulation in the town a
notice which includes:
a. The name of the person appealing.
b. A brief description of the property involved.
c. A brief description of the decision appealed from, or the nature of a variance appeal.
d. The time and place of the Board's hearing.
At least ten (10) days prior to the date set for hearing, the Town Clerk shall also give similar written notice to:
a. All property owners of record whose properties lie within 200 feet of the affected property.
b. The person making the appeal, and
c. The Code Enforcement Officer, and any other parties of record.
E. Hearing Procedure
1. All proceedings of the Board of Appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures specified in
state law, title 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691, subsection 3.
2. The Code Enforcement Officer (CEO) or their designated assistant shall attend all hearings and may present
to the Board of Appeals all plans, photographs, or other material (s)he deems appropriate for an
understanding of the appeal.
F. Decisions of the Board of Appeals
1. The concurring vote of at least three (3) members of the Board of Appeals present at the public hearing shall
be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the CEO or Planning Board, or
to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter related to this ordinance, or to affect any variation in the
application of this ordinance.
2. The Board shall decide all appeals within thirty (30) days after the hearing, and shall issue a written decision
on all appeals.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 20
3. All decisions shall become a part of the record and shall include a statement of findings and conclusions as
well as the reasons or basis therefore, upon all the material issues of fact, law or discretion presented, and
the appropriate order, relief, or denial thereof. Notice of any decision shall be mailed or hand delivered to
appellant, their representative or agent, the Planning Board, the CEO, and the Town Manager within seven
(7) days of the decision date.
4. Upon notification of the granting of an appeal by the Board of Appeals, the CEO shall immediately take such
action as is in accordance with the conditions of the decision, unless the applicant needs a Conditional Use
Permit.
5. Further appeal may be taken as permitted by 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(G) from any decision of the
Board of Appeals to the Somerset County Superior Court.
G. Stay of Proceedings
An appeal stays all legal proceedings related to the action appealed from unless the Code Enforcement Officer
certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause irreparable harm to property or create a threat to the life or health of
any person including the appellant. In such case, the Code Enforcement Officer, if legally authorized by State law
or local ordinance, may seek injunctive relief or refer the matter to the Town Council for prosecution.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 21
Article 4: Amendments
4.1 Initiation
A proposal for an amendment to this Ordinance may be initiated by:
? The Planning Board, by majority vote to the Board;
? The Town Council, by majority vote;
? An individual, through request to the Planning Board; or
? A written petition of a number of voters equal to at least ten percent (10%) of the voters in the
last gubernatorial election.
4.2 Procedure
A. When initiated by an individual, a proposal for an amendment shall be presented to the Planning Board in
writing stating the specific changes requested. When a change in district boundaries is proposed, the
application shall state the nature, extent, and location of the boundary change proposal, and shall be
accompanied by a scale drawing showing the areas to be changed, with dimensions. A fee shall accompany
the proposal to cover the costs of hearings and advertisements. The Planning Board shall make a written
recommendation regarding passage to the Town Council prior to any action on the amendment by the
Council.
B. When initiated by petition or by Council action, the Board shall review the request and shall make a written
recommendation regarding passage to the Council prior to any Council action on the amendment.
C. Before recommending the amendment of an existing ordinance or map, the Planning Board must post and
publish notice of the public hearing required in accordance with the following provisions.
1. The notice shall contain the time, date, and place of hearing, and sufficient detail about the proposed
changes as to give adequate notice of their content. If the proposed changes are extensive, a brief
summary of the changes, together with an indication that a full text is available at the Town Office shall
be adequate notice.
2. The notice shall be posted in the Town Office at least thirteen (13) days prior to the hearing.
3. The notice shall be published in a newspaper with general circulation within the Town. The date of the
first publication shall be at least twelve (12) days prior to the hearing; the date of the second publication
shall be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
4. Notice must be sent by regular mail to a public drinking water supplier if the area to be rezoned contains
its source water protection area.
5. In the case of a request to change district boundaries or the status of permitted or prohibited uses within
a district, notice shall be sent by certified mail to all persons owning property within the area proposed to
be affected, or within 200 feet of the property proposed to be affected. Notice shall include a map
illustrating the proposed change. Notice shall be mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing.
D. Additionally, notice must be given if the proposed amendment within a geographically specific portion of the
Town, has the effect of either prohibiting all industrial, commercial or retail uses where any of these uses is
permitted or permitting any industrial, commercial or retail uses where any of these uses is prohibited. The
notice must contain a copy of a map indicating the portion of the municipality affected by the proposed
amendment.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 22
For each parcel that is in or abutting the portion of the Town affected by the proposed amendment, the notice
must be mailed by first class mail at least thirteen (13) days before the public hearing to the last known
address of the person to whom property tax on each parcel is assessed. Notice also must be sent to public
drinking water supplier if the area to be rezoned is within its source water protection area. The planning board
shall prepare and file with the town clerk a written certificate indicating those persons to whom the notice was
mailed and at what addresses, when it was mailed, by whom it was mailed and from what location it was
mailed. This certificate constitutes prima facie evidence that notice was sent to those persons named in the
certificate.
4.3 Adoption
Any amendment to this Ordinance shall be adopted by the Town Council.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 23
Article 5: Non-Conformance
5.1 Purpose:
It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that non-conforming conditions that existed
before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in this
section.
5.2 General Requirements
Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or
structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created
unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located.
Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and the new owner may continue the nonconforming
use or continue to use the non-conforming structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
This ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures.
5.3 Non-Conforming Structures
A. A non-conforming structure may be repaired, maintained, and improved, but shall not be added to or expanded except
as follows:
1. The expansion does not itself exceed the maximum building height; and
2. The expansion or accessory structure does not increase the existing, non-conforming lot coverage; and
3. The expansion or accessory structure does not increase non-conformance of an existing setback.
B. The placement of a foundation below an existing non-conforming structure shall not constitute an expansion of the
structure provided that the foundation does not extend beyond the existing structure's footprint. The addition of
uncovered, outside stairs or handicapped access facilities shall not constitute an expansion of the structure.
C. A non-conforming structure damaged or deteriorated beyond practicable repair may be rebuilt provided that
construction is completed within 24 months from the date of loss. The structure may not be enlarged in volume or area
except in conformity with this Ordinance.
5.4 Non-conforming Uses
The use of land, buildings or structure, lawful at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, or of subsequent amendments
of this ordinance, may continue although such use does not conform to the provision of this Ordinance, except as
provided in the following paragraphs below.
A. A non-conforming use which is discontinued for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive months may not be resumed.
The uses of the land, building, or structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
B. Whenever a non-conforming use is changed to allow use, the property shall thereafter conform to the provisions of
this Ordinance, and the non-conforming use may not be resumed.
C. A non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use through the Administrative Review process.
The Board of Appeals must find that the proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the district than the existing
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 24
non-conforming use, and the impact on adjacent properties is no more adverse than the impact of the former use.
In determining whether the impact of the proposed non-conforming use is no more adverse, the Board of Appeals shall
consider changes in traffic, parking, noise, potential of nuisances likely to result from such change in use. The
applicable standards and requirements of this ordinance shall apply to any request for a new non-conforming use.
D. Expansions of non-conforming uses are limited to no more than a 25% increase in area or volume of the structure
and/or land and shall require review by the Board of Appeals. The Board may approve the expansion request when it
finds that the proposed expansion will not create a nuisance or negative impact upon adjacent properties that is greater
than the existing non-conforming use.
5.5 Non-conforming Lots
A. A non-conforming lot of record may be built upon provided that such lot is not contiguous with another lot in the same
ownership, and all the provisions of this ordinance except lot size and frontage can be met, or a variance obtained.
B. If two or more adjacent, non-conforming lots are in the same ownership of record, and if one or more of the lots contain
no principal structure, the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional standards.
C. If two or more adjacent, non-conforming lots are in the same ownership of record, and if a principal use or structure
exist on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that lots that are not
served by municipal sewer shall conform to the minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. §4807) and the State of Maine
Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules.
D. If two or more uses or structures exist on a single lot of record on the effective date of this Ordinance, each may be sold
on a separate lot provided that the State Minimum Lot Size Law and Subsurface Waste Water Disposal Rules are
followed. When such lots are divided, each lot thus created must be as conforming as possible to the dimensional
requirements of this Ordinance.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 25
Article 6: Land Use Districts
6.1 Official Map
Districts are located and bounded as shown on the Official Map which is a made part of this Ordinance. Detail Maps
"A" and "B" are hereby incorporated as visual aids in interpretation of the Official Map. The Official Map is separate
and distinct from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map as required in the Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zoning Ordinance,
and does not include shoreland zones designated therein.
A. Certification of Map
The Official Map is certified by the attested signature of the Town Clerk under the following words: "This is the Official
Map of the Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Fairfield'', together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance. The
official copy shall be located in the office of the Town Assessor.
B. Changes to the Official Map
If changes are made in the district boundaries, or other matter portrayed on the Official Map, such changes shall be
made on the Official Map within fourteen (14) days after the amendment has been adopted together with an entry on
the Official Map as follows:
"On (date), the Town Council enacted the following change: (insert brief description of the nature of change)."
Immediately beneath the entry the Town Clerk shall place his or her signature.
C. Replacement of Official Map
In the event that the Official Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature or
number of changes and additions the Town Council shall authorize a new Official Map.
6.2 Establishment of Districts
A. Rules Governing District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Map the following rules shall apply.
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, rivers, or streams, or
defined in terms of their distance from said center lines, shall be construed to precisely reference such center
lines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following plotted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. In
cases where a lot line shifts due to boundary line adjustments, the district boundary will shift accordingly.
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following Town limits shall be construed to follow such limits. Boundaries
indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to following such shorelines, and in the event of change in
the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
4 Sources for the exact delineation of the Special Flood Hazard areas shall be the Town of Fairfield Flood
Insurance Map.
5 Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 26
B. Lots Divided by District Boundaries
When a lot divided by a district boundary, is two acres or less in area, the requirements of either district may be used,
but shall apply to all portions of the lot. On lots larger than two acres, the district regulations shall be followed in each
portion of the lot.
C. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground vary from those shown on the Official Map, or other
circumstances not covered by 6.2.A., the Board of Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
D. Designation of District
The following Land Use Districts are hereby established with symbols designated as follows:
RU = Rural District
R = Residential District
RR = Rural Residential District
UR = Urban Residential District
V = Village District
MS = Main Street District
C = Commercial District
I = Industrial District
6.3 Purpose of Districts
Each Land Use District designated in this ordinance is intended to further and promote the purpose of the
Comprehensive Plan and the health, safety, and general welfare of its occupants.
A. Rural District (RU)
The purpose of the Rural District is to provide for a healthy agriculture, forest, and resource base for the town, while
accommodating low density residential habitation and appropriate economic opportunity. Development activities in the
district are intended to provide an outlet for local resources, and housing, employment, and service opportunities for
residents of the District.
B. Residential District (R)
The purpose of the Residential District is to provide a substantial portion to the town devoted to accommodate
medium-density residential development based on the potential for public water and sewer, as well as associated
commercial development on collector roads.
C. Rural Residential District (RR)
The purpose of the Rural Residential District is to provide an area of prime development land suitable for lowdensity
residential development. Commercial development in the area will be accommodated because of available land, but
should be limited to that which will not impact the need for public facilities, the development capability of the land, or
suitability of neighboring properties for residential use.
D. Urban Residential District (UR)
The purpose of the Urban Residential District is to preserve the quality and integrity of the Town's older residential
neighborhoods and permit higher-density housing in the area closest to the town's public facilities and services, and
within walking distance of our principal commercial area.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 27
E. Village District (V)
The purpose of the Village District is to promote small-scale, mixed-use development characteristic of the town's three
existing village neighborhoods. A healthy mix of locally-oriented commercial development and medium-density
housing (or high-density where public water and sewer are available) is encouraged.
F. Main Street District (MS)
The purpose of the Main Street District is to promote a downtown central business district with a density and location
to serve local residents in the most central location and with efficient delivery of public services. The Main Street
District should be considered a variation of the Commercial District, with flexible standards suited to the highlydeveloped,
small-lot and mixed use character of the Town's existing downtown blocks. Infill and redevelopment to
preserve the viability of the downtown is to be encouraged. New construction and any alteration of existing buildings or
land use should be consistent with the objective to develop and maintain the downtown central business area.
G. Commercial District (C)
The purpose of the Commercial District is to provide a generous public facility and land base on which to build on
regional economic development opportunities. This district provides the necessary encouragements for locations of all
forms of commercial and industrial development oriented to broadly based employment and services, including
proximity to major highways and water and sewer infrastructure.
H. Industrial District (I)
The Industrial District is a specialized commercial district intended to provide for a variety of employment uses without
an adverse effect on adjacent neighborhoods and with an attractive industrial environment including access to
interstate interchanges and public water and sewer systems.
6.4 Land Use Activities Permitted by District
A. The Land Use Table in this section is intended to designate the land use activities which will be permitted, and what
level of permitting is required within each district. The Code Enforcement Officer shall determine which listed category
a proposed activity falls within. The North American Industry Classification System (SIC codes) shall be used as a
guide in the event of uncertainty. Appeals of the CEO’s determination shall be classified as Administrative Review.
The Ordinance is intended to be sensitive to the size, scale, and impact of land use activities. Some uses listed below
are subdivided by size of structure as a means of gauging impact. The general performance standards, Section 7 and
8, intend to regulate the impact rather than the existence of uses which might otherwise have been prohibited within the
district. The letters appearing within the table indicate the level of permitting required, as follows:
A = Allowed (Building Permit required for structures)
PBR = Development Permit by Rule (see Section 3.3)
C = Conditional Use (Planning Board) Permit Required (see Section 3.4)
S = Subdivision Review Required under separate Ordinance
X = Not permitted in this District
Land Use Activity
MS V UR R RR C I RU
Open Space and Resource Uses
Open parks, parking lots,
cemeteries
C C C C C C C C
Recreational facilities C C C C C C C C
Extractive or filling operations X X X C C C C C
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 28
Land Use Activity
MS V UR R RR C I RU
Agriculture & forestry operations X X X A A A A A
Campground X X X C C C X C
Residential uses
One and two-family homes A A A A A A A A
Multiple dwelling units on a lot,
See section 9.11
C/S C/S C/S C/S C/S C/S C/S C/S
Mobile homes X A A A A C C A
Mobile home parks X S X S S S S X
Home occupations PBR PBR PBR PBR PBR C C PBR
Commercial Uses
General entertainment, retail and wholesale, by size (unless otherwise listed):
under 10,000 ft2 building area C C X C C C C C
10,000-20,000 ft2 bldg. area C C X C X C C C
20,000 ft2 & larger bldg. area C X X X X C C X
Manufacturing by size (unless otherwise listed):
under 25,000 ft2 bldg. area C C X X X C C C
25,000 ft2 & larger bldg. area X X X X X C C X
Gasoline and fueling stations C C X X X C C X
Farm stand PBR PBR X PBR PBR C C PBR
Bank C C X X X C C X
Professional offices, see section
9.13
C C C C C C C C
General offices & services C C X C C C C C
Call center C C X X X C C X
Adult business X X X X X C X X
Kennels, animal boarding X X X C C C C C
Ground water extraction X X X X X C C C
Waste/scrap storage/processing
facility
X X X X X C C C
Motor vehicle sales & service C C X X X C C C
Junkyard. auto graveyard X X X X X C C C
Warehousing X X X X X C C C
Sit-down restaurant C C X C X C C X
Snack bar PBR PBR X C C PBR PBR C
Bed & breakfast C C C C C C C C
Hotel, motel C C X X X C C X
Lodging house, guest house C C C C C C C C
College residence hall X C X X X C C C
Controlled substance facilities C X X X X C C X
Communication towers C C X X C C C C
Solar Energy Systems X X X X C C C C
Wind Energy Generation X X X X C C C C
Adult Use Marijuana Facility X C X X X C C C
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 29
Land Use Activity
MS V UR R RR C I RU
Institutional Uses
Public and private schools C C C C C C C X
Places of public assembly C C C C C C C C
Governmental facilities PBR PBR X X C C C C
Public utility structures C C C C C C C C
Essential facilities C C C C C C C C
B. Uses Not Listed
1. Any land use activity not listed in the Table of Land Uses shall be interpreted as follows:
a. If the proposed use is similar to a use in the Table requiring a Development Permit-by-Rule, it will require a
Development Permit-by-Rule.
b. If the proposed use is similar to a use in the Table requiring a Conditional Use Permit, it will require a
Conditional Use Permit.
c. If the proposed use is similar to a prohibited use, it shall be prohibited
2. In determining which uses are similar, the Code Enforcement Officer shall consider the following factors: size and
appearance, impact on abutting properties, scale of operations, traffic, environmental impacts, and the purpose of
the district. In no case will this provision be used to permit prohibited uses or to permit a use which does not
comply with all dimensional requirements and performance standards of this Ordinance.
C. Accessory Uses
1. An activity which is incidental and directly related to the principal use of the property shall be considered a part
of the principal use for the permitting requirements. Examples of such relation include warehouse space as part
of a retail store or waste processing facilities as part of a manufacturing operation.
2. An activity which meets the definition of accessory use, but which has no direct relation to the principal use of the
lot shall be subject to permitting requirements as if it were an unrelated use. Examples might be an auto repair
shop on residential property, or a clothing store in a sawmill.
D. Expansions of Existing Uses
Unless the use is non-conforming, the expansion of an activity already existing at the effective date of this
ordinance, or previously permitted under this ordinance, which would require a development permit-by-rule or
conditional use permit, will require only a building permit if all of the following conditions are met:
i. The expansion does not increase the developed area or building area by more than fifty (50) percent in any
twelve (12) month period, and
ii. the expansion does not require substantial demand for public water, sewer and other services, and
iii. the expansion does not constitute a change of use.
E. Change of Use
A change of use, which is defined as conversion of an activity from one category in the Land Use Table to another,
shall be required to obtain a new permit if the use requires a higher level of permitting, i.e. from an Allowed Use to a
Permit by Rule or Conditional Use permit, or from a Permit by Rule to a Conditional Use. A new permit would be
required even if no building or structural changes are proposed.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 30
A change of use which would require the provision of more parking spaces, as determined in the Table in Section
8.2.C, must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the parking lot has the capacity to absorb the
added demand.
6.5 Dimensional Standards
A. The table in this section contains dimensional requirements for each designated district. These standards shall be
considered minimums, except where noted. See Section 6.1.B, below, for exceptions and adjustments. Relief from
standards herein may be obtained only through the granting of a variance from the Board of Appeals.
DIMENSIONAL
STANDARD
LAND USE DISTRICT
MS V UR R RR C I RU
Minimum Lot area,
(square feet) per Principal
Structure
5,000 20,000 7,500 30,000 80,000 none none 2 acres
Lot area per add'I
dwelling unit or
principal structure
1,200 10,000 5,000 20,000 40,000 none none 2 acres
Lot coverage,
maximum
none 30 % 30 % 10 % 10 % 30 % 50 % 10 %
Street frontage (sf)
– sewered 50 n/a 75 75 n/a 75 75 n/a
-- unsewered n/a 100 n/a 150 200 150 150 250
Front setback 10 15 15 25 50 25 25 50
Side & Rear Setback
– principal structure 5 10 10 10 20 10
see Sec.
6.4.B.2
40
- accessory structures none 5 5 10 10 10 10
Building Height,
maximum 75 35 35 35 35 75 85 35
B. Adjustments to Dimensional Standards
1. Within the Main Street and Urban Residential Districts, the required front setback may be reduced to the average
front setback of the two closest buildings if less than the listed requirement.
2. Within the Main Street and Urban Residential Districts, certain additional dwelling units may be added to preexisting
homes without additional lot size. See Section 9.11.A of this ordinance.
3. Within the Industrial District, if the activity will be adjacent to a commercial or industrial use, minimum side and
rear setbacks shall be twenty-five (25) feet. If the activity will be adjacent to a residential use or district boundary,
setback will be determined by the buffer provided – see Section 7.3 of this Ordinance.
4. Within the Main Street District, the side setback requirement is eliminated if an adjoining building is already built to
the lot line.
5. Within the Main Street District, dwelling units located above the ground floor are not subject to the requirement for
additional lot area.
6. Within the Residential District, the lot area per additional dwelling unit may be reduced to 10,000 square feet if the
unit will be connected to public sewer.
7. Mobile home parks are exempt from the standards of this table, but must comply with the dimensional standards
of 30-A MRSA §4358(3).
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 31
Article 7: Environmental and Neighborhood Protection Standards
7.1 Access to Back Lots
No permit required under this Ordinance shall be issued to erect any structure on a lot without frontage on a public
or private road unless a means of access is constructed within a deeded right-of-way. The access shall be
constructed to a minimum width of twelve (12) feet if serving one dwelling unit, and fifteen (15) feet if serving two
dwelling units. It shall contain a minimum depth of fifteen (15) inches of bank-run gravel, with drainage ditches and
culverts in locations recommended by the Public Works Director.
This section does not displace or reduce the requirements that apply to the creation of three or more lots or dwelling
units subject to review under the Town of Fairfield Subdivision Ordinance.
7.2 Air Pollution
A. No emissions of dust, ash, smoke or other particulate matter which can cause damage to human or animal health,
vegetation, or property by reason of concentration or toxicity, which can cause soiling beyond the property
boundaries is permitted. This shall not be construed to include the airborne by-products of conventional agricultural
practices. Evidence that relevant state and federal regulatory requirements have been met shall be considered
sufficient to meet this standard.
B. The emission of smoke from any chimney, vent, stack, opening, or combustion process shall not exceed a density of
Ringlemann #1.
C. Odors shall be controlled so that they cannot be detected at the property line by an ordinary, healthy person.
D. Vibration inherently and recurrently generated, and heat, shall be imperceptible without instruments at property
boundaries.
7.3 Buffering and Screening
A. Parking Lots
Multi-family and commercial land use activities are subject to the following requirements for screening of parking
lots: Except within the Main Street (MS) District, any parking lot that is located within twenty-five (25) feet of the
street line shall be screened to reduce the distraction of parking lot activity on the street:
1. A minimum buffer width of fifteen (15) feet is required if the width consists of a landscaped mixture of
deciduous and evergreen vegetation, selected for varying heights and adaptability to roadside conditions, and
continuously maintained.
2. A visual screen of at least three (3) feet in height may be substituted for the landscaped buffer. The screening
may consist of low walls, fences, berms, evergreen plantings or any combination of these.
B. Screening of Adjacent Properties
1. Setbacks or Screening for Industrial Uses:
a. No screening shall be necessary if the distance between the developed area and the property line is at
least one hundred (100) feet.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 32
b. A forty (40) foot setback is required if the width will consist entirely of natural woodland or change in
elevation of at least ten (10) feet between the developed area and the property line.
c. A twenty-five (25) foot setback is required if the width will consist of a planted vegetative screen dense
enough to form an effective visual barrier.
d. If no natural or landscaped buffer is obtainable, a structural visual and/or sound barrier must be
erected.
e. The Planning Board may require additional setback or screening requirements where the use abuts a
residential property or district, based on the density of development and type of industry proposed.
f. Additional setbacks or buffer requirements may apply to specific uses (see Article 9).
2. Screening of Commercial and Multi-family Development:
In cases where commercial or multi-family development is proposed adjacent to residential uses or a residential
district boundary, the Planning Board may require a natural or landscaped buffer strip to visually screen the
uses. Where no natural vegetation can be maintained, or due to unusual site conditions, the screening may
consist of fences, walls, berms or combinations thereof. The buffering shall be sufficient to minimize the impacts
of large buildings, loading and unloading operations, outdoor storage areas, parking lots, waste storage and
similar commercial activities. The buffer areas shall be maintained and vegetation replaced to insure continuous
year round screening.
3. Outside storage areas, exposed machinery, and areas used for the storage or collection of discarded
automobiles, auto parts, metals or any other article of salvage or refuse, shall be opaquely shielded to a height
of eight (8) feet from abutting road or residential uses, regardless of distance. Where a potential safety hazard
to children is evident, physical barriers sufficient to deter small children from entering the premises shall be
provided and maintained in good condition.
7.4 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Soil erosion during development shall be minimized through implementation of erosion control management
practices. Maine Erosion and Sediment Control Best Management Practices (Maine DEP, March, 2003 or as
revised) shall be used as a guideline. In addition, the following practices shall be followed:
A. The stripping of vegetation, removal of soil, regarding, or other development of the site shall be accomplished by
limiting the duration of exposure and area of the site to be disturbed. Dust control methods shall be employed
during dry conditions.
B. Permanent vegetation and/or other erosion control and stormwater management (Section 7.11) measures should
be installed prior to, or no later than six months following, completion of the construction.
C. The top or bottom of a cut or fill shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to a property line unless otherwise mutually
agreed to by the affected landowner and town. In no instance shall said cut or fill exceed a 3:1 slope.
7.5 Glare from Outside Lighting
Lighting may be used which serves security, safety, and operational needs but which does not impair the vision of a
vehicle operator on adjacent streets. Lighting fixtures shall be shielded or hooded so that the lighting elements are
not exposed to normal view by motorists or pedestrians, or from adjacent dwellings. Intensity should not exceed one
(1) foot candle at the property line, and under no circumstances be sufficient to create a nuisance to abutting
residential properties.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 33
7.6 Historic and Archaeological Resources
If any portion of the site has been identified, or is found or known to contain historic or archaeological resources, the
development shall include appropriate measures for protecting these resources, including, but not limited to,
modification of the proposed building and site layout and design.
7.7 Natural Resource Protection
A. Natural Features
Site development shall minimize, insofar as possible, disturbance of natural features. This shall be done through
limiting tree removal, disturbance and compaction of soil, and grading and filling. No construction activity shall
disturb natural features shown outside of the clearing limits designated on the site plan.
B. Habitat Protection
1. If any portion of the parcel has been identified as a critical natural area, or as containing threatened or
endangered species of plants or animals, that area shall not be developed. Maps produced by the Beginning
with Habitat Program shall be consulted as a guide. In addition, areas within 250' of these resources shall only
be developed in a manner consistent with protection of these resources. The Planning Board may require a
mitigation or management plan to be reviewed by the Natural Areas Program of the Department of
Conservation prior to approval.
2. If any portion of the area to be developed includes areas shown on Beginning with Habitat program maps as
Deer Wintering Areas, the developer shall consult with the a qualified wildlife biologist on means to limit the
impact of the development on the habitat, and incorporate those recommendations into his plan insofar as
practicable.
3. lf any portion of the development contains a wetland or vernal pool, as determined by the Town of Fairfield, the
Maine DEP, or a certified soil scientist, the developer shall avoid, minimize, or mitigate impacts on the resource
both during and after construction.
7.8 Noise
A. Noise shall be kept within the limits of the Town of Fairfield Noise Ordinance. In general, the maximum
permissible sound pressure level of any continuous, regular, or frequent source of sound produced by any
activity shall be limited by the time period and receiving district listed below.
Sound Pressure Level Limits (Measured in dB)
District 7 a.m. - 9:30 p.m. 9:30 p.m. - 7 a.m.
UR, R, RR, RU Districts 55 45
All other districts 60 50
B. Notwithstanding the standards of subsection A, a venue providing outdoor entertainment activities may produce
sound to the level permitted by the Fairfield Police Chief under a permit issued pursuant to Article 6, Section 7
of the Town of Fairfield Public Safety Ordinance.
C. The level specified may be exceeded by 10 dB for no more than 15 minutes per day. Noise shall be measured
by a meter set on the A-weighted response scale, slow response. The meter shall meet the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI S1.4-1961) "Specification for General Purpose Sound Level Meters". Sound levels
shall be measured at least 4 feet above ground at the property boundary.
D. No person shall engage in construction activities on a site abutting any residential use between the hours of
9:30 p.m. and 7 a.m.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 34
E. The Planning Board, in reviewing Conditional Use applications for commercial activities abutting or within any
residential district, may require additional measures for noise suppression.
F. The following activities shall be exempt from these standards:
1. Sounds emanating from construction and maintenance activities conducted between 7 a.m. and 9:30 p.m.
2. Sounds emanating from safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief valves, and other
emergency or public safety devices.
7.9 Outside Storage of Materials
All materials stored outdoors shall be isolated in such a manner as to prevent the breeding and harboring of insects,
rats, or other vermin. This shall be accomplished by enclosures in containers, raising materials above ground,
separation of material, prevention of stagnant water, extermination procedures, or other means. A plan for
establishment and maintenance of appropriate measures shall be part of any required permit application.
7.10 Commercial Development in the Rural (RU) District
Just as commercial use is promoted in the Commercial (C), Village (V) and Main Street (MS) districts of the town, it
is discouraged in the Rural (RU) district. In addition to other standards established in this ordinance, Rural (RU)
District commercial uses are subject to the following conditions:
1. Setback and Buffer. A minimum of fifty (50) feet shall be maintained between the area or structure used for
commercial purposes and any parcel boundary. A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet shall be in the form of a
natural or planted buffer as described in Sec. 7.3.
2. Size. No new commercial structure may exceed 10,000 square feet, except in such cases where the applicant
can demonstrate that traffic generated by the development will not exceed ten (10) percent of the existing
Average Daily Traffic (ADT) of the road used for access. The total impervious surface used for commercial
purposes shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the gross area of the parcel on which it is established.
The Planning Board may waive this standard only in the case where the commercial use is primarily related to
and dependent on locally-produced farm or forest products, or gravel or other earth products mined on site.
3. Traffic Impact. The Planning Board or a qualified traffic engineer shall estimate the amount of traffic to be
generated by the use. Except for uses waivable in sec. 2, above, no uses will be permitted which generate
more than 300 vehicle trips per day onto Route 139, Route 201, or Route 104, nor more than 200 vehicle trips
per day onto any other road in the district.
4. Access Points. All access points shall be designed and constructed at a point with a minimum of five hundred
(500) feet sight distance in each direction along the public road. All driveways shall be paved for a distance of
at least fifty (50) feet from the edge of the pavement of the public road.
5. Signs. Only one free-standing sign shall be permitted per parcel. The maximum size of the freestanding
sign
shall be thirty-two (32) square feet.
7.11 Storm Water Management
A. All new construction shall be designed to reduce water runoff as nearly as possible to pre-development conditions in
terms of volume, velocity, and location. Where possible, existing natural runoff control features, such as swales,
terraces, and wooded areas, shall be retained in order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of storm water.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 35
B. All applicants for Conditional Uses that will involve creation of more than 10,000 square feet of new impervious
surface must prepare a Storm Water Management Plan. Storm water plans should show how the development will
limit peak discharges from the site to predevelopment levels through a system of engineering structures and best
management practices equivalent to those described in Stormwater Management for Maine: Best Management
Practices, (DEP, January, 2006 or as revised). The use of low-impact development techniques, as described in
Chapter 3 of the above-cited manual, is highly encouraged.
C. Storm water runoff systems should be designed to facilitate aquifer recharge when it is advantageous to
compensate for groundwater withdrawals or reduction in infiltration. Conversely, designs should avoid recharge
where groundwater effects might be harmful.
7.12 Water Quality
A. No activity shall locate, store, discharge, or permit the discharge of any treated, untreated or inadequately treated
liquid, gaseous, or solid materials so as to contaminate, pollute, or harm any surface or ground water resources or
cause nuisances, such as floating or submerged debris, oil or scum, color, odor, taste, or unsightliness, or be
harmful to human, animal, plant or aquatic life. Evidence that State and Federal regulatory requirements have been
met shall be considered sufficient to meet this standard.
B. All above ground storage facilities for fuel, chemicals, chemical or industrial wastes, and biodegradable raw
materials, shall be located on impervious material, and shall be completely enclosed by an impervious dike which
shall be high enough to contain the total volume of liquid kept within the storage area, plus the rain falling into this
storage area during a 25-year storm, so that liquid shall not be able to spill onto or seep into the ground surrounding
the storage area. In addition, such facilities shall be located at least 75 ft. from any lot line, or 40 ft. for underground
storage. Storage tanks for "home heating oil" and diesel fuel, not exceeding 330 gallons in size, may be exempted
from this requirement. Evidence that State and Federal regulatory requirements have been met shall be considered
sufficient to meet this standard.
No commercial activity involving the production, use, or storage of hazardous or toxic chemicals or petroleum
products shall be conducted except in accordance with a Spill Prevention and Management Plan developed at the
time of application and approved by the Town of Fairfield Fire Chief. All materials shall be stored in a manner and
location which is in compliance with appropriate regulations of the Maine Department of Public Safety and other
Federal, State’, and local regulations.
C. Any development which will generate a demand of 2,000 gallons per day or greater provided by groundwater
supplies shall not noticeably diminish groundwater quantity or quality beyond the boundaries of the property as a
result of the project. The Planning Board will require evidence in the form of a report by a qualified hydrogeologist
that this standard will be met.
D. Public Water Supplies: Any land use activity which involves the development of a new public water supply shall
develop a wellhead management plan demonstrating that the applicant has legal control over land use activities
within a minimum three hundred (300) foot radius of the wellhead.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 36
Article 8: Site Design and Public Facilities Impact Standards
8.1 Access to Public Roads
A. General Provisions:
Provision shall be made for vehicular access to the development and circulation upon the lot in such a manner as to
safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in the street and within the development, to avoid traffic congestion
on any street and to provide safe and convenient circulation on public streets and within the development
1. The number of access points shall be minimized consistent with the need to attain safe and proper vehicular
access to the site. Commercial access points shall avoid local residential streets wherever possible.
2. Where a commercial lot has frontage on two or more streets, access to the lot shall be provided from the street
where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion and for hazards to traffic and pedestrians.
3. The street giving access to the lot and neighboring streets which can be expected to carry traffic to and from the
development shall have existing capacity or be improved to accommodate the amount and types of traffic to be
generated by the proposed use. No development shall increase the volume of traffic to a level exceeding eighty
(80) percent of the street's capacity nor reduce the street's Level of Service to "D" or below.
4. Provision shall be made for interconnecting driveway links to adjoining lots, when such driveway would enable the
public to travel between two existing or potential uses, generally open to the public, without need to travel upon a
street.
5. All driveway entrances and exits shall be kept free from visual obstructions higher than three (3) feet above level
within a triangular area defined by legs of 25 feet measured along the driveway and street lines in order to provide
adequate vehicle sight lines.
B. Access onto State Jurisdiction Roads
A land use activity proposed to access onto roads under the jurisdiction of the State of Maine Department of
Transportation (DOT) is required to obtain a DOT Driveway, Entrance, or Traffic Movement Permit, depending on the
volume of traffic involved. If the proposed activity requires a Conditional Use Permit, the applicant shall provide
permitting materials to the Town as evidence that this standard is met.
Roads in Fairfield under Maine DOT jurisdiction include: US 201 outside of the urban compact area, Maine Route 139
outside of the urban compact area, Maine Route 104, and Maine Route 23.
C. Access Standards
The standards of this section shall apply to all land use activities that will access roads not under the jurisdiction of
Maine DOT, including town roads and state highways/state aid roads within the urban compact area.
1. Sight Distances: Driveways shall be designed and located to provide adequate sight distance in each direction. A
sight distance of ten (10) feet for each mile per hour of posted speed limit shall be provided. On unposted roads,
the minimum sight distance is two hundred fifty (250) feet within the urban compact area and three hundred fifty
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 37
(350) feet outside this area.
2 Number of Access Points
The following criteria shall limit the number of access points independent of frontage length.
a. Developments estimated to generate less than ten (10) vehicle trips at the peak hour or 100 vehicle trips per
day shall be limited to one two-way driveway onto a single roadway.
b. All other developments shall be permitted no more than two (2) two-way driveways or three driveways in total
onto a single roadway.
3. Separation from Street Intersections: Separation of driveway from existing street intersections should be the
maximum practicable, based on site constraints.
a. Low volume driveways shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet from an intersection, unless it is controlled
by a traffic signal, in which case it shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet.
b. A two-way driveway which will serve a volume of one hundred (100) or more vehicle trips during its daily peak
hour of operation shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) from an intersection, unless the
intersection is controlled by a traffic signal, in which case it shall be no closer than five hundred (500) feet.
c. A single-lane (one-way) driveway may be located closer than fifty (50) feet of an intersection only if traffic is
prevented from entering into or egressing out of the opposing lane of the road by a raised median or other
device.
d. Distances shall be measured from the point of tangency (PT) of the intersection curb radius to the point of
tangency of the driveway curb.
4. Separation from lot lines: Except in the Urban Residential (UR) District, no driveway entrance shall be located
within ten (10) feet of the side lot line of an adjoining lot, unless the driveway is designed to serve both lots.
5. Driveway Design
a. All driveways, including commercial entrances, with a volume of fewer than one hundred (100) vehicle trips
during its daily peak hour of operation shall meet the following design requirements:
1) Angle of Entry. Driveways shall be two-way operation and shall intersect the road at an angle as nearly
90 degrees as site conditions permit, but in no case less than 75 degrees on arterials, or 60 degrees on
all other roads.
2) Curb Radius. The curb radius shall be between 5 feet and 24 feet, with a preferred radius of 10 feet.
3) Driveway Width. The width of the driveway shall be between 12 feet and 24 feet, as measured in the
throat area behind the radius.
4) Slope. From the street line, the driveway should slope at 2 percent or less for a distance of 25 feet,
followed by a slope of 6 percent or less for at least 50 feet.
b. Commercial driveways with a volume of greater than one hundred (100) vehicle trips during its daily peak hour
of operation shall meet the following design requirements:
1) Angle of Entry. Driveways shall intersect the road at an angle as nearly 90 degrees as site conditions
permit, but in no case less than 75 degrees.
2) Entering and exiting lanes shall be separated by a raised median. The median shall define a throat
length of adequate dimensions based on the traffic volume, but in no case less than forty (40) feet.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 38
3) Width. Driveway widths shall be between twelve (12) feet and twenty-six (26) feet on each side of the
median, depending on whether they are single-lane or two-lane. "Right turn only" lanes established by a
channelization island shall be between sixteen (16) feet and twenty (20) feet in width.
4) Curb Radius. Without channelization islands for right-turn movements, the curb radii shall be between 30
feet and 50 feet. With a channelization island, the curb radii shall be between 75 feet and 100 feet.
5) Slope. From the street line, the driveway should slope no more than 2 percent for a minimum of 100
feet.
6) Appropriate traffic control signage shall be erected at the intersection of the driveway and the street and
on medians and islands.
D. Construction Materials/Paving
1. All driveways entering a curbed street shall be curbed with materials matching the street curbing. Curbing shall be
placed around all raised islands or medians.
2. All driveways shall be paved with bituminous concrete pavement within the street right-of-way.
All commercial driveways regardless of driveway volume shall be paved with bituminous concrete pavement within
thirty (30) feet of the street right-of-way.
8.2 Off-Street Parking
A. General
No use shall be permitted, and no structure shall be constructed or enlarged, unless adequate vehicle parking is
provided without necessity for vehicular parking on the street, in accordance with the following requirements.
B. Parking Lot Design Criteria
1. Access Restrictions
a. Parking areas with more than two (2) parking spaces shall be designed so that vehicles cannot back into the
street.
b. Vehicle access points shall be designed in conformance with section 8.1, above.
c. All parking spaces shall be at least five (5) feet from any side or rear lot line, unless more is required for
buffer yards.
d. Required parking spaces will not be located within the right-of-way of the public street.
2. Interior Vehicular Circulation
a. Major interior travel lanes should be designed to allow continuous and uninterrupted traffic movement, with
particular reference to the necessity of avoiding slowing vehicles on the public road. A throat length adequate
to serve the volume of traffic shall be provided. No parking spaces will access directly from the throat area.
b. In parking lots in excess of one hundred (100) spaces, raised islands with vegetation shall be used to identify
circulation patterns and restrict driving movements diagonally across parking aisles Island placement shall be
sufficient to divide the lot into two (2) or more smaller cells of no more than 100 spaces each. Landscaped
islands shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet of vegetative width containing a landscaped mixture of deciduous
and evergreen vegetation, selected for adaptability to roadside conditions and continuously maintained, except
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 39
that a pedestrian walkway and drainage facilities may be placed within the area, provided that it occupies no
more than one-half the width.
c. All spaces shall be immediately accessible from an aisle without the necessity of moving other vehicles.
d. Parking aisles should be oriented perpendicular to stores or businesses for easy pedestrian access and
visibility.
e. Any layout that utilizes vehicular access service ("drive-up") windows shall provide a minimum of five (5) car
lengths of queuing space on the incoming side of the initial stopping point. This requirement may be increased
by the Planning Board for certain types of development. The required queuing space shall be designed so that
it shall not interfere with parking and circulation on the remainder of the site.
3. Layout of Parking Stalls and Aisles
a. Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length for conventional
arrangement. Stalls designated for handicapped use shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width by
eighteen (18) feet in length and marked appropriately. Stalls may be angled, provided aisles are designated
one-way, and each stall contains the minimum rectangular dimensions. Stalls for parallel parking shall be no
less than nine (9) feet in width by twenty-two (22) feet in length.
b. In paved parking areas painted stripes shall be used to delineate parking stalls. Stripes should be a min. of 4"
in width. Where double lines are used, they should be separated a min. of 10" on center. Unpaved parking
lots are not required to delineate spaces on the ground, but the site plan must show adequate parking and
circulation design and the single space reserved for handicapped parking must be identified with an
appropriate sign.
c. Two-way aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet in width. One-way aisles shall be a minimum of
sixteen (16) feet in width.
d. Bumpers and/or wheel stops shall be provided where overhang of parked cars might restrict traffic flow on
adjacent through roads, restrict pedestrian movement on adjacent walkways, or damage landscape materials.
e. The provision of oversize spaces shall be permitted for activities that ordinarily serve oversize vehicles, such
as recreational vehicles, travel trailers, delivery trucks or tractortrailer
trucks.
4. Paving Required
All parking lots and access drives which would require ten (10) or more parking spaces under the table in Section
8.2.C.1, below, shall be paved with hot bituminous concrete or an equivalent surfacing over a gravel sub-base at
least eighteen (18) inches in thickness, and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where needed.
C. Numerical Requirements
1. Basic Requirements for Parking Space
Adequate off-street parking shall be provided according to the use proposed. The table below shall be interpreted
as a guide, subject to adjustments in Subsections 2 through 5, following. The provision of spaces for vehicles
owned or operated by the business, such as construction vehicles, tractor-trailers, and vehicles displayed for sale,
shall not be included in the calculations.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 40
# of Spaces Land Use Activity
Places of Residence or Accommodation--spaces per room or dwelling unit
1 / 3 Dedicated Retirement Home, Nursing Care Facility
1 Hotel, Motel, Bed & Breakfast, College Residence Hall
2 Multi-family buildings
Places of Public Assembly--spaces per seat based on maximum seating capacity
1 / 4 Theater, with fixed seating
1 / 3 Church
1 / 2 Restaurant, Convention Center, Meeting Hall, Grange, Bottle Club
Places of Commerce and lndustry--spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
1/2 Warehousing, including self-storage
1 1/ 2 Industrial and Manufacturing Facilities, wholesaling
3 Grocery stores over 5,000 sq.ft., Offices, professional, and
personal services, except as noted.
3.5 Retail sales except as noted
5 Banks, Medical & Dental Offices, Call Centers, Fitness Clubs, Child Care
6 Snack bars (6 minimum)
Public and Institutional Facilities--spaces per 1,000 sq.ft. of gross floor area
2 Elementary School .
4 School, except as noted, Museum, Art Center, Public Office
6 Commuter College, Hospital
Miscellaneous--criteria as specified
1 per 1,000 sf Indoor Sports Facility (Tennis, Soccer etc.)--no spectators
1 per 4 seats or
attendees, based on
max. capacity
Stadiums, Arenas, Racetracks, and other spectator sport venues
30 per acre Mini-golf, Go-Carts, and Outdoor Amusements
5 per lane Bowling Alley
3 per service bay plus 1
per 10 vehicles displayed
Motor Vehicle Sales & Service
2. Conditional Modification of Requirements: The Planning Board is permitted to modify these standards as minimum
requirements, under the following circumstances:
a. By up to 10 percent, based upon a showing by a qualified traffic engineer that similar uses under similar
circumstances generate greater or less demand.
b. In the Main Street (MS) District only, the Planning Board may permit any use to provide up to 100 percent of its
parking requirement through the cooperative development and maintenance of a municipal or public parking
lot or structure. Alternatively, the Board may reduce the required parking by up to 30 percent, upon the
condition that provided offstreet
parking not be restricted to patrons/tenants of the development.
c. The following listed uses may satisfy up to 50 percent of their parking requirement through a shared-use
agreement with a non-listed use: Churches, fraternal meeting halls, Eating & Drinking Establishments,
Theaters, Fitness Clubs, Bowling Alleys.
d. A development may include as a portion of its parking requirement the provision of parking spaces not
located on the same lot provided a) that the spaces are located within 200 feet of the property line,
b) that a written agreement is in place for long-term use of the spaces, and c) that the spaces would not
be among the minimum required for a preexisting
or already-permitted use.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 41
3. Impact on Physical and Environmental Resources. Parking lots shall not be excessively large, or contain an area
more than 25 percent greater than that required by these standards.
4. Handicapped Access: At least one space, plus one additional space for every twenty-five (25) required, shall be
designated as available for handicapped persons, and shall be located nearest the primary entrance. If more than
two (2) spaces are required, spaces shall be separated by a five (5) foot wide access aisle. All spaces shall be
identified by pavement markings and signs mounted at least five (5) feet above ground surface.
5. Mixed Uses:
a. Any portion of an activity or use which is listed separately on the table in Section 8.2.C.1 shall be considered
as a separate use for the purpose of calculating spaces if it exceeds in area or seating capacity 25 percent
of the overall area of the building or development.
b. If an Eating and Drinking Establishment provides both indoor and outdoor seating, the parking requirement
shall be calculated according to the total seating capacity.
c. If a mixed use consists of any residential use combined with any commercial use, no parking shall be
required of the residential use unless it consists of more than 67 percent of the total development area.
D. Standards for Loading Bays
1. Areas for loading and unloading goods shall be located entirely on the same lot as the building or use to be
served so that trucks, trailers, and containers for loading or storage shall not be required to stand or maneuver
upon any public street, except that in the Main Street (MS) District, unloading to pre-existing buildings may be by
way of the street for time periods specified in the Town of Fairfield Public Safety Ordinance, Article 1, Section 5.
No loading bays shall be on the side of the building facing the principal street frontage, except for approved
industrial activities in the Industrial (I) District.
2: The following minimum off-street loading bays or berths shall be provided and maintained in the case of new
construction, alterations, and changes of use for the purpose of retail, wholesale, warehouse and industrial
operations.
Building Size: Loading Bays Required:
5,0001 to 20,000 sq. ft. 1 bay
20,001 to 80,000 sq. ft. 2 bays
80,001 to 130,000 sq. ft. 3 bays
130,001 to 190,000 sq. ft. 4 bays
Each 100,000 square feet over 190,000 square feet requires one (1) additional bay.
3. Loading bays shall be a minimum dimension of twelve (12) feet by fifty-five (55) feet and be designed and
delineated so as not to interfere with traffic flow or other parking spaces.
8.3 Signs
A Permit by Rule (Section 3.3 of this ordinance) is required for the erection of any new sign or sign structure or when an
existing sign is replaced by a larger one. This section sets out standards for sign location, size, and placement in
addition to those of the Maine Traveler Information Services Act, 23 M.R.S.A. §1901 et seq.
A. In the RU, RR, and UR Districts, only the following signs shall be permitted.
1. One free-standing sign may be displayed. In RR and UR Districts, the sign shall be limited in square footage to
1/20 (5 percent) of the linear street frontage of the property, or nine (9) square feet, whichever is larger. In the RU
District, the sign shall be limited to thirty-two (32) square feet regardless of frontage.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 42
2. In the UR District only, no sign shall be internally illuminated. External illumination shall be limited to lowintensity
fixtures aimed directly at the sign.
B. In the R, I, and C Districts, the following restrictions shall apply.
1. Signs shall be permanently affixed to the land or building except as provided in section 8.3.E below. The total area
of signage in square feet shall not exceed 1/3 (33 percent) of the linear street frontage of the property or, on corner
lots, the longest single street frontage of the property.
2. Free-standing signs (not building-mounted) shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. Signs shall be placed no closer than 10 feet from the edge of the street right-of-way. No sign shall be placed
in or on the sidewalk.
b. No portion of any free-standing sign shall extend more than twenty-five (25) feet above the level of the ground
on which it is located.
c. No single free-standing sign shall exceed 50 percent of the allowable sign area for the lot.
d. No more than two free-standing signs shall be permitted per lot or business.
e. Within an approved commercial subdivision, property owners may pool their permissible sign area to erect one
free-standing sign at the entrance to the development.
3. Building-mounted signs shall be subject to the following requirements:
a. There shall be no more than three building-mounted signs permitted, except in the case where there are
multiple lessees of a building, in which case, there shall be permitted no more than one sign per lessee.
b. If mounted on the building in such a way as to overhang a pedestrian walkway or public sidewalk, no portion of
the sign shall extend beyond five (5) feet of the building face to which attached, nor within ten (10) feet vertical
distance of the sidewalk.
c. If the proposed sign is to be "flush-mounted", it shall not extend or project more than twelve (12) inches from
the building wall. Cut out letters should not project more than six (6) inches from the building wall.
d. No portion of a sign structure shall extend higher than ten (10) feet above the cornice line of any building.
C. In the V and MS Districts, special provision must apply to accommodate existing development and higher development
densities. In general, the provisions of Section 8.3.B shall apply, except as follows:
1. The total signage area in square feet shall not exceed 1/2 (50 percent) of the linear street frontage of the property.
2. No free-standing sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way or sidewalk, except that temporary "sandwich
board" signs may be placed on sidewalks during normal business hours.
D. Changeable Signs: as defined 23 MRSA §1914.11A(1)
1. Changeable signs, including digital displays, are permitted only in the following Districts: l, C, MS, and V. Only a
single changeable sign is permitted per lot of record.
2. The display on a changeable sign may be changed no more often than once every ten (10) seconds. If adjacent to
pre-existing residential development, the changing feature shall be discontinued outside of business hours.
3. The displayed message shall not scroll, flash, dissolve, or be otherwise animated. No streaming or moving images
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 43
shall be displayed on the sign. No sign shall contain external moving parts or other elements that may distract
drivers.
4. The message display area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area, or fifty (50) percent of the area of the
sign, whichever is larger.
5. Changeable signs shall not be placed so that the message is readable from the interstate or associated ramps.
E. Temporary signs
Temporary signs and banners may be posted for a period of not more than twenty (20) days within any ninety (90) day
period. The owner shall remove said signs upon termination of the event. No temporary sign or banner shall be placed
in or above the right-of-way of a public street, except by written permission of the Town Manager.
F. The following are not considered signs subject to these provisions:
1. Flags and insignia of any government.
2. Legal notices, identification, information, or directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies.
3. Integral decorative or architectural features of building unless they consist of letters, trademarks, moving parts, or
moving or flashing lights.
4. Signs placed for the purpose of guiding traffic and parking on private property.
5. Signs advocating for an election issue or candidate.
G. Existing, non-conforming signs may be maintained but shall not be replaced except by conforming signs. Upon change
of ownership of a business premises, all non-conforming signs must be removed or replaced by conforming signs.
H. A sign which advertises a business which is no longer in operation, or which poses a risk to public safety by virtue of
being unmaintained shall be removed by the owner, agent, or person responsible for the building or site upon which the
sign is located. The Code Enforcement Officer is responsible for identifying such signs and providing written notice to
the owner of record in accordance with section 3.8.A of this Ordinance.
8.4 Solid and Liquid Wastes
A. The development shall provide for the disposal of all solid wastes on a timely basis and in an environmentally safe
manner. The Town shall not be responsible for pickup or transfer of wastes.
B. Sanitary and Liquid Wastes
1. When not serviced by the public sewerage system, the approval of a permit shall be subject to presentation of a
completed site evaluation form (HHE-200) which evidences adequate soil conditions for wastewater disposal.
2. Industrial or commercial waste waters may be discharged to public sewers only and in such quantities and/or
qualities as to be compatible with operations of the Kennebec Sanitary Treatment District. Wash water or
other process water carrying stone dust, stone particles, silt or other mineral matter will not be accepted.
Wastes may require pretreatment at the industrial or commercial site in order to achieve this standard. The
Planning Board shall consider the impact of particular industrial or chemical wastes or by-products upon the
system's facilities (in terms of volume, flammability, or toxicity) and may require the development to dispose
of such wastes elsewhere, in conformance with applicable State and Federal regulations. The Board may
require the applicant to specify the amount and exact nature of all industrial and chemical wastes to be
generated by the proposed operation.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 44
This standard shall not apply to facilities that treat their own wastewater requiring an Effluent Discharge
Permit from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection.
8.5 Utilities
Public utility lines feeding commercial structures shall be placed underground wherever practicable.
8.6 Public Safety and Emergency Services
A. Commercial buildings in the Industrial (I) and Commercial (C) Districts covering an area of more than ten thousand
(10,000) square feet shall provide clear access for emergency vehicles on all sides of the building(s). Clear access
consists of a minimum of twenty feet of unobstructed width with a surface level and firm enough to support fire
equipment. The access shall be considered developed area and not included in any calculations for buffer areas.
B. At a minimum, the requirements of the editions of NFPA – 1 and NFPA – 101 in use at the time of construction must
be met for all construction, alteration, or demolition. Key box security systems shall be installed, as required by
Article 1 of the Fairfield Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance. Truss construction markers as required under
Article 4 of said ordinance shall be properly displayed at all entrances.
C. All fire lanes shall be installed and maintained as required by Article 5 of the Fairfield Fire Prevention and Protection
Ordinance. The Fire Chief may require temporary fire lanes and/or building access routes during construction,
alteration, or demolition work.
D. The applicant must submit evidence that proposed fire protection measures are adequate, in the form of a written
statement from the Fire Chief that the proposed development will not exceed the capacity of the department to
provide adequate protection. The Fire Chief may recommend additional protective improvements, including but not
limited to fire ponds, dry hydrants, fire lanes, separation of flammable wastes, or sprinkler systems.
E. If the development will use or store items that because of their toxicity or flammability would require specialized
training or equipment, the developer will be responsible for providing that training or equipment to the fire department.
F. The development must be designed to provide security consistent with the capacity and practices of the town police
department. The applicant shall provide a written statement from the Police Chief approving any proposed security
measures.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 45
Article 9: Design Standards Applicable to Specific Activities
9.1 Adult Businesses
The purpose of this section is to permit the establishment of adult businesses, as defined, in such manner and
location as will protect the general welfare and preserve the community standard.
A. Physical Separation: In districts where permitted, adult businesses shall not be located within 250 feet of a residential
district boundary, nor within 500 feet of an existing residential, educational, or religious structure, nor within 500 feet of
any other adult business.
B. Exterior Appearance: No sexually explicit message, materials, images, or activity shall be visible outside the building.
9.2 Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards
Automobile graveyards and junkyards shall be subject to the provisions of 30-A MRSA, sec. 3751-3760, as amended
"Automobile Graveyards and Junkyards", including separate licensing provisions. In addition to the requirement for a
Conditional Use Permit under this Ordinance, an automobile graveyard or junkyard is required to obtain a permit
under the Fairfield Automobile Graveyard and Junkyard Ordinance and meet the performance standards therein. The
applicant will show that the performance standards in both ordinances will be met prior to receiving a Conditional Use
Permit.
9.3 Campgrounds and Tenting Grounds.
A. General
1. A campground must be constructed on a lot containing a minimum of ten (10) acres. All RV or trailer sites and all
structures shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line.
2. Campsites shall be laid out and screened in such a manner that none are within view from public roads,
neighboring residences, or approved subdivision lots. Any combination of natural woodland, evergreen planting,
landscaping earthen berms, or solid fencing may be used to screen this activity, when sites would otherwise be
visible from the locations described above.
3. No mobile home or manufactured housing unit shall be permitted within any campground, temporary or otherwise,
except for a single unit for the use of the owner or manager.
4. Tent sites and sites for trailers and RVs shall be laid out so that the overall density does not exceed fourteen units
per acre for tents or eleven units per acre for trailer or RV sites, unless a lower density is required under the Town
of Fairfield Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
5. The minimum setback from the normal high-water mark shall be 100 feet for all recreational vehicles, tents, or
other temporary or permanent structure.
6. No campsite shall be located within the 100 year floodplain.
B. Parking and Circulation
1. Adequate parking plus maneuvering space shall be provided for each RV, tent, or shelter site. Individual spaces
shall be laid out so that there shall be a minimum of 75 feet between RV sites and all public roads located inside
the boundaries of the campground.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 46
2. Vehicular access shall be provided onto a hard-surfaced road adequate for the volume and type of traffic likely to
be generated. All roads shall be constructed to the standards for a private right-ofway
as per the Town of
Fairfield Subdivision Ordinance. No vehicle parking shall be permitted on the roadway.
C. Health and Safety
1. Trash receptacles shall be provided at convenient locations throughout the campground. The park management
shall dispose of refuse from said containers at least once every three days.
2. A campground shall provide water and sewage systems, sanitary stations, and convenience facilities in
accordance with the regulations of the State Wastewater Disposal Rules. At least one toilet, one shower, and
one lavatory shall be provided for each sex for every ten (10) campsites. All RV and trailer sites shall be
equipped with water and sewage hook-ups, and connected to approved distribution or disposal systems.
3. Fire extinguishers capable of dealing with electrical and wood fires shall be kept in all service buildings. A
suitable ingress and egress shall be provided so that every campground may be readily serviced in emergency
situations. Twenty-Four (24) hour emergency service (e.g. telephones) shall be provided.
D. Planning and Review
Campgrounds are subject to review under the Town of Fairfield Subdivision Ordinance, with particular attention to the
requirements for habitat protection and retention of natural vegetation. Campgrounds within shoreland zoned areas
are under the jurisdiction of the Fairfield Shoreland Zoning Ordinance.
9.4 Communication Towers
New or expanded communication towers are subject to review as a Conditional Use and the standards of this section,
unless exempted under subsection C of this section. Maintenance and repair of existing facilities and equipment and
addition of antennae does not require review unless there is a change in height or coverage of impervious surface of
the facility. A building permit may be required.
A. Location
1. Communication Towers are prohibited in the UR, and R Districts. This shall not be construed as prohibiting
building-mounted antennae in those districts.
2. Consideration shall be given to use of existing towers (co-location) whenever practicable. Applicants for permits
for new facilities shall state why location on an existing tower is not feasible.
3. Towers shall be located no closer than one-half the height of the tower from all property lines and dwelling units.
B. Design and Installation
1. No tower shall exceed one hundred ninety five (195) feet in height, as measured from the tip to the ground
surface. A tower in the MS or V Districts shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height.
2. The applicant for a new tower will provide the Planning Board with a radio frequency propagation survey
demonstrating that the proposed tower height is needed.
3. All new and replacement towers shall be of the monopole design.
4. No tower shall be approved unless at least one (1) wireless service provider has already committed occupancy.
New towers shall be designed with capacity for co-location.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 47
5. A new or expanded tower shall be placed on a lot owned by the operator of the facility or leased for a period of
not less than ten (10) years.
6. New towers shall be constructed with materials and colors that match or blend in with the surrounding natural or
built environment to the maximum extent practicable.
7. All towers and supporting structures must comply with structural standards established by the Electronic
Industries Association/Telecommunication Industries association. Compliance with these standards shall be
certified by a registered professional engineer.
8. Any communication tower that is unused or out of service for a period of eighteen (18) continuous months shall
be considered abandoned and shall be removed as soon as possible. The Town of Fairfield is hereby authorized
to contract for removal of the tower and assess the cost of said removal as a lien against the property.
C. Exempt Installations
1. Facilities for communication by local, county, state or federal emergency and public safety organizations.
2. Amateur radio stations as licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
3. Facilities accessory to an existing dwelling unit.
4. Facilities intended to be in operation for no more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
9.5 Eating and Drinking Establishments
A. All permit applications shall state the maximum seating capacity of the establishment, including any planned outdoor
seating areas. Any expansion or enlargement over the stated capacity shall require a new permit.
B. Any establishment located within 500 feet of an existing public sewer line shall connect with the sewer system at the
expense of the developer. When subsurface wastewater disposal is proposed, completed soil evaluation forms (HHE-
200) shall be submitted. All proposed subsurface disposal systems shall meet the Maine State Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal rules.
C. Separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons complying with the Maine State Plumbing Code shall be
provided on the premises.
D. Eating establishments with little or no indoor seating capacity (“snack bars”) must still provide for traffic flow and
parking such that movement on the public road is not impeded.
9.6 Extractive or Filling Operations
A. Scope and Exclusions: Except for the exclusions listed below, the removal or placement of topsoil, rock, sand, gravel,
and other earth materials is prohibited in the UR, V, and MS Districts and is a Conditional Use in all other districts:
1. The removal, placement or transfer, of less than one hundred (100) cubic yards of material from or onto any lot in
any twelve (12) month period.
2. The removal, placement or transfer, of material incidental to construction, alteration, or repair or a building or in
the grading and landscaping incidental thereto; and
3. The grading or shifting of material incidental to construction, alteration, or repair of a public or private way or
essential facility.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 48
B. Submission Requirements
1. All applications shall show sufficient information to determine compliance with this ordinance and applicable State
Laws, and accompanied by all required State Permits or Licenses and the following information:
a. A site plan with topography indicating not greater than five (5) foot contour intervals, related to US Geodetic
Survey data; the location and slope of the grades, existing and as proposed upon completion of the extraction
operation; and detailing proposed fencing, buffer strips, signs, lighting, parking and loading areas, entrances
and exits; together with a written statement of the proposed operating procedure and working hours.
b. A plan for reclamation of the site upon completion of the operation.
c. Evidence of adequate insurance against liability arising from the proposed operations, to be maintained
throughout the period of operation.
d. Written approval of routes to be used by the Fairfield Director of Public Works.
2. The Board may require the additional submission of a hydrogeological study to determine the effects of the
proposed activity on groundwater movement and quality within the area.
C. Performance Standards
1. No part of any excavation shall be permitted within 150 feet of any property or street line, except for drainage
ways. Natural vegetation shall be left and maintained on the undisturbed land.
2. If any standing water accumulates, the site shall be fenced in a manner adequate to keep children out. Measures
shall be taken to prevent or halt the breeding of insects.
3. No slopes steeper than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1) shall be permitted at any site unless a
fence at least six (6) feet in height is erected to limit access to such locations.
4. Topsoil and subsoil suitable for purposes of revegetation shall, to the extent required for restoration, be stockpiled
for use in restoring the location after an extraction operation has ceased. Stockpiles shall be protected from
erosion, according to the erosion prevention performance standards of this ordinance.
5. The sides and bottom of cuts, fills, channels, and artificial water courses shall be constructed and stabilized to
prevent erosion or failure, as provided in section 7.4 of this Ordinance.
6. Lagoons shall be designed to avoid creation of fish trap conditions. The applicant shall submit written approval
from the Maine Department of Environmental Protection, and/or the Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife,
as applicable, prior to consideration by the Planning Board.
7. The hours of operations at any site shall be limited as the Planning Board deems advisable to ensure compatibility
with neighboring residences.
8. Loaded vehicles shall be suitably covered to prevent dust and contents from spilling or blowing from the load, and
all trucking routes and methods shall be subject to approval by the Director of Public Works. No mud, soil, sand,
or other materials shall be allowed to accumulate on a public road from loading or hauling vehicles.
9. All access/egress roads leading to or from the site to public ways shall be treated with suitable materials to reduce
dust and mud for a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet from such public ways.
10. No equipment debris, junk, or similar material shall be permitted on a site. Any temporary shelters or buildings
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 49
erected for such operations and equipment used in connection therewith shall be removed within thirty (30) days
following completion of operations.
11. Within six (6) months of the completion of operations at any site of any one or more locations within any site,
ground levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the submitted reclamation plans, including the
following:
a. All debris, stumps, boulders, and similar materials shall be removed or disposed of in an approved location
or, in the case of solid, non-organic, non-toxic matter, may be buried and covered with a minimum of two (2)
feet of soil.
b. The extent and type of grading material shall be appropriate to the use intended. The applicant shall specify
the type and amount of fill to be used.
c. Storm drainage and water courses shall leave the site at the original natural drainage points. The amount of
drainage at any point will be significantly increased.
d. Sufficient topsoil or loam shall be retained or obtained to cover all disturbed areas to a depth of four (4)
inches. Areas shall be reseeded and properly restored to a stable condition.
12. No slope greater than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical (3:1) shall be permitted.
D. Existing Operations
1. Any extraction operation in lawful operation at the time this section becomes effective, may operate for a period of
five (5) years from the effective date without a Conditional Use Permit. Within six (6) months of enactment of this
ordinance, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide written notice to the owners of all property which, to the
best of their knowledge, contain existing operations, informing them of the requirements of this section.
2. Discontinuation of any existing operation shall result in the loss of pre-existing status for the operation.
Discontinuation is defined as being the excavation, processing, or storage of fewer than one hundred (100) cubic
yards of material, for any consecutive one-year period of time.
9.7 Ground Water and/or Spring Water Extraction and/or Storage
A. Permit Required. The removal of more than two thousand (2,000) gallons per day of ground water or spring water for
commercial purposes is a Conditional Use in all districts.
B. Submission Requirements. The application shall include the following information:
1. Statement of the quantity of ground water planned to be extracted at full capacity, expressed as the annual total,
the maximum monthly rate by month, and the maximum daily rate;
2. A letter from the Maine Department of Health and Human Services approving the facility as proposed where the
Department has jurisdiction over the proposal;
3. Where appropriate, letters from the Department of Environmental Protection when the Site Location Law is
applicable or a discharge permit is required.
4. A hydrogeological report by a certified professional hydrogeologist or registered professional engineer. This report
shall include:
• A map of the aquifer feeding the spring(s), well(s), or excavation(s) from which water is to be
extracted in sufficient detail to support a calculation of sustained yield during a drought with a
probability of one in ten (10) years.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 50
• An estimate of any potential interaction between this aquifer and adjacent water supplies.
• Impacts on the water table in the aquifer and wells within 1,000 feet of the proposed extraction
facilities shall be assessed.
C. Performance Standards
1. The quantity of water to be taken from water sources will not substantially lower the water table beyond the
property lines, cause undesirable changes in ground water flow, or cause unacceptable ground subsidence,
during a drought with a probability of occurrence of once in ten (10) years.
2. The proposed facility shall not cause water pollution or other diminution of the quality of the aquifer from which the
water is to be extracted.
3. Safe and healthful conditions shall be maintained within and about the proposed use.
4. The operator shall make monthly operating records of the quantity of water extracted, stored, and removed from
the site, available to the Code Enforcement Officer or a designee.
5. Nothing in this procedure, and no decision by the Planning Board shall be deemed to create groundwater rights
other than those rights which the applicant may have under state law.
9.8 Home Occupations
Home occupations are permitted as a Permit by Rule in all districts except C and I Districts, where they are a
Conditional Use. A business enterprise which cannot meet these standards must be classified and permitted
according to the Land Use Table. A home occupation in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance is not
required to get a permit or comply with these standards unless the activity expands in size, scope, or traffic demand.
A. The use of a dwelling unit or property for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental to and subordinate to the
residential use of the property and surrounding residential uses.
B. A home occupation may not alter the residential character of the structure or neighborhood, or change the character of
the lot from its principal use as a residence.
C. The home occupation shall be carried on wholly within existing structures. Any outside storage or display of materials
or products shall be screened from view from the abutting properties and street. The display for sale of motor vehicles
or outside storage of vehicles awaiting repair is expressly prohibited as a home occupation.
D. If carried on within a unit of a multi-family building or mobile home park, only resident family members may be
employed and there shall be no signs posted or retail sales conducted.
E. All parking shall be located to the rear or side of the principal structure, but not within the required yard setbacks.
F. One non-illuminated sign, no larger than six (6) square feet may be erected on the premises.
G. The sale of products shall be limited to those items which are crafted, assembled, or substantially altered on the
premises, to catalog items ordered off the premises by customers, and items not crafted on the premises but which
are accessory and incidental to a service which is provided on the premises.
H. A home occupation shall not involve the use or storage of heavy commercial vehicles, including construction and
delivery vehicles.
I. A home occupation shall not create greater traffic than normal for the area in which it is located or generate more than
forty (40) vehicle trips/day.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 51
J. A home occupation shall not generate noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, odor, heat, light, electrical interference, or other
effects which can be detected beyond the boundaries of the property, or in the case of a multi-family unit, beyond the
walls of the unit.
9.9 Kennels and Veterinary Clinics
A. Structures or pens for housing or containing the animals shall be located not less than one hundred (100) feet from the
property line.
B. All pens, runs, kennels, and other facilities shall be designed, constructed, and located on the site in a manner that will
minimize the adverse effects upon the surrounding properties.
C. The owner or operator shall maintain the premises in a clean, orderly, and sanitary condition at all times. No garbage,
offal, feces, or other waste material shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises. The premises shall be
maintained in a manner that they will not provide a breeding place for insects, vermin or rodents.
D. Temporary storage containers for any wastes containing or including animal excrement shall be kept tightly covered at
all times and emptied no less frequently than once every four days. Such containers shall be made of steel or plastic
to facilitate cleaning, and shall be located in accordance with the setbacks required for outdoor runs.
E. If outdoor animal “runs" are created, they shall be completely fenced in, and shall be paved with cement, asphalt or a
similar material to provide for cleanliness and ease of maintenance.
F. Incineration devices for burning excrement-soaked waste papers and/or animal organs or remains shall be located a
minimum distance of four hundred (400) feet from any property line, and shall have a chimney vent not less than thirtyfive
(35) feet above the average ground elevation. Approval shall be obtained from the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection for the proposed incinerator.
9.10 Mobile Homes in the Village (V) and Urban Residential (UR) Districts
All new installations of manufactured housing units in the Village (V), and Urban Residential (UR) Districts shall
conform to the following design standards:
i. All units must be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet in width and contain at least seven hundred fifty (750) square
feet of living space;
ii. All units shall have a residential-style siding and roof pitch of at least three (3) in twelve (12);
iii. All units shall have wheels and axles removed and be placed upon a permanent foundation consisting of a
frost wall, a paved pad with skirting, or a full basement.
9.11 Multiple Dwelling Units on a Lot
This section applies to multiple dwellings units on a lot, regardless of tenure (condominium or rental) or number of
individual buildings. Certain forms of multiple dwellings may also be subject to the Fairfield Subdivision Ordinance.
A. Apartments within a pre-existing home: Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance regarding minimum lot area
per dwelling unit, a home built prior to April 14, 1999 and located in the Urban Residential (UR) or Main Street (MS)
Districts may accommodate a single additional dwelling unit without the requirement for additional lot size.
1. No exterior structural changes may be made to the home to accommodate the additional unit, except for the
addition of exterior stairways as additional means of egress.
2. Each apartment shall be equipped with approved, hard-wired smoke and CO detectors.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 52
3. Sufficient parking shall be provided on site, as provided in Section 8.2.C of this Ordinance.
4. The site shall not be required to meet the screening requirements of Section 7.3 of this Ordinance for multifamily
developments. The Planning Board may require a fence or wall to be constructed as screening based
on specific conditions of the lot.
5. Each apartment must consist of a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of living area and shall meet all
plumbing code and fire safety requirements for a dwelling unit
B. In the Main Street District, all newly created dwelling units adjacent to Main Street must be wholly located above the
ground floor. All newly created dwelling units may only be located on the ground floor adjacent to Main Street, upon
appeal to the Fairfield Board of Appeals, if the property owner can demonstrate that the property is otherwise
incapable of earning an economic return on its value as appraised by a qualified real estate appraiser.
C. Multi-family Housing: The construction of three or more units within a building, where permitted, shall comply with the
standards of this subsection. Multi-family housing includes college residence halls.
1. A multi-family housing unit is also a subdivision; however, the planning board may choose to perform the
subdivision and conditional use reviews jointly.
2. Multi-family buildings shall meet all of the dimensional standards of Section 6.5 of this Ordinance, as well as
performance standards in Articles 7 and 8.
3. If a multi-family building is not located on a public sewer system, the developer shall reserve an undeveloped
area of sufficient size and suitability for a replacement subsurface wastewater disposal system.
4. A multi-family development of four (4) or more units shall designate a minimum of three thousand (3,000)
square feet of open space for the recreational use of the tenants. The open space may be developed with
benches, tables, walkways, playground equipment or similar structures.
D. Mobile Home Parks: Mobile home parks are permitted in all districts except Main Street (MS), Urban Residential
(UR), and Rural (RU). In all district where permitted, the establishment of a mobile home park shall be reviewed as a
subdivision.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Ordinance, dimensional standards for mobile home parks shall be as
provided in 30-A MRSA §4358(3) “Regulation of Mobile Home Parks.”
9.12 Overnight Accommodations
A. All facilities intended for short-term stay and designed and constructed without individual kitchen facilities (except for
Bed and Breakfast) are subject to the following requirements:
1. No part of any building shall be closer than sixty (60) feet to the front lot line, rear lot line, or either side line of
such lot. Buffer requirements of Section 7.3 of this Ordinance shall be observed.
2. Except as provided in subsections B and C, below, each rental unit shall contain not less than two hundred (200)
square feet of habitable floor area enclosed by walls and roof exclusive of any adjoining portions of roofed or
covered walkways; each sleeping room shall not be less than twelve by fifteen (12X15) feet horizontal
dimensions, exclusive of bath; and each unit shall include private bathroom facilities..
3. For each building or lot, one dwelling unit may be provided for a resident owner, manager, or other responsible
staff person.
4. If not located on a public sewer system, the developer shall reserve an undeveloped area of sufficient size and
suitability for a replacement subsurface wastewater disposal system.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 53
5. Each rental room shall be equipped with approved, hardwired smoke and CO detectors.
B. Bed and Breakfast facilities shall comply with the following:
1. The application for permit shall include a scale drawing of the lot showing the location of: existing buildings,
existing and proposed parking, and existing and proposed sewage disposal system.
2. In addition to parking required by section 8.2.C of this ordinance, two spaces shall be provided for the dwelling
unit.
3. There shall be at least one (1) bathroom for the rental rooms, in addition to the bathroom for the dwelling unit.
4. Each rental room shall have not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
C. Guest Houses, lodging houses, boarding houses, room rentals shall comply with the following standards:
1. Guest houses are generally considered to be conversions from pre-existing single-family homes. A “new” guest
house is technically a motel. Therefore, there should be no new external construction to increase the size of the
structure to accommodate the use other than necessary to meet fire egress or handicapped accessibility codes.
2. The water and sewage facilities meet all existing laws and codes for the increased demand.
3. One parking space shall be provided for every room to be rented, in addition to two for the original dwelling unit.
D. Hotel, motel or cottage units with self-contained kitchen and toilet facilities or otherwise designated as housekeeping
accommodations are considered to be dwelling units and shall meet all applicable standards of this ordinance. In
addition, the creation of three or more units may be subject to review under the Town of Fairfield Subdivision
Ordinance.
9.13 Professional Offices in the Urban Residential (UR) District
Within the UR District, professional offices may be established, subject to the following standards:
A. New professional offices shall be located only within existing buildings, in order to retain the essential character of the
neighborhood. No use projected to generate more than sixty (60) vehicle trips per day will be permitted.
B. Exterior alterations shall be minimized and shall be similar to the original architectural style of the building. In special
situations where a building is extremely dilapidated and structurally unsound, the Planning Board may approve plans
to replace the existing building with a new building designed to be consistent in scale and appearance with other
buildings in the neighborhood. The Board may seek the recommendation of a recognized architectural authority
before granting permission to demolish.
C. Parking for professional offices shall be located to the side or rear of the building, and shall be screened from view
from abutting residential properties.
D. All outdoor lighting shall be directed in such a manner as to avoid "overspill" onto abutting residential properties, or
glare into the street.
9.14 Recreational Facilities
All public and private recreation facilities shall meet the standards below, as appropriate:
A. There shall be provided adequate off-street parking for the anticipated maximum attendance at any event.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 54
B. If the facility is an outdoor venue, containers and facilities for rubbish collection and removal shall be provided, as well
as sufficient sanitary facilities. Fixed-location sanitary facilities shall comply with the Maine Plumbing Code.
C. Adequate screening, buffer area, or landscape provisions shall be built, planted, or maintained, to protect adjacent
residences from adverse noise, light, dust, smoke, and visual impact.
D. The facility shall not create a traffic hazard due to the intermittent nature of peak traffic flow. The Police Department
shall review the location and access and provide its comments to the Planning Board prior to or at the public hearing.
9.15 Schools, Colleges, Churches, Fraternal Organizations, and Non-Profit Clubs
Public and private schools, colleges, religious and fraternal organizations, and non-profit clubs shall meet the
provisions below.
A. Buffering and screening shall be provided as if a commercial use in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.3 of
this ordinance.
B. No principal building shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from a property line.
9.16 Storage Containers
Storage containers placed into use after the effective date of this ordinance may only be located and utilized in
accordance with the following standards. Containers placed into use prior to the effective date of this ordinance may
remain but shall be replaced in accordance with the standards of this section if deemed unsafe or hazardous by the
Code Enforcement Officer.
A. Temporary Use. A storage container may be used for no more than sixty (60) days per calendar year under the
following conditions:
1. An application to use a temporary storage container shall be submitted to the Town prior to the commencement of
the intended use. The application shall be processed as a Permit by Rule.
2. No more than three (3) containers shall be located on a property;
3. Containers shall be placed within the required front and side yard setbacks, unless the Code Enforcement Officer
determines in writing that such placement is not feasible;
4. Containers shall not displace parking required to be provided for the land use on the lot and will not be placed so
as to create vehicle or pedestrian hazards;
5. Containers shall be structurally sound, with no visible rust or holes, sharp edges, damaged sheathing or other
defects which could endanger public health or safety;
B. Non-temporary Storage Containers. Storage containers intended to be in use for longer than sixty (60) days shall be
used under the following conditions:
1. Containers are considered to be accessory to the principal use of the property and subject to permitting as such.
If there is no development of the property at the time the containers are placed, the use is presumed to be
warehousing and regulated accordingly.
2. Maximum dimensions for a storage container are fourteen (14) feet in width, fifty five (55) feet in length, and nine
(9) feet in height.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 55
3. Containers shall comply with all required setbacks and other dimensional standards.
4. Containers shall not displace parking required to be provided for the land use on the lot and will not be placed so
as to create vehicle or pedestrian hazards;
5. The exterior sheathing of the container will contain no signs or advertising material;
6. Containers shall be structurally sound, with no visible rust or holes, sharp edges, damaged sheathing or other
defects which could endanger public health or safety
9.17 Solar Energy Systems
The standards in this section apply to all Solar Energy Systems (SES) except those that are accessory to a previouslyestablished
principal use:
1. Layout, design and installation shall conform to applicable industry standards, such as those of the American
National Standards (ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories (UL), the American Society for Testing and Materials
(ASTM), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), Solar Rating and Certification Corporation
(SRCC), Electrical Testing Laboratory(ETL),Florida Solar Energy Center (FSEC) or other similar certifying
organizations, and shall comply with MUBEC, and with all other applicable fire and life safety requirements. The
manufacturer specifications for the key components of the system shall be submitted as part of the application.
2. The owner of a SES shall provide the CEO written confirmation that the public utility company to which the SES
will be connected has been informed of the customer’s intent to install a grid connected system. The owner shall
provide a copy of the final inspection report and connection approval from the utility company to the CEO prior to
the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the SES.
3. All on-site utility transmission lines and plumbing shall be placed underground. If, however, the applicant can
demonstrate that this would not be feasible, this requirement may be waived.
4. The SES shall be situated to eliminate concentrated glare onto nearby structures or roadways.
5. Ground mounted SES shall be screened from any adjacent property that is residentially zoned or used for
residential purposes. The screen shall consist of a vegetative barrier which provides a visual screen. In lieu of a
planting screen, a fence that provides visual screening may be used.
6. The surface area of the arrays of a ground mounted SES, regardless of the mounted angle of any solar panels,
shall not be considered impervious surface for purposes of a stormwater management plan.
7. All ground mounted SES rated in excess of ten (10) kw shall be completely enclosed by chain link fencing that
consists of a minimum eight (8) foot high fence with a locking gate. A clearly visible warning sign shall be placed
at the base of all pad-mounted transformers and substations and on the fence surrounding the SES informing
individuals of potential voltage hazards.
8. Access drives shall be maintained to allow for maintenance and emergency management vehicles. At a minimum,
drives must be twelve (12) feet wide and surfaced with a fifteen (15) inch thick gravel base.
9. The SES must be properly maintained and be kept free from all hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring,
loose fastenings, being in an unsafe condition or detrimental to public health, safety or general welfare.
10. The SES owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the
Fire Chief. Upon request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an
emergency response plan. A key box shall be used to allow emergency service access. All means of shutting
down the solar energy system shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 56
for public inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
9.18 Waste and Scrap Storage and Processing
Waste, scrap storage, and processing facilities are subject to the provisions of 38 MRSA, chapter 13 Waste
Management, including separate licensing provisions, and shall meet the following standards in addition to those in
Articles 7 and 8 of this ordinance:
A. Location
1. No waste scrap storage or processing facility shall be located in a sand and gravel aquifer or an aquifer recharge
area, as mapped by the Maine Geological Survey or a qualified hydrogeologist.
2. No waste, scrap storage, or processing facility shall be located within the one hundred (100) year floodplain, as it
appears on federal Flood Insurance Rate Maps on file at the town office.
B. Supplementary Submission Requirements
1. All applications for a Conditional Use Permit shall in addition to the basic submission requirements, be
accompanied by all required state permits or licenses and the following information:
a. A written statement of the proposed operating procedure and working hours.
b. Evidence of adequate insurance liability arising from the proposed operations, to be maintained throughout
the period of operation.
2. The Planning Board may require the additional submission of a hydrogeological study to determine the effects of
the proposed activity on groundwater and quality within the area.
C. Performance Standards
1. The hours of operation shall be limited as the Planning Board deems advisable to ensure operational compatibility
with nearby residences.
2. Storm drainage and water courses shall leave the location at the original natural drainage points and in a manner
such that the amount of drainage at any point is not significantly increased.
3. Safe and healthful conditions shall be maintained within and about the proposed use.
9.19 Wind Energy Generation Facilities (WEGF)
A. Supplementary Submission Requirements
In addition to the submission requirements of section 3.4.B, applications for Wind Energy Generation Facilities (WEGF)
shall contain the following information:
i) A map and description of the route to be used for transporting personnel and materials to the development site;
ii) Documentation of pre- and post-construction sound levels at the property boundaries;
iii) A plan and description of connections to the utility grid, if one is proposed, together with the form of a connection
agreement between the applicant and the utility;
iv) A decommissioning plan, together with a proposal for a performance guarantee for decommissioning costs.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 57
B. General Standards
The following standards apply to both residential and commercial WEGF.
1. Setback: The tower of the WEGF shall be placed a horizontal distance no closer than 1.5 times the height of the
tower to any adjoining property boundary, easement or right-of-way, or to any residential structure other than that
of the applicant.
2. Height: The WEGF tower structure shall not exceed 175 feet in height (excluding blades). The purpose of this
limitation is to forestall the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirement for the tower to be lighted. If at
some time in the future, the FAA requirement is amended, the planning board may modify this requirement.
3. Sound Levels: No WEGF shall produce sound at any property boundary that exceeds thirty-five (35) decibels
(dBA) between dusk and dawn, and forty (40) decibels (dBA) at other times, or five (5) decibels (dBA) above preconstruction
levels at any time, whichever is greater. Permissible sound levels may be exceeded during shortterm
(12 hours or less) weather events.
No WEGF shall produce low-level (dBC) sound above background levels at any property boundary.
4. Design:
a. Any tower stays or guy wires shall have safety coverings extending from the ground to at least fifteen (15)
feet above ground level.
b. The WEGF shall be equipped with both manual and automatic overspeed controls.
c. The WEGF shall be designed and constructed to prevent disruption to radio, television, cable, wireless, or
internet connections or similar signals beyond the site.
d. The tower shall contain no step-bolts or ladder structure within twenty-five (25) feet of the ground surface, to
deter unauthorized access.
e. All materials in the WEGF shall be non-reflective to minimize visual disruption.
f. Electrical wiring associated with the WEGF shall be installed underground, except as needed to transition to
the utility grid. Transition points shall be enclosed in rigid conduit.
g. The tower shall not be lighted unless required by the FAA. If the FAA approves or requires technological
upgrades to lighting systems, they shall be installed by the operator within one hundred eighty (180) days of
the effective date of the rule.
h. The minimum distance between the lowest point of a blade in a horizontal-axis system and the ground shall
be fifteen (15) feet. The minimum distance between the lowest point of a blade in a horizontal-axis system
and any other structure shall be eight (8) feet.
C. Standards for Facilities over 50 kw
1. Shadow flicker: Shadow flicker shall be limited to the site of the facility at all times.
2. Use of Public Roads: The Applicant shall identify all state and local public roads to be used to transport
equipment and parts for construction, operation or maintenance. The applicant shall retain a third-party engineer
acceptable to the Town to document road conditions prior to construction and again thirty (30) days after
construction is complete or as weather permits. Any road damage caused by the Applicant or its contractors
shall be promptly repaired at the Applicant’s expense.
The Applicant shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Town that it has financial resources sufficient to comply
with this requirement. The Town may require the Applicant to post a performance guarantee in order to ensure
such compliance.
3. Access: All ground-mounted electrical and control equipment and all access to the WEGF tower shall be labelled
and secured to prevent unauthorized access.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 58
4. Wildlife Habitat: The design and operation of the WEGF shall minimize interference with flying wildlife patterns to
the extent possible. The creation of artificial habitat for raptors or raptor prey shall be minimized. Bird flight
diverters shall be installed on any guy wires.
5. Decommissioning/Abandonment: The applicant shall provide a plan for removal or replacement of the WEGF at
such point as it is no longer in operation. “No longer in operation” means that the facility is not producing
electricity into the grid. The decommissioning plan shall show that work to remove or replace the WEGF shall
commence within six (6) months of the time when it is no longer in operation and conclude within two (2) years.
The plan shall estimate costs and provide a means for paying that cost.
If a WEGF is not in operation for a period of at least six (6) months, the Town may declare the facility abandoned
and shall order its removal. If the facility has not been removed within ninety (90) days of such order, the Town
shall contract to remove the tower and assess the cost to the property owner, said cost to become a lien against
the property.
6. Emergency Services: The wind turbine shall be equipped with an appropriate fire suppression system to attack
fires within the nacelle portion of the turbine. The applicant shall develop a coordinated emergency response
plan in coordination with the fire chief and Somerset County Sherriff’s Office. The plan shall include means and
equipment necessary to respond to emergencies at ground-level facilities on the site.
9.20 Adult Use Marijuana Businesses
Marijuana is illegal under the federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. §§801 et seq. State and local regulations
do not preempt federal law. Cultivation, processing, sales, and possession of marijuana is illegal under federal law
and those who engage in such activities do so at their own risk of criminal prosecution under federal law. Local zoning
in the Town of Fairfield Land Use Ordinance and other regulations are not a defense against a violation of federal law.
By enacting this section 9.20 Adult Use Marijuana Businesses in the Fairfield Land Use Ordinance the Town of
Fairfield does not intend to encourage or promote the establishment of any business or operation, or the commitment
of any act, that constitutes or may constitute a violation of state or federal law.
Prohibition
No adult use marijuana businesses may be established in the Town of Fairfield until such time as the Maine State
licensing authority, as defined in M.R.S.A. Title 28-B, has adopted final rules for the proper licensing, regulation and
control of the cultivation, manufacture, distribution, sale, and testing of adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana
products.
A. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act, M.R.S.A. Title 28-
B which authorizes the licensing and regulation of adult use marijuana businesses and affords municipalities the
option to determine whether or not to allow adult use marijuana businesses within their municipality. It is further
intended that the purpose of these regulations is to: Regulate the conduct of persons owning, operating, and using
adult use marijuana businesses in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and establish a
nondiscriminatory mechanism by which the Town of Fairfield appropriately regulates the location and operation of
adult use retail marijuana stores, adult use marijuana cultivation facilities, adult use marijuana products
manufacturing facilities, or adult use marijuana testing facilities. Adult use marijuana social clubs are prohibited in the
Town of Fairfield.
Adoption of State Statutory Provisions and State Administrative Regulations: Except where the provisions set forth
under this Section 9.20 of the Fairfield Land Use Ordinance are inconsistent with or differ from the Maine Marijuana
Legalization Act, M.R.S.A. Title 28-B, as may be amended from time to time, relating to adult use marijuana facilities,
all of the provisions of the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act are hereby adopted by reference and apply to all
conditional use applications received and permits issued by the Fairfield Planning Board. If there is a conflict between
the provisions of this section and the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act, M.R.S.A. Title 28-B, the stricter provisions will
control to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law. The Planning Board may impose such reasonable terms and
conditions on conditional use permits for adult use marijuana facilities as may be necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare, and obtain compliance with the Fairfield Land Use Ordinance, the Maine Marijuana
Legalization Act, the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC), the State of Maine Fire and Life Safety
Codes, the State of Maine Plumbing and Electrical Codes and must obtain a food establishment license, pursuant to
M.R.S.A. 22, §2167, prior to preparing edible goods containing adult use marijuana.
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 59
The terms used in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to them in the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act,
M.R.S.A. Title28-B, as may be amended from time to time, and such definitions are hereby incorporated into the
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance by reference.
Only adult use marijuana businesses specifically authorized under these provisions are permitted. All other adult use
marijuana businesses are prohibited. Adult use marijuana social clubs are prohibited in the Town of Fairfield.
B. No Town Liability
By operating an adult use marijuana business pursuant to a conditional use permit issued by the Fairfield
Planning Board, and an annual Town of Fairfield Adult Use Marijuana municipal license issued by the Municipal
Officers, a permit holder releases the Town of Fairfield, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees,
attorneys and agents from any liability for injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or
prosecution of the licensee or permit holder, its owners, operators, employees, clients or customers for a violation
of any state or federal law, rule or regulations related to marijuana, or from forced closure of the licensed
premises because the Maine Adult Use Marijuana Legalization Act M.R.S.A. Title 28-B is found to be invalid
under any applicable law, including but not limited to Federal law. As part of the conditional use permit application
and the Town of Fairfield Adult Use Marijuana municipal license application for an adult use marijuana facility in
the Town of Fairfield, an applicant shall sign and submit a waiver that states the following:
1. By applying for and accepting a Conditional Use Permit issued by the Fairfield Planning Board, and an
annual Town of Fairfield Adult Use Marijuana municipal license issued by the Municipal Officers, the
permit holder waives and releases the Town of Fairfield, its officers, elected and appointed officials,
employees, attorneys and agents from any liability for injuries, damages or liabilities of any kind that result
from any arrest or prosecution of business owners, operators, employees, clients or customers for a
violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations.
2. By applying for and accepting a Conditional Use Permit, and an annual Town of Fairfield Adult Use
Marijuana municipal license all permit holders, jointly and severally if more than one agree to indemnify,
defend, and hold harmless the Town of Fairfield, its officers, elected and appointed officials, employees,
attorneys and agents against all liability, claims and demands on account of any injury, sickness, disease,
death, property loss or damage, or any other loss of any kind whatsoever arising out of or in any manner
connected with the operation of the adult use marijuana business that is subject of the conditional use
permit and an annual Town of Fairfield adult use marijuana municipal license.
C. Conditional Use Permit Required
No person, firm, or corporation may operate a retail adult use marijuana store facility, an adult use marijuana
cultivation facility, an adult use marijuana products manufacturing facility, or an adult use marijuana testing
facility, without a valid Conditional Use Permit issued by the Town of Fairfield Planning Board, and an annual
adult use marijuana municipal license issued by the Municipal Officers, and an adult use marijuana license issued
from the State of Maine Licensing Authority. A person, firm or corporation seeking to obtain a conditional use
permit from the Town of Fairfield shall file an application with the Town of Fairfield Planning Board in accordance
with the requirements set forth in Town of Fairfield Land Use Ordinance. A Conditional Use Permit application
must be made on an Adult Use Marijuana application form provided by the Town of Fairfield. The Town of
Fairfield Conditional Use Permit is a revocable privilege subject to the will and scrutiny of local authorities. Each
Conditional Use Permit is separate and distinct. A separate Conditional Use Permit application shall be required
for each specific adult use marijuana business type and for each geographic location.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended nor shall be construed to authorize or approve medical marijuana collective
gardening or medical marijuana cooperatives. Operation of a retail adult use marijuana facility without a
Conditional Use Permit issued by the Fairfield Planning Board and an annual adult use marijuana municipal
license issued by the Municipal Officers and an adult use marijuana license issued from the State of Maine
Licensing Authority, is a violation of the Fairfield Land Use Ordinance and will be prosecuted as such.
D. General Provisions
1. Restrictions on where an adult use marijuana facility can locate.
Pursuant to the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act M.R.S.A. Title 28, with a Conditional Use Permit, the Town of
Fairfield is allowing adult use marijuana retail stores, adult use marijuana cultivation facilities, adult use
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 60
marijuana products manufacturing facilities and adult use marijuana testing facilities in the Town of Fairfield and
these facilities shall only be permitted to locate in the Village (V), Commercial (C), Industrial (I) and Rural (RU)
land use districts, in accordance with all applicable provisions set forth in section 9.20 of the Fairfield Land Use
Ordinance, the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act M.R.S.A. Title 28-B and all other applicable codes and
regulations, including but not limited to the Maine Uniform Building and Energy Code (MUBEC), the State of
Maine Fire and Life Safety Codes, the State of Maine Plumbing and Electrical Codes and a State of Maine food
establishment license, pursuant to M.R.S.A. 22, §2167, prior to preparing edible goods containing adult use
marijuana.
2. A separate Conditional Use Permit application and fee must be submitted for each type adult use marijuana
facility to the Town of Fairfield Planning Board.
3. Adult use marijuana social clubs are prohibited in the Town of Fairfield.
4. Applications; issuance for adult use retail marijuana store facilities in the Town of Fairfield shall be in accordance
with provisions of the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act M.R.S.A. Title 28-B, and the Town of Fairfield Land Use
Ordinance. The Town of Fairfield Planning Board may not grant more than one adult use marijuana retail store
facility permit in the Town of Fairfield to any one applicant or entity.
Adult use marijuana facility applications must be deemed complete by the Planning Board Clerk before the
applications are presented to the Planning Board for review.
5. Adult use marijuana facilities proximity to other land uses: The distance limitations established by this section
shall control the location of all adult use marijuana facilities in the Town of Fairfield. Distances shall be computed
by direct measurement from the nearest property line of the land use listed below to the nearest portion of the
building or area of outdoor cultivation of an adult use marijuana facility. Distances shall be verified by the
applicant and confirmed by the Fairfield Code Enforcement Officer. Each adult use marijuana facility shall be
operated from a permanent location. No adult use marijuana facility shall be permitted to operate from a movable,
mobile or transitory location. At a minimum, no adult use marijuana facility shall be located within the following
distances from the specified land uses listed below:
a. 500 feet of any existing public or private school grades Pre-K through 12, or existing licensed childcare
facility, public library, or any public parks and public playgrounds designated as drug free safe zones by
the Town of Fairfield in accordance with M.R.S.A. Title 17-A, §1101 (23);
b. 500 feet from any existing halfway house;
c. 500 feet from any existing drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility;
d. 500 feet from any houses or worship;
e. 500 feet from any other adult use marijuana retail store facility.
The suitability of the location for an adult use marijuana facility shall be determined at the time of the issuance of
the conditional use permit for such business. The fact that changes in the neighborhood that occur after the
issuance of the Conditional Use Permit might render the site unsuitable for an adult use marijuana facility under
this section shall not be grounds to suspend, revoke or refuse such adult use marijuana facility to continue doing
business in this location.
6. Adult use marijuana facilities shall not be allowed as a home occupation as defined within Article 2, 2.2
Definitions, of the Fairfield Land Use Ordinance.
Adult use marijuana shall not be sold from any residential unit nor shall adult use marijuana be grown in or on any
portion of residential property with the intent to sell. Residential personal adult use marijuana cultivation shall be
conducted in accordance with the Maine Marijuana Legalization Act M.R.S.A. Title28-B, Chapter 3. Personal use
of adult use marijuana is for personal use only and shall not be sold and shall not be given away and/or gifted for
a donation and/or for shipping/delivery fees, or any remuneration shall be accepted from a consumer for personal
use grown adult use marijuana or for personal use adult use marijuana infused products.
7. Hours of operation.
An adult use marijuana retail store facility may open no earlier than 8:00am and shall close no later than 8:00pm,
Monday through Sunday. No sale of adult use marijuana may occur upon the premises between the hours of
8:00pm and 8:00am.
8. No Giveaways:
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 61
Adult use marijuana facilities may not distribute adult use marijuana or adult use marijuana infused products free
of charge to a consumer. Adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana infused products shall not be given away
free and/or gifted for a donation and/or for shipping/delivery fees to be accepted from a consumer. The use,
consumption, ingestion or inhalation of marijuana or marijuana infused products on or within the premises of an
adult use marijuana store facility, adult use marijuana cultivation facility, or an adult use marijuana products
manufacturing facility is prohibited.
9. Direct Sales.
All retail sales of adult use marijuana or adult use marijuana infused products at adult use retail marijuana stores
must be made in person, directly to the consumer/purchaser that has been verified to be twenty-one (21) years of
age or older. No sales of adult use marijuana may be made by telephone, internet, or other means of remote
purchase, no deliveries. No sales of adult use marijuana or adult use marijuana infused products shall be made
to a person that is or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or under the influence of any controlled
substance, including marijuana. The use, consumption, ingestion or inhalation of adult use marijuana or adult use
marijuana infused products on or within the premises of a retail adult use marijuana store facility, adult use
marijuana cultivation facility or adult use marijuana products manufacturing facility is prohibited.
10. Disposal of adult use marijuana waste shall be stored, secured, and managed in accordance with the Maine
Marijuana Legalization Act MRSA Title 28-B, in effect and as amended from time to time hereinafter.
11. Persons prohibited from applying for adult use marijuana facility conditional use permits:
a. Any person until all state adult use marijuana licenses and fees have been paid;
b. Any natural person under twenty-one (21) years of age;
c. Any person who fails to remedy outstanding delinquent state and local taxes;
d. Any person who’s license for a medical or adult use marijuana business in another town, city, county or
state has been revoked;
e. Any person who is not a resident of Maine;
f. Any person who has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement on his or her application; and
g. Any person who has pending Town of Fairfield Land Use Ordinance violations.
12. Odor Control at adult use marijuana facilities.
The applicant will submit a detailed report on the effective mitigation of any marijuana odors of the proposed
operation. Such report shall include proof that the design plan for the purification of air and odor for indoor adult
use marijuana facilities shall be prepared and installed by a professional mechanical contracting company to
show ventilation systems will properly filter marijuana odors. If any complaints are received, conditional use
permit holders for adult use marijuana facilities will rectify air quality marijuana odor concerns immediately.
Unresolved air quality marijuana odor complaints may be the basis for legal action in accordance with section 3.8
of the Land use Ordinance and failure to correct violations may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the
Fairfield Conditional Use Permit.
13. All cultivation, production, storage, display, testing and sales of adult use marijuana and adult use marijuana
infused products must not be visible from the exterior of the property.
For the purposes of this section, greenhouse cultivation shall be deemed to occur within a building. The
greenhouse or outdoor cultivation area must have proper buffering, screening or fencing so its contents are not
visible from any property line or public road.
14. Issuance of a Conditional Use Permit.
Upon approval of each application the Town of Fairfield Planning Board shall provide the applicant with one (1)
original Conditional Use Permit for each adult use marijuana facility to be operated by the applicant. Each such
copy shall show the name and address of the permit holder, the type of the facility for which it is issued, and the
address of the facility at which it is to be displayed. Each conditional use permit shall be limited to use at the
premises on the application for such permit. The conditional use permit remains valid as long as there is no
change in use or change in ownership of the of the adult use marijuana facility.
Change of use or transfer of ownership of a permitted adult use marijuana facility shall be cause for a new
Conditional Use Permit application to be filed with the Fairfield Planning Board at least thirty (30) days prior to the
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 62
anticipated change. The Planning Board will review the change of use or transfer of ownership of the Conditional
Use Permit, at which time new conditions of approval may be applied to the new permit issued by the Town of
Fairfield Planning Board. The current owners of a Conditional Use Permit adult use marijuana facility retain full
responsibility of the permitted adult use marijuana facility until the new ownership Conditional Use application is
approved in writing by the Town of Fairfield Planning Board and by the State licensing authority.
Change in location of a permitted adult use marijuana facility shall be cause for a new application to be filed with
the Fairfield Planning Board at least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated change in location. A permitee
wishing to change the location of its adult use marijuana facility shall submit a new Conditional Use Permit to the
Fairfield Planning Board. Such application shall meet the requirements for a new Conditional Use Permit in the
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance.
15. Hazardous chemicals storage and disposal of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and any other hazardous
chemicals associated with the cultivation of marijuana shall comply with all local, state, and federal laws.
A Conditional Use Permit application for review of any adult use marijuana cultivation facility shall include a floor
plan showing the location of the storage of such chemicals and shall be subject to review and approval by the
Fire Chief.
16. Signage and advertising.
All signage and advertising for adult use marijuana facilities shall comply with applicable State of Maine signage
laws as well as the provisions of section 8.3 of the Town of Fairfield Land Use Ordinance. Adult use marijuana
facility signs shall not be attractive to children.
17. Required Notices.
There shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each adult use marijuana store, cultivation, and manufacturing
facility, a legible sign containing the following warnings:
a. that the use of marijuana or marijuana infused products may impair a person’s ability to drive a motor
vehicle or operate machinery, and that it is illegal under Maine Law to drive a motor vehicle when under
the influence of or impaired by marijuana;
b. that loitering in or around an adult use retail marijuana facility is prohibited;
c. that no one under the age of twenty-one (21) years is permitted on the premises;
d. possession and distribution of marijuana is a violation of federal law;
e. no onsite consumption or use of marijuana; and
f. no giveaways and/or gifts: no distribution of adult use marijuana or adult use marijuana infused products
given free of charge to a consumer.
18. Security requirements at adult use marijuana facilities shall comply with all requirements of the State of Maine
and shall include at a minimum the following:
a. security surveillance cameras installed to monitor all entrances, and the common areas of the adult use
marijuana facility, to discourage and facilitate the reporting of criminal acts and nuisance activities
occurring at the adult use marijuana facility, and all security recordings shall be preserved for at least 90
days by the adult use marijuana facility and be made available to law enforcement upon request for
inspection, these recordings shall be continuously backed-up to both on-site and a secure, off-site
location;
b. robbery and burglary alarm systems which are professionally monitored and maintained in good working
condition;
c. a locking safe permanently affixed to the premises that is suitable for storage of all cash stored at the
adult use marijuana facility;
d. exterior lighting that illuminates the exterior entrances and walls of the adult use marijuana facility and
complies with the provisions of section 7.5 of the Town of Fairfield Land Use Ordinance.
e. access to any marijuana cultivation facility that is located in the same building as an adult use marijuana
store facility or an adult use marijuana products manufacturing facility shall be secured so as to render
the cultivation facility inaccessible to any unauthorized persons at all times.
19. Inspection and compliance.
Inspection of the adult use marijuana facility is required after approval of the Conditional Use Permit. When the
building in which the adult use marijuana facility is completed in accordance with the plans submitted and
Fairfield Land Use Ordinance page 63
approved by the Planning Board for a conditional use permit, the premises will be inspected for occupancy by the
Code Enforcement Officer and Fire Chief, to determine compliance with the conditional use permit, building and
life safety codes. Throughout the term of the Town of Fairfield Conditional Use Permit for an adult use marijuana
facility, the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Chief, and Law Enforcement may inspect the permitted premises to
determine continuing compliance with the building and life safety codes and state and local laws and rules.
20. Public Nuisance.
If a violation of the Fairfield Land Use Ordinance or conditions applied to an adult use marijuana facility
Conditional Use Permit is declared to be a public nuisance per se, and, in addition to any other remedy provided
by law or equity, the violation may be abated by the Town of Fairfield under the applicable provisions of this
Ordinance or State Law.
21. Adult use Marijuana Municipal License required.
In addition to a Conditional Use Permit, an adult use marijuana facility shall obtain a separate annual adult use
Marijuana Municipal License subject to an annual public hearing, for each type of adult use marijuana facility,
from the Town of Fairfield, Municipal Officers. It is recommended that applicants familiarize themselves with the
Town of Fairfield Land Use Ordinance relating to adult use marijuana facilities, as well as building codes and
state licensing regulations before they complete an application and submit the fee to the Town of Fairfield. The
Adult Use Marijuana Municipal License is not transferable, and a new license must be obtained from the
Municipal Officers for a change of ownership or a change in location. The applicable adult use marijuana
business license fee shall be set forth in the Town of Fairfield fee schedule, and approved by the Town of
Fairfield Municipal Officers, as amended from time to time. The annual adult marijuana business license fee is
non-refundable.
22. All adult use marijuana businesses shall obtain all necessary building, electrical, and plumbing permits for any
portion of the structure that contains electrical wiring, light and/or watering devices that support the cultivation of
and or resale of adult use marijuana.
Skowhegan Rd
Norridgewock Rd
Ridge Rd
Middle Rd
Green Rd
Martin Stream Rd
Ohio Hill Rd
Covell Rd
I-95
Main St
Center Rd
Davis Rd
Back Rd
Six Rod Rd
Oakland Rd
Pirate Ln
High St
Horn Hill Rd
Ten Lots Rd
Western Ave
Nyes Corner Dr
Joy Rd
West St
Gagnon Rd
Savage St
Wood St
Howe Rd
Elm St
Eskelund Dr
Bray Ave
Water St
Burrill St
Page Ter
Summit St
Old County Rd
Bear Mountain Rd
Burns St
Maple St
Sheridan Dr
Industrial Rd
Bickford Dr
Currier Rd
Adams Rd
Silver St
Kennebec St
Archer Rd
Cottage St
Faiths Way
Mountain Ave
Nash Ln
Military Ave
Island Ave
Pratt Rd
Brown Ln
Maes Way
Bridge St
Williams St
Old Norridgewock Rd
Osborne St
Hardwood Ln
Kelle y St
Robinson St
School St
Bulldog Dr
Townsend Rd
Pike Dr
Mill St
Forest Ln
Newhall St
Breton Hill Rd
Willow St
Park St
Dirigo Dr
Old Pung Hill Rd
Bunker Ave
Montcalm St
Gibson St
Fairwood Dr
Lawren ce Ave
Bartlett St
Hutchins Rd
Hebert Ln
Gould Dr
Ricker St
Cayer Ln
Samara Ln
Bigelow Hill Rd
Church St
Trowgreen Ln
Kendall Annex Rd
Truss Ln
Kingman Rd
Sanderson Dr
N Circle Dr
Somerset Ave
Wandrup Dr
Sturtevant Dr
Great Mea dow Ln
Pellerin Pl
Franklin Dr
Sunrise Dr
Hardscrabble Ln
King St
Crane Dr
Hinckley Rd
Hatch St
Nickel St
Little Creek Ln
Evergreen Dr
Pinewood Ln
Skyview Dr
Grant Ln
Bard Dr
McKenzie Ave
Jane Cir
Hooper Ln
Lilac Ln
Scott Ave
Maketu Dr
Osborne Ct
Serenity Cir
Down Back Dr
Shannon Ln
Brookside Dr
Prescott Dr
Keyes St
Pamador Dr
Pu tt Ln
Jodie Ave
Henderson Ct
Liberty St
Brayley Ave
Verdun St
Violette Ln
Valley Farms Rd
Burke Ct
Shady Acres Dr
Morning Dew Dr Poulin Ln
Guerette Ln
Gerald Ter
Spruce Ln
Reds Pl
I-95
Center Rd
9
5
8
6
4
10
1
13 12
3
7
15
2
14
11
16
18
21
22
19
23
28
2A
26
29
36
25
27
33
24
35 20
31
32
17
30
34
34
Map Legend
District Designations
Zone
Residential (R)
Rural Residential (RR)
Urban Residential (UR)
Main Street (MS)
Commercial (C)
Industrial (I)
Village (V)
Rural (RU)
Roads
Ponds and Rivers
Perennial Streams
¯
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Miles
Neither KVCOG nor the Town of Fairfield assume any liability
for the data delineated herein. Boundaries depicted on this map are
for planning purposes only. Boundary data is based on digital sources
and may differ from ground-based observations.
Data Sources: Maine Office of GIS, Maine DOT
Created 10-2019 by JG
Town of Fairfield
LAND USE DISTRICT MAP
Somerset County, Maine
This is the Official Map of the Land Use Ordinance of the
Town of Fairfield, incorporating sheets labeled "Detail A"
and "Detail B".
Date of Amendment: __________________________________
Signature of Town Clerk: ____________________________
AMENDMENTS: October 2019
PAGE 1
Town of Fairfield • Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance
TOWN OF FAIRFIELD
LOCAL FOOD AND COMMUNITY SELF-GOVERNANCE ORDINANCE
Table of Contents
Article Number Article Page
1 Title 2
2 Purpose 2
3 Definitions 3
4 Authority 3
5 Statements of Law 4
6 Civil Enforcement 4
7 Effect 4
8 Severability Clause 4
9 Repealer 4
10 Human Rights and Constitutionality 4
The effective adoptive date of this Ordinance is the 24th day of October 2018.
Amendments:
A True Copy I Attest:
_________________
Town Clerk
Town Seal
PAGE 2
Town of Fairfield • Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance
1. Title
This ordinance, adopted by the town of Fairfield (hereinafter “the Town”), shall be known and may be
cited as the “Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance.”
Preamble
We, the People of the Town have the right to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume local foods
thus promoting self-reliance, the preservation of family farms, and local food traditions. We recognize
that family farms; sustainable agricultural practices; and food processing by individuals, families, and
non-corporate entities offer stability to our rural way of life by enhancing the economic, environmental,
and social wealth of our community. We recognize the authority to protect that right as belonging to the
Town.
We have faith in our citizens’ ability to educate themselves and make informed decisions. We hold that
certain federal and state regulations unnecessarily impede local food production and constitute a
usurpation of our citizens’ right to foods of their choice. We support food that fundamentally respects
human dignity and health; nourishes individuals and the community; and sustains producers, processors,
and the environment. We are therefore duty bound under the Constitution of the State of Maine to protect
and promote reasonably unimpeded access to local foods.
All individuals have a natural, inherent, and unalienable right to acquire, produce, process, prepare,
preserve, and consume the food of their own choosing for their own nourishment and sustenance.
Furthermore, all individuals have a right to barter, trade, and purchase food and to save and exchange
seed from the sources of their own choosing for their own physical health and well-being. Every
individual is fully responsible for the exercise of these rights, which may not be infringed.
2. Purpose
It is the policy of this State to encourage food self-sufficiency for its citizens. The purpose of the Local
Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance is to:
A. Through local control, preserve the ability of individuals and communities to save and exchange
seed, to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume locally produced foods;
B. Ensure the preservation of family farms and traditional food ways through small-scale farming,
food production.
C. Improve the health and well-being of citizens of this State by reducing hunger and increasing
food security through unimpeded access to wholesome, nutritious foods by encouraging
ecological farming;
D. Promote self-reliance and personal responsibility by ensuring the ability of individuals, families
and other entities to prepare, process, advertise, and sell foods directly to customers intended
solely for consumption by the customers or their families;
E. Enhance rural economic development and the environmental and social wealth of rural
communities; and
PAGE 3
Town of Fairfield • Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance
F. Protect access to local food through direct producer-to-consumer transactions.
3. Definitions
As used in this ordinance, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following terms have the meanings
stated below:
A. DIRECT PRODUCER-TO-CONSUMER TRANSACTION: An exchange of local food between a
producer or processor and a patron by barter, trade, or purchase on the property or premises owned,
leased or rented by the producer or processor of the local food.
B. LOCAL FOOD: Any food or food product that is grown, produced, processed, or prepared by
individuals who exchange that food directly with patrons.
C. PATRON: An informed individual who acquires local food directly from a processor or producer.
D. PROCESSOR: An individual who processes or prepares products of the soil or animals for food or
drink.
E. PRODUCER: A farmer or gardener who grows or raises any plant or animal for food or drink.
4. Authority
This ordinance is adopted and enacted pursuant to the inherent, inalienable, and fundamental right of the
citizens of the Town to self-government, and under the authority recognized as belonging to the people of
the Town by all relevant state and federal laws including, but not limited to the following:
§1-A of Title 7 of the Maine Revised Statutes, which states inter alia: “The survival of the family farm
is of special concern to the people of the State, and the ability of the family farm to prosper, while
producing an abundance of high quality food and fiber, deserves a place of high priority in the
determination of public policy. For this purpose there is established the Department of Agriculture,
Forestry, and Conservation”
§1-B of Title 7 of the Maine Revised Statutes, which states inter alia: The [...] preservation of rural life
and values in the State [is] to be the joint responsibility of all public agencies, local, state and federal,
whose policies and programs substantially impact the economy and general welfare of people who reside
in rural Maine, such as the development and implementation of programs that assist in the maintenance
of family farms [...] and improve health and nutrition.
§284 of Title 7, Chapter 8-F, Maine Food Sovereignty Act, which states inter alia: “a municipality may
adopt ordinances regarding direct producer-to-consumer transactions and the State shall recognize such
ordinances by not enforcing those state food laws with respect to those direct producer-to-consumer
transactions that are governed by the ordinance.”
§3001 of Title 30-A of the Maine Revised Statutes, which implements Home Rule and grants
municipalities all powers necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Town
where those powers have been conferred on the towns by the Legislature or not otherwise limited.
PAGE 4
Town of Fairfield • Local Food and Community Self-Governance Ordinance
5. Statements of Law
A. Right to Self-Governance. Citizens of the Town have the right to a form of governance which
recognizes that all power is inherent in the people, that all free governments are founded on the
people’s authority and consent.
B. Right to Acquire and Produce Food. Citizens of the Town possess the right to save and exchange
seed and to produce, process, sell, purchase, and consume local foods of their choosing.
C. Exemption from Licensure and Inspection. The producers and processors of local food intended
for direct producer-to-consumer transactions in the Town governed by this ordinance shall be exempt
from state licensure and inspection. In accordance with Section 284 of the Maine Food Sovereignty
Act, the State of Maine shall not enforce those state food laws, rules, or regulations with respect to
those transactions as defined in Section 4. The transactions enumerated in Section 4 are governed by
this ordinance and provide the context otherwise indicated as stated in Section 282 of the Maine Food
Sovereignty Act.
D. Meat and Poultry. This ordinance is not applicable to any meat or poultry products that are required
to be produced or processed in compliance with the Maine Meat and Poultry Inspection Program.
E. Liability Protection. Producers and processors of local food may enter into private agreements with
patrons to waive any liability for the consumption of local food.
6. Civil Enforcement.
Any individual citizen of the Town shall have standing to enforce any rights secured by this ordinance
which have been threatened or contested by any person, whether natural or juridical, and may seek relief
both in the form of injunctive and compensatory relief from a court of competent jurisdiction.
7. Effect
This ordinance shall be effective immediately upon its enactment.
8. Severability Clause
To the extent any provision of this ordinance is deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
provision will be removed and the balance of the ordinance shall remain valid.
9. Repealer
All inconsistent provisions of prior ordinances adopted by the Town are hereby repealed, but only to the
extent necessary to remedy the inconsistency.
10. Human Rights and Constitutionality
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as authorizing any activities or actions that violate human
rights protected by the U.S. Constitution or the Constitution of the State of Maine.
PAID SEXUAL CONTACT ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to prohibit certain acts for paid sexual contact
within the Town of Fairfield in order to reduce the likelihood of criminal activity,
moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the
community, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. This
ordinance is adopted under the Town’s home rule powers.
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
(a) Sexual contact means any touching of the genitals or anus, directly or
through clothing, or other covering, for the purpose of arousing or gratifying
sexual desire.
(b) Pecuniary benefit means any direct or indirect payment of money or any
other object of value.
SECTION 3 SEXUAL CONTACT FOR PECUNIARY BENEFIT PROHIBITED
(a) Engaging in, or agreeing to engage in, or offering to engage in sexual contact
in return for a pecuniary benefit to be received by a person engaging in the
sexual contact or by a third person is prohibited.
(b) Providing or agreeing to provide a person for purposes of engaging in sexual
contact in return for a pecuniary benefit to be received by a person engaging in
the sexual contact or by a third person is prohibited.
(c) Causing or aiding another person to engage in sexual contact in return for a
pecuniary benefit to be received by a person engaging in the sexual contact or
by a third person is prohibited.
(d) Agreeing to pay for sexual contact is prohibited.
(e) Any person in control or possession of any place or premises, who knowingly
permits the place or premises to be used as a site for any activity prohibited in
subsections (a), (b) (c) or (d) of this ordinance commits a violation of this
ordinance.
SECTION 4 PENALTIES
The violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of not
less than five hundred dollars ($500) nor more than one thousand ($1,000) for
each offense. Each act of violation and everyday upon which any such violation
shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to such penalty, the
town may enjoin or abate any violation of this article by appropriate action,
including but not limited to revocation of any town license, following a hearin&
for a premises or business in which sexual contact for pecuniary benefit is
transacted.
SECTION 5 SEVERABILITY
If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this article is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion
shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such
holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.
If the Town prevails in an action to enforce this ordinance, or an action to enjoin
or abate any activity prohibited by this ordinance, it shall be awarded its
reasonable attorneys fees, expenses and costs incurred in the action. All fines
recovered hereunder accrue to the municipality.
Public Hearing Held October 15, 1996
Adopted October 15, 1996












0
TOWN OF FAIRFIELD PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ORDINANCE
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section .................................................................................................................. Page
1. Authority ........................................................................................................................ 1
2. Title ................................................................................................................................ 1
3. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 1
4. Required Maintenance ................................................................................................... 1
5. Grounds Maintenance Standards ................................................................................... 1
6. Maintenance After Casualty Damage ............................................................................ 2
7. Responsibilities .............................................................................................................. 3
8. Enforcement & Penalties. .............................................................................................. 4
9. Severability .................................................................................................................... 5
10. Conflict with Other Laws ............................................................................................... 5
11. Effective Date ................................................................................................................ 5
Definitions ........................................................................................................................... 6
Appendix A. General
1
SECTION 1 AUTHORITY
This ordinance is enacted pursuant to State law, Title 30-A Section 3001.
SECTION 2 TITLE
This ordinance shall be known as the “Property Maintenance Ordinance of the Town of Fairfield,
hereinafter referred to as “this ordinance”.
SECTION 3 PURPOSE
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for the
maintenance of structures and the grounds of property in order to protect public health, public
safety, property values, and to prevent nuisance conditions.
SECTION 4 REQUIRED MAINTENANCE
All grounds and structures or parts thereof shall be maintained to prevent unsafe, unsanitary
and/or nuisance conditions (according to the nuisance definition found in State law Title 17,
Section 2802 and as shown in the Appendix) and to avoid any adverse effect on the value of
adjoining properties.
SECTION 5 GROUNDS & PROPERTY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
The grounds and the exterior of structures or parts thereof shall be kept in good repair and free
from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage and any unsafe or unsanitary conditions. Such
conditions may include:
Grounds
Exterior accumulation of refuse, household trash, junk, discarded plumbing, heating
supplies, old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper/cardboard trash, rubber,
waste and all scrap iron, steel, other scrap ferrous or nonferrous material, debris, scrap
lumber and building materials, inoperable machinery or part ‘thereof, glass, used
furniture, used household items and unused and inoperable appliances.
Any places where one or more old discarded, worn out junked, unserviceable vehicle (s),
except in an approved licensed junkyard or auto repair business permitted under the
Town of Fairfield Automobile Graveyard & Junkyard Ordinance and the Land Use
Ordinance.
Materials intended for the private use of the property owner may be stored on the
property as long as such material is screened from the public way and from abutting
properties (see Appendix A) and is not in violation with State Laws. Private use does not
include items intended for resale.
2
Upon the closure of a business activity, the owner of said business or activity, or property
owner, if different from the business owner, shall, within 30 days, remove from public
view all signs identifying the business or activity that has vacated the premises.
Exterior of Structures
All fences and barriers shall be kept in good repair.
All exterior walls, roofs, chimneys, smokestacks, stairs, decks, porches, and balconies
shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair.
All projections from structures, such as awnings, signs, fire escapes, and ductwork shall
be properly anchored and maintained in good repair.
All handrails and guards shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally
imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition.
All exterior wall and roof surfaces of any structure used for human occupancy shall be
protected so as to prevent wind, rain, and snow penetration.
Basement foundations shall be enclosed so as to prevent entry of vermin.
All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which
insects or rodents are found shall be exterminated by approved processes that will not be
injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent re-infestation.
SECTION 6 MAINTENANCE AFTER CASUALTY DAMAGE
Within a period of 90 days after casualty (see Definitions) damage to property grounds or
structures, the owner shall cause or contract (see Definitions) for the repair or restoration of
damaged areas and the demolition of any areas not to be repaired and the removal of all debris
connected therewith. The Code Enforcement Officer may grant an extension under certain
hardship conditions (see Section 8).
Dangerous Building or Property
A building or property is deemed to be dangerous if, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, it
presents a serious threat to life from any of the following conditions:
1. Structural failure;
2. Fire damage, explosion, or toxic gases;
3. Poisonous contamination or biological infection of water, flood damage, air or the
physical environment;
4. Any use or condition of the building or property from which death or physical injury to
the occupants or public could be reasonably expected if occupancy or entry to the
building or property is allowed.
If the Building Inspector finds a building or property to be dangerous, a written notice of
violation shall be given to the property owner and violator if different, to immediately secure
such building or property to prevent unauthorized entry. If the owner fails to secure their
building or property within seven (7) days of said order, or when immediate action is required to
protect public safety, the Building Inspector shall cause the building or property to be secured
3
and shall take any other necessary protective measures including, but not limited to, installing
sidewalk and street barricades. All expenses incurred by the town to secure the dangerous
premises and to assure the public safety affected thereby, shall be repaid to the Town of Fairfield
by the owner or owners of the dangerous building or property within thirty (30) days after
demand for repayment to the town or a special tax may be assessed against the property and
collected in the same manner as other municipal taxes are collected.
The procedure for demolition of buildings shall be in accordance with Title 17 §2851 et seq., as
amended, Dangerous Buildings.
SECTION 7 RESPONSIBILITIES
Owners, operators, and occupants of properties shall maintain the structures and exterior
property grounds in compliance with this ordinance and shall be jointly and severally liable for
violations and for corrective actions required.
All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe,
secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health and safety and to avoid any adverse effect on the value of
adjoining properties.
SECTION 8 ENFORCEMENT & PENALTIES
Method of Service
The Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the violator. Such written notice of violation shall be
deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is: 1. Delivered personally by hand delivery, 2.
Sent by certified mail addressed to the last known address; or 3. If the notice is returned showing
that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the structure or property affected by such notice.
Said notice shall explain the nature of the violation and require corrective action within 30
calendar days from the date of the receipt of the notice to correct the violation; 7 days for a
health and/or safety violation. The violator may appeal the Code Enforcement Officer’s decision
to the Town Council. A written application for appeal must be filed within 7 days of notification
of violation or order served by the Code Enforcement Officer. Appeals of notices and orders
(other than imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the
appeal is heard by the Town Council. The number of days given for compliance shall start after
the Council has heard the appeal.
If a violation is not corrected within the time allowed, the Town shall pursue all remedies and
relief available by law and/or in equity for land use ordinances, including without limitation the
remedies and relief provided in 30A MRSA Section 4452 currently including, without limitation,
a penalty of $100 to $2,500 per day for a specific violation, injunctive relief and reasonable
attorney fees, expert witness fees and costs. The Town shall retain all penalties set forth in this
ordinance. The Code Enforcement Officer may represent the Town in District Court, pursuant to
Rule 80-K. However, should the services of the Town Attorney be required, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall first review the case with the Town Council.
4
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a structure or property who has received a compliance order
or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise
dispose of to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have
been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or
lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official and
shall furnish to the code official a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation
and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs
required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
Extension Requests
Violators may submit a written request to the Code Enforcement Officer for a one time extension
of time to correct the violation/s. The extension of time may be given for financial hardship and
it shall be required to prove hardship through financial documentation such as tax returns and
proof of expenses. If a violation is discovered during winter months (November 1 - April 1) and
if winter weather prevents the correction of a violation/s a onetime extension of time for winter
conditions may be given. These extensions for financial or seasonal hardships shall be at the
discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer. The Code Enforcement Officer may offer one (1)
special extension of up to 180 days to violators of this ordinance if a reasonable hardship can be
shown.
SECTION 9 SEVERABILITY
If any section, subsection, clause, paragraph, phrase or portion of this ordinance is for any reason
held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portions shall be
deemed to be a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions thereof.
SECTION 10 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS
Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is inconsistent with another provision
of this Ordinance or any other ordinance, regulation or statute, the provision imposing the greater
restriction shall control. The newest version of this Ordinance shall be the one that is enforced.
SECTION 11 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall be effective upon adoption by the Fairfield Town Council and may be
amended in accordance with Town requirements for amending ordinances. Adopted: October 9,
2002, Amended: June 12, 2013.
5
DEFINITIONS
Where terms are not defined in this ordinance and are defined in the building, fire prevention,
land use, plumbing or mechanical codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
in those codes.
Where terms are not defined, through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall
have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context applies.
Blighting Problem – A deteriorated condition.
Casualty- Any unforeseeable, unintended accident affecting a property.
Cause or Contract- For this ordinance, “cause or contract” as it appears in Section 5 includes
the initiation of an insurance claim (as opposed to resolution), the contracting of a
construction/repair business, or the substantial preparation for self-repair work.
Grounds- The part of a property not covered by permanent structures.
Imminent Hazard – A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at
any time.
Infestation – The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats,
vermin or other pests.
Junk — For this ordinance the term “junk” refers to dilapidated, discarded or used material or
objects.
Nuisance Condition-This term has been defined by MRSA Title 17 Section 2802. It reads as
follows: “The erection, continuance or use of any building or place for the exercise of a trade,
employment or manufacture which, by noxious exhalations, offensive smells, or other
annoyances, become injurious and dangerous to the health, comfort or property of individuals, or
of the public; causing or permitting abandoned wells or tin mining shafts to remain unfilled or
uncovered to the injury or prejudice of others; causing or suffering any offal, filth or noisome
substance to collect, or to remain in any place to the prejudice of others; obstructing or impeding,
without legal authority, the passage of any navigable river, harbor or collection of water;
corrupting or rendering unwholesome or impure the water of a river, stream, pond or aquifer;
unlawfully diverting it from its natural course or state, to the injury or prejudice of others; and
the obstructing or encumbering by fences, buildings or otherwise, of highways, private ways,
streets, alleys, commons, common landing places or burying grounds are nuisances within the
limitations and exceptions mentioned. Any places where one or more old, discarded, worn out or
junked motor vehicles as defined in Title 29A, Section 101, subsection 42, or parts thereof, are
gathered together, kept, deposited or allowed to accumulate, in such manner or in such location
or situation, either within or without the limits of any highway, as to be unsightly, detracting
6
from the natural scenery or injurious to the comfort and happiness of individuals and the public,
and injurious to property rights, are declared to be public nuisances.”
Occupant- Any person living, sleeping, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
Operator- Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or property, or a part
thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner.
Owner- Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with each other, shall have legal or
equitable title to any property, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof, or shall
have charge or control of any dwelling unit as owner or agent of the owner or as fiduciary
including but not limited to executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate or
as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession was obtained.
Premises –A lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon.
Property- For this ordinance the term shall be defined as any lot, plot, or parcel of land.
Structure- Anything built or constructed and permanently affixed on a property that cannot be
considered grounds or landscaping.
Unserviceable- For the purposes of this ordinance the Town will rely on a Maine Supreme Court
decision (Town of Pownal v. Emerson, 639 A.2d 619 (Me. 1994); Town of Mt. Desert v. Smith,
2000ME 88, 751 A.2.d. 445) which includes the following: “unserviceable means not ready for
use or presently useable” as opposed to “incapable of being serviced.”
Yard –An open space on the same lot with a structure.
7
APPENDIX A GENERAL
Screening may be accomplished by natural or man-made objects, plantings or properly
constructed fences, any of which must completely screen the items from ordinary view from any
portion of any public way or abutting property throughout the entire calendar year. All screening
must be located outside of the public way right-of-way limits.
Natural or man-made objects may be interpreted to be:
1. Hills, gullies, or embankments. Such man-made objects must be constructed to blend
with the landscape with loaming and seeding or other treatment as may be necessary to
establish a natural appearance.
2. Buildings or other installations.
3. Combinations of above.
Plantings
Trees, shrubs, or other vegetation of sufficient height, density and depth of planting or growth to
completely screen the junkyard from ordinary view from any highway within the prescribed
distance throughout the entire calendar year may be used for screening.
Fences
Fences shall be so located and of sufficient height to completely screen the junkyard from
ordinary view from any highway within the prescribed distances. It must be emphasized that
height must be sufficient to accomplish the complete screening from ordinary view. All fences
shall be well constructed and maintained. Only sound undamaged material, uniform in
appearance, and erected in a workmanlike manner will be acceptable to be considered a fence.
Suggested Materials
Posts: Wood - Sound, round or square, preferably cedar, hackmatack, spruce, or fir. Preservative
treatment is suggested. 4” x 4” (square) or 4” minimum diameter (round).
Metal - Steel pipe or structural section steel either galvanized or base coat painted with rust
inhibitive paint.
8
All posts to extend a minimum of forty (40) inches below ground level and to be set plumb.
Recommended post spacing eight feet (8’) to twelve feet (12’). End and corner posts to be
diagonal braced to nearest adjacent post.
Stringers: Minimum 2” x 4” - Spruce or Fir - Sound and free of excessive or weakening knots,
and relatively free from lumber defects such as wane, twist, cup, or bow and preferably treated
with wood preserver after cutting to length. Solidly spike to wood posts or bolted to metal posts.
Three stringers for 6 to 8 foot height of fence.
Steel pipe or structural section stringers may be used. There should be either galvanized or base
coat painted with rust inhibitive paint.
Facing Materials
Facing materials may be wood, composite, sheet metal or plastic. Although new material will not
be a requirement, deteriorated, poor quality, bent, damaged, scrap, discarded, mixed or
conglomerate materials will not be acceptable as facing material.
Suggested materials would be sound, new or used boards; exterior grade hardboard, steel,
aluminum, or vinyl fence material.
It is suggested that all fastenings be galvanized nails, spikes, bolts, clamps, etc., and that all
wood materials be treated with wood preservative (with color additive) to preserve and prolong
the life of the fence and to present a uniformity of appearance.
Since wind damage is a problem with any fence, bracing may be required and certainly would be
essential on any fence over 8 feet in height. In board fence construction, relief of wind pressure
may be achieved by placing the boarding alternatively on outside and inside of stringers with the
spacing to be such that the edges overlap enough to present a solid appearance and effectively
screen the junkyard from ordinary view.
ORDINANCE # PD95-01 PROSECUTION OF TOWN ORDINANCES
The Council of the Town of Fairfield hereby gives the Chief of Police
authorization to represent the Town of Fairfield in District Court in the
prosecution of alleged violation of those ordinances which the police department
is empowered to enforce, if duly certified in accordance with Title 25 M.R.S.A.
Section 2803, or successor statute. The Chief of Police may designate any officer
under his command, if so certified, to perform this prosecutorial function.
Dated: March 21, 1995
Town Council
Effective Date: This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by the
Council.
Adopted on the 21st day of March, 1995 by the Fairfield Town Council and
attested by Cynthia P. Blair, Town Clerk.
AN ORDINANCE RELATIVE TO PUBLIC DUMPING GROUNDS
SECTION 1
The Council shall designate certain areas as Public Dumping Grounds where
rubbish way lawfully be deposited and may establish hours for the use of same.
SECTION 2
The use of any Public Dumping Grounds located in the Town of Fairfield shall be
restricted to the dumping of refuse originating within the said Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 3
The use of any Public Dumping Grounds shall be under the direction of the
custodian, and the deposit thereon of junk automobiles, car bodies or other
oversize objects is expressly forbidden.
SECTION 4
The removal of any material from a Public Dumping Ground, without the written
consent of the Town Manager or Town Council is forbidden.
SECTION 5
Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall
be subject to a fine of not more than $25.00 for each offense.
Adopted: March 4, 1968
Town of Fairfield Public Safety Ordinance
The effective date of this Ordinance is the 20th day of August, 1996.
Amended October 12, 2005.
Amended October 26, 2005.
Amended December 14, 2011.
Amended October 10, 2012.
Amended February 13, 2013.
Amended November 12, 2014
Amended August 9, 2017
Amended December 12, 2018
A True Copy
Attest:__________________________
Town Clerk
Town Seal
Table of Contents
Article Number Article Page
Article 1 Parking 2
Article 2 Impounding Vehicles 9
Article 3 Taxicab and Taxi Stands 11
Article 4 Through Truck Traffic and Weights 15
Article 5 Pawn Brokers, Secondhand Dealers, Garage 17
Sales, Venders and Sellers, Precious Metals Dealers
Article 6 Noise Control 22
Article 7 Firearms Discharge 29
Article 8 Parks and Playgrounds 30
Article 9 Dog Control 35
Article 10 Fireworks Limitations 40
Article 11 Bicycles 42
Article 12 Curfew for Juveniles 45
Article 13 Severability Clause 47
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 2 of 47
ARTICLE 1
Stopping, Standing and the Parking of Vehicles on Municipal Ways.
SECTION 1 PROHIBITIONS
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device, in any of
the following places:
1. On a sidewalk, bridge or culvert, bicycle lane, bicycle and pedestrian lane, or crosswalk;
2. In front of any public or private driveway; nor within ten feet of either side of any
driveway;
3. Within an intersection;
4. Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant;
5. Within twenty (20) feet of the near corner of the curbs at the intersection, unless
otherwise designated;
6. Within twenty feet of the driveway entrance of any fire station and on the side of the
street opposite the entrance of any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of that
entrance.
7. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing,
or parking would obstruct traffic;
8. On the road way side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of the street or
double parked, so-called;
9. At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
10. Within ten (10) feet of a railroad track;
11. On any street or highway that is the traveled portion of said street or highway;
12. On any street or highway where parking is allowed, with the vehicle facing in the
opposite direction.
SECTION 2 PASSENGER AND FREIGHT LOADING ZONES
The Municipal Officers may establish passenger zones and freight loading zones and place and
maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions
of this Ordinance are applicable.
SECTION 3 NO PARKING ZONES
The Municipal Officers may establish and then erect and maintain signs indicating that no
parking is permitted on the side of said street.
SECTION 4 STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO THE CURB
Except when necessary in case of an accident to a vehicle or in obedience to traffic regulations or
signs, the operator of a motor vehicle shall park such vehicle headed in the direction of traffic
and with curb side wheels of the vehicle within one foot of the edge of the roadway, except as
provided in the following paragraphs:
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 3 of 47
1. Upon those streets which have been marked or signed for angular parking. Vehicles shall
park at an angle to the curb as indicated by such marks and signs;
2. The Municipal Officers shall determine upon what streets angular parking shall be
permitted and mark or sign such streets or parts of streets or cause the same to be marked
or signed;
3. That portion of Main Street on the westerly side from Waterville-Fairfield town line to a
point which is the southwesterly corner of the intersection of Cottage Street and Main
Street shall be restricted to parallel parking only.
SECTION 5 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT
A. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to place the same in any street so as to
prevent or obstruct the passing of other vehicles or passenger bus, and it shall be unlawful for
any operator to double park a vehicle or stop the same abreast of another vehicle lengthwise
or otherwise in any street at any time.
B. Large vehicles - No owner or operator, or person in charge of any vehicle which has a
carrying capacity of more than three thousand pounds or which including load is more than
eighteen feet in length or which including load is more than eight feet in width, or which
including load is more than twelve feet six inches in height, shall permit the same to stand
upon any public street in the town for longer period than two hours, except when loading and
unloading.
C. No vehicle specified in Section B as large vehicles shall park within the compact or built up
area for a longer period than 20 minutes and then only when loading and unloading.
SECTION 6 SPECIFIC PARKING RESTRICTIONS
A. The following street intersections are hereby declared to be hazardous areas and no vehicle
shall be permitted to stop, stand, or park within twenty - five (25) feet of a point where the
curb lines extended would intersect at the following street corners or intersections:
1. Main Street and Summit Street
2. Main Street and Military Avenue
3. Main Street and Burrill Street
4. Main Street and Western Avenue
5. High Street and Robinson Street
6. High Street and Burrill Street
7. High Street and Elm Street (south-easterly side)
8. High Street and Western Avenue
9. High Street and Lawrence Avenue
10. Western Avenue and Maple Street
11. On the easterly side of High Street within seventy-five (75) feet of its intersection
with Elm Street
B. No vehicle shall be allowed to stop, stand or park:
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 4 of 47
1. On the westerly side of Main Street from a point of Summit Street north-west
intersection of Main and Summit Street, no parking or standing vehicles.
2. On the westerly side of Main Street from a point at the Northwesterly intersection of
Main Street and Cottage Street to a point on Main Street just 397 feet northerly of the
first mentioned point.
3. On the easterly side of Main Street from a point in the Waterville-Fairfield town line
to a point 1,235.6 feet northerly from the Waterville-Fairfield town line.
4. Within twenty feet of any crosswalk at any point along the westerly side of Main
Street beginning at a point in the Fairfield-Waterville town line to a point which is the
south-westerly intersection of Cottage Street and Main Street.
5. Any portion of Main Street where the highway is divided into two roadways by an
intervening island or physical barrier.
6. On the westerly side of Main Street from a point at the northwest corner of the
intersection of the Huhtamaki, Inc. parking lot driveway and Main Street to a point
where the Northerly boundary line to the Huhtamaki, Inc. property intersects the
Westerly side of Main Street.
7. On the westerly side of Main Street from a point at the southwest intersection of Main
Street and Western Avenue to a point on Main Street just four hundred (400) feet
southerly from the first mentioned point.
8. On the easterly side of High Street from a point just opposite the Southwest
intersection of High Street and Woodman Avenue to the Northeast corner of the
intersection of High Street and Burrill Street.
9. On the southerly side of Water Street from the Southeast corner of the intersection of
Water Street and Main Street to a point opposite the Northwest corner of the
intersection of Mill Street and Water Street.
10. On the northerly side of Western Avenue from the northwest corner of the
intersection of Western Avenue and Main Street to the northeast corner of the
intersection of Western Avenue and Maple Street.
11. On the easterly side of Island Avenue from the intersection of Island Avenue and
Bridge Street to the Main Central Railroad bridge of Island Avenue.
12. No person or persons shall park any motor vehicle beyond the area designated by the
Municipal Officers so as to obstruct the view of any warning signals.
13. On the westerly side of Mill Street so called, beginning at a point where the Mill
Street so called intersects with the southerly line of Bridge Street to a point on Mill
Street so called just one hundred and seventy-six feet southerly from the first
mentioned point.
14. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in any loading zone
established by the Municipal Officers except for the purpose of unloading
merchandise at the place of business where such loading zone is established. Such
loading zones shall be appropriately marked by signs or devices placed there at the
direction of the Municipal Officers to indicate the nature of the loading zone.
15. On either side of Preble Street from the Kelley Street intersection to the Elm Street
intersection while school is in session.
16. On the Westerly side of High Street from the Southwest corner of the intersection of
Elm Street and High Street, South to the Northwest corner of the intersection of
Kelley Street and High Street, no parking or standing vehicle.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 5 of 47
17. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a commercial vehicle or bus on the East
side of Main Street from the Southeast corner of Water Street to the Northeast corner
of the South entrance of the Big Apple Store.
18. On the Westerly side of U.S. Route 201, also known as the Skowhegan Road, from
the Southwest corner of the Old County Road intersection to a point 1,000 feet South
of the Boulet Trucking entrance.
19. On the Easterly side of U.S. Route 201, also known as the Skowhegan Road, from the
Northeast corner of the entrance to Caswell’s Warehouse, North to the Southeast
corner of Brayley Avenue.
SECTION 7 PARKING NEAR THE FIRE STATION
A. Authority of the Chief. The Chief of Police or the Fire Chief or both are hereby authorized to
set out, make and maintain parking signs, lines and barriers near the fire stations in
accordance with other provisions of the Section.
B. Fire Personnel. Parking for fire personnel only shall be permitted in the stalls marked as “Fire
Personnel”.
C. The Fire Chief is authorized to regulate parking by means of signs within 100 feet of any fire
station.
SECTION 8 HANDICAPPED PARKING
No person shall park or cause to be parked any motor vehicle or motorcycle in a parking space
clearly marked as a handicapped parking space, unless that vehicle or motorcycle displays a
special registration license plate issued under Title 29-A M.R.S.A. Sections 521, 522 or 523, or a
similar license plate or placard issued by this or any another state.
SECTION 9 DOUBLE PARKING
Double parking shall not be permitted on any street or way within the Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 10 PARKING TIME LIMITED
A. Whenever any time limit parking is imposed, except when specifically exempted, the
Municipal Officers shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof.
B. Between the hours of nine o’clock in the forenoon and nine o’clock in the evening, Monday
through Sunday in accordance with the time adopted and in effect in the town, it shall be
unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the same for any one consecutive period of
time longer than one hundred twenty minutes (2 hours) or upon the following streets or parts
thereof:
1. Both sides of Main Street from Summit to the intersection of Elm Street.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 6 of 47
2. Both sides of Lawrence Avenue from Main Street three hundred (300) feet westerly
and from Main Street to the Fairfield-Benton Bridges.
3. Both sides of Main Street southerly from the intersection of Main Street and Water
Street to the intersection of Main Street and Gibson Street.
4. The westerly side of Main Street from the entrance to the Huhtamaki parking lot, to
the Waterville town line shall be limited to thirty (30) consecutive minutes of parking.
C. No vehicle shall be left parked on the following streets from August 15 to June 30 of the
following year.
1. On the Northerly side of Summit Street from the intersection of West Street to the
intersection of High Street.
2. On the Northerly side of Flood & Kelley Street from the intersection of West Street to
the intersection of Preble Street.
3. On the Easterly side of West Street from the intersection of Savage Street to the
intersection of Elm Street.
4. On the Northerly side of Elm Street from the intersection of Preble Street to the
intersection of West Street.
SECTION 11 MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
A. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Ordinance for any person to permit any vehicle
owned by or under the control of such person to remain or stand in any Municipal Parking
Lot at any time unless such vehicle complies with the laws of the State of Maine made and
established for the licensing of such vehicle.
B. Any police officer of the Town of Fairfield may cause an unlicensed motor vehicles found in
any Municipal Parking Lot of the Town of Fairfield to be towed away at the expense of the
owner of said vehicle.
C. No person shall park any vehicle in any Municipal Parking Lot in the Town of Fairfield for a
period exceeding twenty-four (24) hours at any one time. For the purpose of this Ordinance,
Municipal Parking Lots are hereby defined as lots of land owned and set aside by the Town
of Fairfield as off- street parking areas for the parking of vehicles. Such areas are for public
usage under the regulations of this Ordinance.
SECTION 12 SNOW REMOVAL
No vehicle shall park so as to interfere with or hinder the removal of snow from any street or
way. The Chief of Police may cause a vehicle so parked on any street or way to be removed from
the street and placed in a suitable parking space off the street, at the expense of the vehicle
owner.
For the purpose of facilitating the removal of snow from the streets of the town, the Town
Manager or Police Chief may cause to be placed properly marked signs along any street or
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 7 of 47
streets as he or she shall from time to time deem necessary. It shall be unlawful for the operator
of vehicles to enter upon, stop, or park within the space indicated by such signs.
SECTION 13 WINTER PARKING BAN
No vehicle shall be parked on any street or way of the Town from November 1 to March 31 of
the following year, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Any vehicle so parked may be
removed or caused to be moved within the scope of the towing guidelines of the Town of
Fairfield. Emergency vehicles of the Town, ambulances, doctors and police vehicles within the
scope of their duty are exempted.
SECTION 14 EMERGENCY PARKING
When, in the best judgment of the Municipal Officers or the Chief of Police, an emergency exists
or is about to exist because of snow, ice, hurricane, or other weather hazard, or because of a large
gathering such as a fair or concert, the Municipal Officers or the Chief of Police may,
notwithstanding any other provision of this Ordinance determine and designate, by proper
emergency signs, streets or portions of streets, on which no stopping or parking of vehicles may
be permitted and also to determine and designate, by proper emergency signs, streets, or portions
of streets, on which vehicular traffic may move only in one direction.
SECTION 15 PENALTIES
A. Any person who violates a provision of the parking ordinance shall be subject to the
following penalties:
1. Overtime Parking $10.00
2. Vehicle in Crosswalk or in Sidewalk $10.00
3. Obstructing Traffic $10.00
4. Obstructing Driveway $10.00
5. Parking in Restricted Area $10.00
6. Double Parking $10.00
7. Parking Overnight/Winter Ban Parking $10.00
8. Other $10.00
9. Handicapped Parking Violation $200.00
B. If the penalty is not paid within 30 days after notice of the violation, a civil summons may be
issued charging that person with the specific violation under Article IV. Upon adjudication,
that person shall be punished by a fine according to Section 15, Penalties. The District Court
in addition to the penalty may assess a fee not to exceed $100.00 to cover the cost to the
Town for the District Court process.
C. Penalties are to be collected by the Fairfield Police Department dispatch office and handled
according to the Town cash control policy. A duplicate copy of the account will be forwarded
to the Town Treasurer.
SECTION 16 SCOFFLAWS
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 8 of 47
Offenders who have three or more unpaid parking tickets issued by the Fairfield Police
Department under this Ordinance shall be considered scofflaws. Any vehicle of a scofflaw found
to be in violation of this ordinance may be removed and stored at the owner’s expense until all
fines, penalties, storage, and towing charges are paid.
SECTION 17 EMERGENCY REMOVAL
The Chief of Police or his or her designee may cause the removal, at the owner’s expense, of any
motor vehicle in violation of this ordinance which is posing an immediate threat to public safety.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 9 of 47
ARTICLE 2
Impounding Vehicles
SECTION 1 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND
A. Members of the Police Department are authorized to cause to be removed any vehicle from a
street or highway, or any public way, to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to an
area designated or maintained by the Town, in the following instances:
1. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge or causeway where such vehicle
constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
2. When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic
or the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are
incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
3. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street or highway and is so parked
illegally as to constitute a hazard to life or property or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic;
4. When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street highway and is so parked as to
interfere with or hinder snow removal operations by the Town;
5. When any vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, including
being parked in excess of the time specified herein;
6. When a vehicle is found on a street, highway or public way within the jurisdiction of
the Town, when such vehicle has three or more outstanding parking violations, and is
at that place and time in violation of any provision of this Ordinance;
7. When a vehicle is left unattended, upon or adjacent to a street or highway, the owner,
or person in charge of said vehicle shall remove or cause to be removed the vehicle
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not removed as required, the Police Department may
have the vehicle towed at the owner’s expense.
SECTION 2 TOWING RECORDS
When a vehicle is caused to be removed by a police officer, the Police Department shall keep
and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing its owner as reflected by the registration
records, the owner’s address, the make, year of manufacture, the color of the vehicle, the
registration number, the state of registration, the date and hour of the tow, the location towed
from, the location towed to, the reason for the towing, and the name of the officer authorizing the
tow. A copy of this notice shall be given to the operator of the vehicle conducting the towing and
impounding activities and to the operator of the facility where the vehicle is to be impounded.
SECTION 3 COST
The owner of any vehicle removed from the street or highway or public way pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be responsible for all towing costs.
SECTION 4 RECLAIMING VEHICLES
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 10 of 47
A. The owner of any vehicle removed from the street or highway under this Ordinance may
reclaim the vehicle by:
1. Furnishing satisfactory evidence of his identity and of his or her ownership of the
vehicle to the officer in charge at the Police Department;
2. Paying the costs for the towing and storage of the vehicle;
3. Paying all outstanding fines, fees and assessments for parking violations outstanding
against the vehicle at that time; and,
4. Signing a receipt for the return of the vehicle.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 11 of 47
ARTICLE 3
Taxicab Licenses and Stands
SECTION 1 TAXICAB STANDS
The Municipal Officers are hereby authorized to establish Taxicab Stands on such streets and in
such places and in such manner and numbers as shall be determined to be the greatest benefit and
convenience to the public and appropriate signs shall designate every stand. Municipal Officers
may also assign said stands to persons or corporations authorized to engage in the Taxicab
Business in a manner for the benefit and convenience of the public. The Municipal Officers may
revoke, alter, or amend any established stand or any assignment to any established stand.
SECTION 2 TAXICAB LICENSE
Taxicab means a sedan, station wagon or minivan used for hire, with a driver, which has a
seating capacity of fewer than 5 persons behind the driver. This definition is found in Title 29-A
M.R.S.A. Section 101 (79).
SECTION 3 LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall own and use or operate any taxicab in the Town without a license for such
purpose as provided for herein. Operate, for the purpose of this section only, shall mean: To pick
up any paying fair. Nothing in this policy shall prevent Taxicabs licensed in another jurisdiction
from dropping off a paying fair in the Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 4 ISSUANCE OF OWNER’S AND OPERATORS LICENSES
A. The Municipal officers shall have the authority to authorize the office of the Police Chief, or
his/her designee to issue licenses to own or use a vehicle for hire within the Town and further
to issue licenses to operate a taxicab within the Town. Applicants for either an owner or
operator's license must file a written application with the Police Department and must pay the
required fee. The Police Department, utilizing the following guidelines and standards, will
issue a license, provided all of the following guidelines and standards are met:
1. Has a valid State of Maine driver's license;
2. Is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
3. For any owner, has the required vehicle registration.
4. Has a minimum of one (1) year's driving experience;
5. Has been photographed by the Town of Fairfield;
6. Has obtained an identification tag as described in Section 6 of this chapter;
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 12 of 47
7. For an owner, has current liability running for no less than one (1) year after May first
of each year, and for a sum of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
because of bodily injury or death to any one person; in the amount of one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) because of bodily injury or death of two (2) persons
in any one accident; and in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
because of injury to and destruction of property in any one (1) accident; or a one
hundred twenty-five thousand dollar ($125,000) single-limit policy as provided
through the assigned risk program. All liability insurance policies required under this
subsection shall contain a clause requiring notification to the Town if the policy is
canceled or not renewed;
8. Has not been convicted of any of the following:
i. Operating under the influence of either drugs or alcohol within the previous
one-year period; two (2) or more convictions for operating under the influence
of either drugs or alcohol within the previous (6) six-year period;
ii. A class A, B, or C crime and any sexual offense of any class as set forth in
Chapter 11 of Title 17-A of M.R.S.A., within the previous (10) ten-year
period; conviction of any crime of any class that involves threatening or
violent behavior within a (5) five-year period;
iii. More than two (2) motor vehicle violations within the past eighteen (18)
months; more than four (4) motor vehicle violations within the past thirty-six
(36) months;
iv. Is not required to register as a sex offender.
9. Has submitted the appropriate fees at the time of application; set by the Town Council
in the Town of Fairfield, Fee Schedule for each operator plus the cost of background
checks for an initial license and renewals. Operators licensed in reciprocating
communities will not be charged the background check fee. Fees are non-refundable.
B. If the Police Chief makes the factual determination that one (1) or more of the above
guidelines and standards has or have not been met, is to issue in writing a denial of a request
for a license to either own or use or to operate and will set forth the reason for refusal to issue
such license. An applicant who has been denied a license shall have the right to appeal the
denial of this license to a select committee designated by the chairman of the Town Council,
which committee may consist of no more than three (3) members. The select committee shall
act in an appellate manner and shall ascertain from the facts presented in the record compiled
by the Fairfield Police Department as to whether the facts are accurate, and if accurate
constitute a failure to meet one (1) or more of the guidelines or standards set forth in this
section as a basis for denial of a license. An appeal from the decision of the select committee
of the Town Council will then be in accordance with Rule 80B of the Maine Rules of Court.
SECTION 5 RENEWAL AND REVOCATION OF OWNER’S OR OPERATOR’S
LICENSES
A. The Chief of Police shall renew a license issued under Section 4 to either own or use a
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 13 of 47
taxicab or to operate a taxicab on or before May 1st of each year, provided however, that the
applicant must still meet all of the licensing guidelines and standards set forth in Section 3.
Upon proof of meeting the guidelines and standards and payment of the license fee, the
Police Chief is authorized to issue a renewal of licenses under this section.
B. If information is provided to the Police Chief that a current licensee has violated one (1) or
more of the guidelines or standards set forth in Section 4 and this fact is verified by the
Fairfield Police Department, then in that instance, the Police Chief shall issue a notice of
revocation of an existing license. A licensee who has been notified of revocation of this
license is entitled to an appeal from this decision in the manner set forth in Section 4
provided however, the licensee shall be banned from owning and using or operating pending
a decision on appeal. Failure to surrender a revoked license upon written request by the
Police Chief shall be subject to a fine under Section 12.
SECTION 6 IDENTIFICATION TAG GUIDELINES
A. Each taxicab operator is required to display an identification tag in a conspicuous manner in
any taxicab the licensee operates. The identification tag must contain the licensee's name,
photograph, and license number.
B. Every taxicab owner licensed to operate within the Town shall keep a copy of the guidelines
set forth in Section 3 posted at his place of business.
SECTION 7 REQUIRED INSPECTIONS; CERTIFICATE
Each taxicab used in this Town shall be inspected by May 1 each year; and at the request of the
owner or operator thereof, may also be inspected at any other time. No certificate of inspection
shall be in force longer than a one (1) year period. Such inspection shall be made by the Chief of
Police or designee who shall issue his certificate of inspection if he finds the taxicab to be safe,
clean and otherwise suitable. Such certificate shall be carried in the taxicab and readily available
for inspection. No taxicab shall be operated without such certificate.
SECTION 8 REVOCATION
The municipal officers may revoke or suspend the license of any owner or operator who violates
the conditions of the license, makes a material misstatement on the application for the license,
uses abusive or profane language in the presence of a passenger, keeps his taxicab in an unsafe,
unclean or unsatisfactory condition, or operates his taxicab in an unsafe manner. The municipal
officers may revoke or suspend the certificate of inspection of any taxicab, if any part of it is
found by the chief of police to be in an unsafe, unclean or unsanitary condition.
SECTION 9 RATES TO BE CHARGED, VIOLATIONS, PENALTY
A. A schedule of rates shall be posted in every taxicab when in operation, and the schedule shall
be illuminated at night so as to be easily read by passengers.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 14 of 47
B. In case of violation of the rates so fixed, owners or operators of taxicabs shall be liable to the
penalty provided in Section 11 of this Code for each violation, and in addition the municipal
officers may revoke or suspend the license of any taxicab owner or operator who is convicted
of such violation.
SECTION 10 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS PERMITTED
The number of passengers carried by a taxicab at any time shall not exceed the seating capacity
of the vehicle.
SECTION 11 FINES AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision of this taxicab ordinance
shall be punished upon adjudication by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each offense. Each day on which any continuing
offense occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 12 RECIPROCITY
Any other town or city that allows taxicabs and drivers licensed by the Town of Fairfield the
right to operate in said town or city, without obtaining a license from said town or city, shall be
awarded that same right of operation in the Town of Fairfield provided that said town or city has
a written ordinance that is at least as stringent as the Fairfield Public Safety Ordinance Article V
dealing with taxis.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 15 of 47
ARTICLE 4
No Through Trucks, Seasonal Weight Restrictions
SECTION 1 NO THRU TRUCKS
There will be no through truck traffic at the following locations:
1. Covell Road, from the Norridgewock Road (Route 139) to the Middle Road (Route 104).
2. Davis Road, from the Norridgewock Road (Route 139) to the intersection of Toulouse
Corner (Six Rod Road, Ten Lots Road, and Martin Stream Road intersection).
3. Wood Street, from the Middle Road (Route 104) to the Davis Road.
4. Eskelund Drive, from Route 201 to Western Avenue.
5. High Street, from Western Avenue to Main Street.
6. Lawrence Avenue, from Main Street to High Street.
7. Newhall Street, from Western Avenue to Lawrence Avenue.
EXCEPTIONS: This Article will not pertain to pick-up trucks or four wheel vans. All State of
Maine and Fairfield Municipal vehicles, Local deliveries and pickups may be made on the
Covell Road, Davis Road and Wood Street.
SECTION 2 SEASONAL WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS ON TOWN WAYS
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Article is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of the Town of Fairfield and the general public by regulating the seasonal
weight restrictions on town ways in order to insure the proper use of and to prevent the abuse
of all town ways and town highways within the Town of Fairfield.
B. Seasonal Weight Maximum.
1. It shall be unlawful for any motor truck, motor vehicle, animal drawn vehicle, or team
exceeding the registered gross weight of 23,000 pounds to pass over any and all town
ways, town highways, improved 3rd class highways, and bridges, or sections thereof,
at anytime during the weight restriction season except when the way is solidly frozen
meaning that the air temperature is below 32 degrees and there is no liquid water
showing in cracks or potholes. Both conditions are required for road to be considered
solidly frozen.
2. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle or combination of vehicle exceeding the
registered gross vehicle weight to pass over any and all town ways, town highways,
improved 3rd class highways, and bridges or sections thereof at any time.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 16 of 47
C. Special Exceptions. This Ordinance shall apply to all motor trucks, motor vehicles, animal
drawn vehicles, and teams, except the following:
1. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight of 23,000
pounds or less, other than those referred to in Section B (2) above.
2. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles registered for a gross weight in excess of
23,000 pounds and traveling without a load other than tools or equipment necessary
for the proper operation of the vehicles.
3. Any vehicle engaged in highway operation, repair, or maintenance under the direction
of the Fairfield Public Works Director or the Maine Department of Transportation.
4. Any two-axle home heating fuel truck registered in excess of 23,000 pounds which
has an exemption certificate issued by the Maine Department of Transportation.
5. Any vehicle engaged in the transportation of bulk milk or bulk feed which is
registered in excess of 23,000 pounds with an exemption certification issued by the
Maine Department of Transportation carrying a partial load with a weight equal to or
less than indicated on the exemption certification as documented by delivery slips or
bills of lading accompanying the vehicle.
6. Any vehicle engaged in the transportation of household refuse registered in excess of
23,000 pounds that has obtained a written permit from the Public Works Director or
designee.
D. Penalty for Violation. Any person, operator, or owner of any such motor truck, motor
vehicle, animal drawn vehicle, or team who violates this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil
violation and each violation, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500.00.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 17 of 47
ARTICLE 5
Pawn brokers, Second-Hand Junk dealers, Garage Sales, Venders and Sellers, and
Precious Metals Dealers
SECTION 1 LICENSE REQUIRED
No person shall engage in the business of pawnbroker, junk dealer, second-hand dealer, precious
metals dealer or conduct any garage sale without having a license or permit issued by the Town
of Fairfield for such activity.
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
A. Garage Sale shall mean and include all sales entitled “garage sale”, “lawn sale”, “attic sale”,
“rummage sale”, and any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised
by any means whatsoever whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
B. Junk Dealer shall mean any person engaged in the purchase, sale or barter of old iron, steel,
chain, aluminum, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals, belting, waste paper, old rope,
old bags, bagging, barrels, piping, rubber, glass, empty bottles, and jugs of all kinds and
quantities of less than one gross, and all other articles discarded or no longer used as
manufactured articles composed of any one or more of the materials herein before
mentioned.
C. Pawnbroker shall mean any person engaged in the business of lending money on deposit or
pledges of personal property or other valuable thing other than securities or printed evidence
of indebtedness, or in the business of purchasing personal property, or chooses in action, or
other valuable thing, and selling or agreeing to sell the same back to the seller at a price other
than the original price of purchase, or in the business of purchasing personal property such as
articles containing gold, silver, platinum or other precious metals or jewels for the purpose of
reducing or smelting them into a different form and reselling the product.
D. Second-hand Dealer shall mean any person who engages in the purchase, collection, transfer
or storage for later resale, or who engages in the trading or selling, unless such sale is by
auction of less than four days duration, of any article, vehicle or material, or portion thereof,
of which prior use has been made in any manner whatsoever. The term, “secondhand dealer”
shall not be construed to includes pawn broker, junk collectors, used car dealer, antique
dealer who handle and sell bona fide antiques exclusively; nor shall it include any person
primarily engaged in the retail sale of new and unused goods, who deals with used goods
only incidentally, such as accepting such goods in trade as part of a transaction involving the
sale of new goods, but only to the extent that such used goods are of the same type as the
new goods sold by such person.
E. Vendor/Seller shall mean any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any
other mode of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street
carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares and merchandise and offering or exposing
the same or any service for sale; or who without traveling from place to place shall sell,
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 18 of 47
expose or offer any goods, wares, merchandise or service for sale from any portable, mobile
or temporary structure, or from a wagon, automotive vehicle or other vehicle or conveyance;
or who without traveling from place to place shall sell, expose or offer for sale the same in
the entrances to buildings or other premises or upon vacant lots or other tracts of land within
the corporate limits of the town. The term “vendor/seller” shall not be construed to include
the following: vendors of food sold by wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, vendors of merchandise by sample list or catalog for future delivery, vendors of
farm, dairy, orchard, fish or forest products of their own production, vendors of newspapers
and religious literature, route salesmen while engaged in making deliveries to their regular
customers, commercial travelers or selling agents who, in the usual and customary course of
business, make sales to dealers, or persons duly authorized to conduct tag days, sell poppies
or otherwise solicit.
F. Precious Metals Dealer shall mean any person who engages in the business of purchasing,
selling or acquiring through exchange second hand items composed in whole or in part of
gold, silver, palladium or platinum, but does not include dental gold, unrefined metal ore, an
electronic product, any part of a mechanical system on a motor vehicle, gold or silver coins
or bullion.
SECTION 3 LICENSE
A. The municipal officers shall grant a license if the applicant has chosen a location which
complies with all municipal zoning ordinances, has not been convicted of a crime arising out
of sales of items covered in Section 2, has not violated state law governing pawnbrokers or
junk dealers, second-hand dealers or precious metals dealers, and has filed an application
with the Town Clerk with the following information:
1. Name of licensee;
2. Proposed place of business;
3. Hours of operation;
4. Manner of operation;
B. Any person who conducts a sale of used items from a location more frequently than three
garage sales per year excluded from the regulation under Section 11 shall be deemed to be a
secondhand junk dealer and must comply with all the requirements of this section. Renewals
shall be issued by the Town Clerk upon submission of a renewal application substantially
identical to the original application.
SECTION 4 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT AND PREMISES
1. Upon receipt of an application for any license or renewal, the Town Clerk shall
inquire of other town departments as appropriate for comments as to whether a
license may be granted consistently with the provisions of the laws and ordinances
enforce by such department.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 19 of 47
2. The Fire Chief shall cause inspection to be made for the purpose of determining if
town ordinances, a state law, or state regulations concerning fire and safety have been
complied with.
3. The Police Chief shall cause an investigation to be made of the principal officers or
persons to be licensed as a pawnbroker, junk dealer, second-hand dealer, and precious
metals dealer. All such persons shall report to the clerk in writing, and copies of any
such report shall be deemed a public record.
SECTION 5 REVOCATION/SUSPENSION
Duly authorized town officials shall have the power to temporarily suspend a license under this
article if the license violates any conditions of the permit, violates any ordinance or statute
governing the operation of any pawnshops, junk dealerships, second—hand dealerships, or
precious metals dealers, makes a material misstatement in the application, or the activity presents
a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. Following a Public hearing, any
license issued by the Town Council and license fees retained by the town, upon a finding by the
council that the licensee has violated the ordinances of the town or the laws of the state, or has
willfully or persistently failed to comply with any applicable rules and regulations. Licensee
must be notified a minimum of three (3) days prior to such hearing in writing stating the reasons
for the revocation. In emergency situations where a license is suspended prior to a hearing,
licensee must be given an opportunity to be heard as soon as is practicable.
SECTION 6 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; FEE; DURATION; RECORDS
All licenses under this division shall be over the signature of the Town Clerk, and the fee for
making and issuing the same shall be set by the Town Council in the Town of Fairfield Fee
Schedule annually, to additionally include the cost of public hearing notice, and will be paid by
the licensee. Such license shall continue in force for one year from its date, unless sooner
revoked by the municipal officers.
SECTION 7 REGULATIONS
Every person licensed under this ordinance shall put and keep in some conspicuous place on and
outside of his place of business a sign designating that he is licensed to deal in such articles; and
he shall keep a book in which shall be written, at the time of every purchase of every such
article, a description of the article and the day and hour when such purchase was made; and he
shall at all times keep the articles thus purchased, while the same remain in his possession, in
such convenient place that they may be readily seen and examined.
No pawnbroker shall sell any property until it has remained in his/her possession for three (3)
months after the expiration of the time for which it was pawned.
No other dealer or shopkeeper regulated by the provisions of this article shall permit to be sold
any such article purchased or received by him/her until, at least, a period of one (1) week from
the date of its purchase or receipt has elapsed, unless authorized to sell the same in less than one
(1) week by the Chief of Police.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 20 of 47
A precious metals dealer who determines that the precious metals are not listed in an electronic
database designed to catalog stolen property may sell or alter the precious metals five (5)
business days after the date of acquisition.
SECTION 8 RECORDS, ARTICLES PURCHASED SUBJECT TO INSPECTION
The book required to be kept by this ordinance and the articles thus purchased shall at all times
be subject to the inspection and examination of the municipal officers, the chief of police and
any police officer or constable or any other officer seeking information in the line of duty.
SECTION 9 DAILY REPORT REQUIRED
Every licensed pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer, and precious metals dealer shall
make out and deliver to the chief of police or his designee on duty at the police department every
day before the hour of 10:00 a.m., a legible and correct list containing an accurate description of
all articles taken in pawn, taken in exchange, bought or sold during the preceding twenty-four
(24) hours, together with the time when such articles were pawned, exchanged, bought or sold.
Any item of jewelry must be photographed and those photographs must be maintained and
available for viewing by the Police Chief for a period of no less than 180 days from the date the
jewelry was received by the establishment. Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be recovered
by complaint.
SECTION 10 PURCHASES FROM MINORS PROHIBITED
No person licensed as aforesaid shall purchase any of the articles named in Section 2 of this
ordinance from any minor, without written authorization of a parent or legal guardian.
SECTION 11 GARAGE SALE PERMIT REQUIRED
A permit for a garage sale as defined in Section 2 shall be required and the following conditions
shall be met:
(a) a permit shall be issued by the Town Clerk or Police Chief for the garage sale at no
cost to the resident.
(b) the Town Clerk shall register the sale with the Police Department of the Town of
Fairfield.
SECTION 12 REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS OF GARAGE SALE PERMITS
The garage sale permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. There shall be no more than three
(3) sales a year permitted to any one person or for the same location during any calendar year.
Each sale shall be no more than three (3) consecutive days. This permit may be canceled if in the
opinion of the police chief or his/her designee there is a vehicular or pedestrian problem because
of inadequate off-street parking arrangements. No fee shall be charged for garage sales as
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 21 of 47
defined in Section 2. Failure to comply with this ordinance shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation.
SECTION 13 VENDORS AND SELLERS LICENSE REQUIRED
No person or persons shall engage in the business of vending or peddling of goods, ware, and
merchandise at retail in the Town of Fairfield without first obtaining a license.
SECTION 14 REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS OF VENDORS AND SELLERS
Such vendors and sellers license shall be granted by the Town Clerk for a specified period of
time and only upon certification by the Chief of Police. This section does not apply to
commercial agents or other persons selling by list, catalogs, or otherwise, goods, wares, or
merchandise sold for future delivery. This section also does not apply to residents of Fairfield
selling agricultural products produced on their property, or to persons selling newspapers,
magazines, or religious literature, or to persons selling Christmas trees, wreaths, greens, cards, or
seals.
SECTION 15 PAWNBROKERS, VENDORS, SELLERS, AND PRECIOUS METALS
DEALERS LICENSE FEES
See Town of Fairfield Fee Schedule
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $50.00, nor more than $250.00 for each offense. Each day on
which any continuing offense occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
SECTION 16 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION
Upon complaint being filed with the police department that any person to whom a local
vendor/seller license has been issued has violated any law or ordinance which has a reasonable
relationship to the conduct of the licensed business, and, if upon investigation, it is found that
such complaint is valid, the police official charged with the duty of investigating such complaint
may suspend such license for no more than three days. It shall be the duty of the police official
who affects such a suspension to notify the Town Clerk and the Town Council on the next
regular working day following such suspension. The grounds of such suspension shall also be
sufficient basis for revocation of that same license.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 22 of 47
ARTICLE 6
Noise Control
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
This Ordinance is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the health, safety, welfare and quality
of life of the citizens of Fairfield through the reduction, control and prevention of excessive
noise.
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
A. Day-Time Hours: Shall mean the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 9:30 p.m., Monday through
Saturday and the hours 9:00 a.m. through 9:30 p.m. on Sundays. For the purposes of this
Ordinance time shall be measured by the prevailing local time at the pertinent point in time,
whether United States Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time.
B. Multi-Unit Structures: Shall mean any attached living units, including, but not limited to,
apartments, condominiums, duplexes and multiplexes.
C. Night-Time Hours: Shall mean the hours between 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday evening
through Saturday morning, and the hours between 9:30 p.m. Saturday evening and 9:00 a.m.
Sunday morning. For the purposes of this Ordinance time shall be measured by the prevailing
local time at the pertinent point in time, whether United States Eastern Standard Time or
Eastern Daylight Time.
D. Noise: Shall mean any sound, produced by any means. The term shall not be construed as
having any connotations of pleasantness or unpleasantness.
E. Noise Source: Shall mean anything capable of producing noise; the thing from which noise
emanates.
F. Persons: Shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, syndicate, company, trust,
corporation, municipality, agency or political, administrative or legal entity of any kind.
G. Premises: Shall mean any building, structure, land or portion thereof, including all
appurtenances, and shall include yards, lots, courts, inner yards and real properties without
buildings or improvements, owned or controlled by a person.
H. Engine Brake: Shall mean a compression release engine brake, frequently called a Jake brake
or Jacobs brake, an engine braking mechanism installed on some diesel engines. When
activated, it opens exhaust valves in the cylinders after the compression cycle, releasing the
compressed air trapped in the cylinders, and slowing the vehicle
SECTION 3 NOISE PROHIBITED
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 23 of 47
It shall be unlawful for a person to produce or initiate, or to be the efficient cause of production
of, a noise that is audible above background sounds at a distance of 75 feet or more from the
noise source. This Ordinance should be read in its entirety, as other prohibitions also apply. For
example Section 5 prohibits the production of noise during night-time hours in a unit of a multiunit
structure that is audible in another unit in that structure.
SECTION 4 EXCLUSIONS
This prohibition shall not apply to noise produced by or related to the following activities, so
long as the noise, if only related to an activity, is a reasonably necessary adjunct to the activity.
A. Natural phenomena
B. Church bells ringing as part of any official church ceremony or service, tower clock bells
ringing the hour during the day-time hours, or electronic carillons.
C. Any siren, whistle or bell lawfully used by emergency vehicles or any other alarm systems
used in any emergency situation, except burglar or other tampering or intrusion alarms,
including but not limited to vault alarms and motor vehicle alarms, that produce a sound that
is not terminated within twenty (20) minutes after activation.
D. Warning devices required by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration or other
state or federal safety regulations.
E. Tools and equipment and processes used for or in domestic construction, repair,
maintenance, improvement, and demolition, including but not limited to the power and hand
tools and garden tractors, landowners and roto—tillers, when used or operated or performed
during day-time hours.
F. Timber harvesting, including, but not limited to, the felling and removing of logs from the
woods.
G. Commercial activities of construction, maintenance, repair, improvement, or demolition
during day-time hours, provided the noise generated does not exceed limits that may be set
from time to time by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or the Maine Department of
Environmental Protection.
H. Agricultural animals, livestock, or fowl.
I. Refuse and solid waste collection, and collection of recyclable materials provided that the
activity is conducted during day-time hours.
J. Any activity not prohibited by this Ordinance or by any other law, where the noise is not
audible above background sounds beyond any lot boundary line of the premises upon which
the noise source is located.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 24 of 47
K. Any activity for which a permit is required by and under the Ordinance or other law,
including but not limited to parades, sporting events, concerts, and fireworks displays,
provided that all licenses or permits required by this Ordinance and/or any other law shall
have been obtained in accordance with applicable law.
L. Noise associated with manufacturing activity permitted in an Industrial Zone.
M. The use of Engine brakes, if they are being used in accordance with the Environmental
Protection Agency’s Codes as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 202.20. The Town recognizes that
engine brakes are a critical component to the safe stopping ability of heavy equipment
operated on town roads. Nothing in this article shall restrict the Town of Fairfield from
posting signage that states “Please restrict use of engine brake” or other words to that effect.
SECTION 5 NOISE IN MULTI-UNIT STRUCTURES
It shall be unlawful for a person to produce or initiate, or to be the efficient cause of production
of noise in one unit of a multi-unit structure which is audible in another unit of that same multiunit
structure during night-time hours, exceptions being bone fide cries for help, infants crying,
and other unintentional noises that can not be reasonably controlled.
SECTION 6 SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS
Anything in Sections 3 and 4 of this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, the following
activities are prohibited:
A. ANIMALS: Keeping, owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird which for a period
of ten minutes or intermittently for one-half hour or more, makes sounds at any time of day
or night which is audible beyond the lot line of the premises upon which the animal or bird is
situated: provided, however, that it shall not constitute a violation of this Ordinance of at the
time a dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to
trespass upon private property or upon which the dog is situated.
B. RADIO: Using operating or playing, or permitted the use, operation or playing of any radio
receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud-speaker, sound amplifier, or other
machine or device for the production, amplification, or reproduction of sound that is audible
above background sounds at a distance of 75 feet or more from the noise source, and which is
loud and unnecessary, and which disturbs the peace and quiet of others between the hours
9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday morning. For the purposes of this Ordinance time shall be
measured by the prevailing local time at the pertinent point in time, whether United States
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time.
C. VEHICLES: Using, operating, or revving up, any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle in such
a manner as to create loud and unnecessary gating, grinding, rattling or any other noise that is
audible above background sounds at a distance of 75 feet or more from the noise source, and
which is loud and unnecessary, and which disturbs the peace and quiet of others between the
hours 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday evening through Saturday morning, and the hours
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 25 of 47
between 9:30 p.m. Saturday evening and 9:00 a.m. Sunday morning. For the purposes of this
Ordinance time shall be measured by the prevailing local time at the pertinent point in time,
whether United States Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time.
D. VOICES: Shouting or crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which unreasonably disturbs
the peace and quiet of the neighborhood between the hours 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday
evening through Saturday morning, and the hours between 9:30 the hours between 9:30 p.m.
Saturday evening and 9:00 a.m. Sunday morning. For the purposes of this Ordinance time
shall be measured by the prevailing local time at the pertinent point in time, whether United
States Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Time.
E. IDLING VEHICLES: Idling of any engine or any standing motor vehicle with a weight in
excess of 10,000 pounds Manufacturers Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) for a period in excess
of ten consecutive (10) minutes between the hours 9:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Sunday evening
through Saturday morning, and the hours between 9:30 p.m. Saturday evening and 9:00 a.m.
Sunday morning. For the purposes of this Ordinance time shall be measured by the prevailing
local time at the pertinent point in time, whether United States Eastern Standard Time or
Eastern Daylight Time, when such vehicle is within a public way adjacent to a residential
premises.
SECTION 7 PERMITS
This ordinance authorizes two kinds of noise permits, a Special Sound Permit and a Commercial
Sound Permit, described below. Applications for these permits must be submitted to the Chief of
Police of the Fairfield Police Department on a form furnished by the Town of Fairfield.
A. Special Sound Permits. A Special Sound Permit is available to authorize the production or
generation of sound that would otherwise be in violation of this Ordinance on an occasion
that is not part of a regular business activity of the premises on which the sound will be
produced or generated. The owner or operator or the manager of the premises shall apply for
this permit at least forty-eight (48) hours before the hour the intended noise-producing
activity will commence except for emergency repairs to public infrastructure in which case
permission shall be sought as soon as possible. The Chief of Police or his or her designee will
have sole authority to grant or deny a Special Sound Permit, but the decision must be made
within the following guidelines.
B. Guidelines.
1. No permits shall be issued for any of the specific prohibitions listed in Sec. 6 above
except for Sec. 6. An exception to this is for any public infrastructure construction or
repairs that in the opinion of the Town Council, after a public hearing on the request,
would be in the best interest of the general public to have the work performed
between the hours of 9:30 P.M. Sunday evening through 7:00 A.M. Saturday
morning. Emergency repairs to public infrastructure are permitted to be done with
permission from the Police Chief or his/her designee without a public hearing.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 26 of 47
2. The activity producing noise must be an event which occurs infrequently on the
premises listed on the Permit. If the noise production is a routine occurrence, the
producer of such noise or the person responsible for the production of such noise,
must obtain a Commercial Sound Permit.
3. The applicant may not receive more than two Special Sound Permits for any
particular premises in any twenty-eight (28) day period.
4. The Chief of Police or his/her designee must consider the character of the
neighborhood in which the applicant’s premises is located in deciding whether to
grant or deny a permit.
C. If a permit is granted, the permitee must comply with the following terms. Failure to comply
with the following terms shall be a violation of this Ordinance. After notice and a hearing a
Special Sound Permit can be revoked by the Chief of Police for failure to comply with any of
the terms or conditions of the Permit. This section shall not apply to public infrastructure
work that the Town Council or Police Chief or his/her designee may permit.
1. The only noises permitted are music or the human voice.
2. The permit shall be in effect for one day only, from 10:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. local
time.
3. The noise generated shall not be audible above background sounds at a distance of
100 yards or more from the noise source, nor shall the noise be unreasonably loud
within the sound area.
4. Noise shall not be produced within 100 yards of hospitals, schools, churches, nursing
homes or business premises open to the public unless the permitee secures a consent
in writing, and in advance, from the owner, lessee, operator or manager at the affected
hospital, school, church, nursing home or business premises open to the public.
Copies of the consents must be filed together with the application for the Special
Sound Permit. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may determine whether all
required consents have in fact been obtained.
D. Appeal. Applicants may appeal any denial of a Special Sound Permit to the Fairfield Town
Council, and if the denial is not reversed, to the Superior Court in accordance with law and
court rules.
E. Commercial Sound Permits. Any person who in the course of business intends to produce or
be responsible for the production of noise in violation of this Ordinance more than twice in
any twenty-eight (28) day period must apply to the Chief of Police or his/her designee for a
Commercial Sound Permit. There shall be a $50.00 application fee for this permit. After
notice and a hearing the Chief of Police or his/her designee can revoke a Commercial Sound
Permit for violating a term or condition of the Permit and no refund of the Permit application
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 27 of 47
fee shall be due from the Town of Fairfield in the event of such revocation. Failure to comply
with the following terms shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
1. Procedure. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall conduct a public hearing on
the application before issuance. The date, time and location of hearing shall be
advertised once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Fairfield at least
one week, but not more than four weeks, before the hearing is held. The cost of this
advertisement shall be prepaid by the applicant. The applicant will be responsible for
placement of the notice upon approval of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. At
the hearing all those in favor and all those opposed to the granting of the permit shall
have an opportunity to voice their opinions. The hearing shall be an informal process.
After the hearing, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall grant or deny the
permit, after applying the following guidelines.
2. No permits shall be issued for any of the specific prohibitions listed in Section 6.
3. The Chief of police shall address, in writing, the comments made at the hearing.
4. The applicant must operate a business at an established premises.
5. The Chief of Police or his/her designee must consider the character of the
neighborhood in which the applicant’s premises is located in deciding whether to
grant or deny a permit.
F. If a permit is granted, the permitee must comply with the terms listed in Section 7 above,
except Section 7, and must also comply with the following:
1. The permit shall be in effect for one year from the date of issue, and shall permit
noise production between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., local time, Sunday
through Thursday, and 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday. In addition, the
following terms must be met:
2. The permitee must pay the Town a reasonable sum, to be agreed upon by the Town
Manager, for additional police protection on occasions negotiated and agreed upon by
the applicant and the Chief of Police and his/her designee at the time of application.
3. The permit is non-transferable. Furthermore, it cannot be transferred from one set of
premises to another, even if both premises are owned by the same person.
G. Appeal. Applicants may appeal a denial of a Commercial Sound Permit to the Fairfield Town
Council, and if the denial is not reversed, to the Superior Court in accordance with law and
court rules.
H. Expiration. A Commercial Sound Permit expires at 12:00 midnight on the last day of its oneyear
term. A permitee may file a new application for a permit not earlier than thirty (30) days
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 28 of 47
before such expiration or at any time after such expiration.
SECTION 8 ENFORCEMENT
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Fairfield Police Department. In the event the offense
under this ordinance shall not have been witnesses by a law enforcement officer, the complaint
may be substantiated by the use of a video camera and/or tape recorder or at least two sworn
affidavits.
SECTION 9 PENALTIES
Civil Penalties. Any person in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any term or
condition of a permit issued under this Ordinance shall be subject to a civil penalty, and upon
adjudication, thereof shall be fined in an amount not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250) for each separate violation. The municipality may be
awarded attorney’s fees and costs incurred in enforcing this Ordinance. Each day such violation
continues after the time for correction of the violation has been given in an order, shall constitute
a continuing violation and the amount of fine shall be doubled for each day said violation
continues, said fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) per day.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 29 of 47
ARTICLE 7
Firearms Discharge Ordinance
SECTION 1 PROHIBITIONS
No person shall discharge any firearm, including air rifles, air pistols or any rifle or pistol
powered by CO2 or compressed air.
A. In the Urban Compact area of the Town of Fairfield as defined by the State of Maine
Department of Transportation. The Urban Compact Area is marked by use of Urban Compact
signs installed by said Department of Transportation.
B. In, upon or over any of the public lanes, courts, parks, or public squares situated within the
Town of Fairfield.
C. Within three hundred (300) yards of any built-up area as defined in M.R.S.A. Title 29A
Section 2074—2 ss 1252 (3) (A).
D. On any public lands of the Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 2 EXCEPTIONS
A. Law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties.
B. Military exercises, funerals, or reviews.
C. At memorial events.
D. In proper defense of one’s self, family, or property.
E. In destruction of a dangerous animal.
F. Written permission from the Chief of Police or his/her designee for a specific event of a short
duration or for a place that would not endanger or otherwise disturb the peace of the public.
SECTION 3 PENALTY
Whoever is found to have violated any section of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for
each separate offense.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 30 of 47
ARTICLE 8
Parks and Playgrounds
SECTION 1 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES INVOLVING PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
A. Buildings and other Property
1. Disfiguration and Removal. Willfully mark, disfigure, injury, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving, or paving
material, water lines, or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or place-cards whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or
other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or maker property
or appurtenances whatever, either real or personal.
2. Removal of natural resources. Dig or remove any sand, shrubs, or plants, timber or
other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other
means or agency.
3. Erection of structures. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any public service
utility into, upon, or cross such lands, except on special written permit issued by the
director.
B. Trees, Shrubbery and Lawns.
1. Injury and removal. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark, or pick the flowers and seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any
person attach a rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not
dig in or otherwise disturb grassy areas, or in ant other way injure or impair the
natural beauty or usefulness of any areas.
2. Climbing trees. Climb a tree or walk, stand, or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains,
railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for
such purposes.
SECTION 2 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES INVOLVING SANITATION
No person in the park shall:
A. Pollution of waters. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pool, pond, stream, or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any
tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, manner or
thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Refuse and trash. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 31 of 47
or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided;
where waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for such presence,
and properly disposed of elsewhere.
C. Human waste. Urinate or defecate in or upon any park or playground within the Town of
Fairfield.
D. Tobacco. Dispose of any smoking materials including any tobacco products.
SECTION 3 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES INVOLVING TRAFFIC
No person in a park shall:
A. State motor vehicle laws apply. Failure to comply with all applicable provisions of the state
motor vehicle laws with regard to equipment and operation of vehicles together with such
regulations as are contained in this and other Town of Fairfield ordinances.
B. Obey traffic signs. Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction,
caution, stopping, or parking, and all other posted for proper control and to safeguard life and
property.
C. Speed of vehicles. Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding the posted speed for
any park areas.
D. Operation of vehicles. Drive any vehicle, excepting bicycles, on or in any area except public
ways and paved park roads or parking areas, or such other areas may, on occasion, be
specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the director, or the Chief of Police.
Excepting bicycles, only vehicles properly licensed and registered for operation on public
ways and operated by persons properly licensed under the laws of the State of Maine shall be
permitted in any park area.
E. Parking
1. Designated areas. Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking
area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions thereat and with
the instructions of any attendant who may be present.
2. Night parking. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night within any parking area
from one half hour after sunset to one half hour before sunrise.
F. Bicycles
1. Confined to roads. Ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicle road or path
designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle
by hand over any grassy area or wooden trail or any paved area reserved for
pedestrian use.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 32 of 47
2. Operation. Ride a bicycle other than on the right hand side of the road paving as close
as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single file when two (2) or more
are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with a
reasonable regard as to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any
vehicle they are overtaking, and pass to the right of any vehicle they may be meeting.
3. Designated racks. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees,
or any place or position where other persons may trip over, or be injured by them.
SECTION 4 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES INVOLVING RECREATION
No person in a park shall:
A. Bathing and Swimming
1. Designated areas. NO person shall frequent any waters or places customarily
designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat in such
activities prohibited by the director.
2. Certain hours. Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such hours of the day
and on such conditions as shall be designated by the director for such purposes for
each individual park area.
3. Hunting and firearms. No person shall use, carry or possess firearms of any
description or air rifles, spring guns, bows, and arrows, slings, or other forms of
weapons potentially harmful to wildlife and dangerous to human safety or any other
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping
devise. Shooting in park areas as defined herein is strictly forbidden, except if issued
a permit by the Chief of Police, or in accordance with the Town of Fairfield
“FIREARM DISCHARGE ORDINANCE.”
4. Camping. No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the
purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing
hours, any movable structures or special vehicle that could be used for purposes such
as a house trailer, camp trailer, tent or the like, except with the permission of the
Chief of Police.
SECTION 5 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES INVOLVING BEHAVIOR
No person in a park shall:
A. Prohibited. Have brought alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person drink alcoholic beverages
in any playground or park at any time.
B. Fires. Build or attempt to build a fire, except at such areas and under such regulations as may
be designated by the Chief of the Fairfield Fire Department or his designee. No person shall
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 33 of 47
drop, throw, or other wise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco or
other inflammable material, within the park or playground area or any highway, road or street
abutting or contiguous thereto.
C. Closed areas. Enter an area posted as “closed to the public”, nor shall any person use or let
the use of an area in violation of posted notices.
SECTION 6 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES INVOLVING VENDING AND PEDDLING
No person in a park shall: Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall he station or
place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any such thing.
Exception here is made as to any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the
authority and regulations of the Chief of Police.
SECTION 7 PLAYGROUND OPERATING POLICY
A. Hours. Except as provided by Subsection B below, all playgrounds, as defined herein, shall
be open to the public every day of the year from one half (1/2) hour before sunrise to one half
(1/2) hour after sunset. The director shall cause notices of the opening and closing hours to
be posted in each individual playground for the public information purposes.
B. Closed Areas. Any section or part of any park or playground may be declared closed by the
Director at any time for maintenance or repair.
C. Entry prohibited. Except with written permission of the Director, no person shall enter, pass
through, or remain in any playground, or the closed areas of such playground, except during
the hours and times which such playgrounds, or portion thereof, are open to the public as
provided in this section.
SECTION 8 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS
A. Officials. The director and subordinate employees shall, in connection with their duties
imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this ordinance. In addition, the members
of the Fairfield Police Department shall also have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this ordinance.
B. Ejection. The director, any subordinate employees, and the Fairfield Police Department shall
have the authority to eject from any park or playground any person or persons acting in
violation of this ordinance.
SECTION 9 CANINE WASTE
A. It shall be in violation of this ordinance for any person who owns, possesses, or controls a
dog to fail to remove immediately and dispose of any feces left by his or her dog on or in any
park or playground within the Town of Fairfield in a sanitary and lawful manner.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 34 of 47
B. The provisions of this section, entitled “Canine Waste”, shall be enforced by any designated
representative of the Town of Fairfield health officer, the Director, or any of his subordinated
employees, or any member of the Fairfield Police Department.
C. Exemptions. This section, entitled “Canine Waste”, shall not apply to a dog accompanying
any handicapped person who, by reason of his or her handicap, is physically unable to
comply with the requirements of this section.
SECTION 10 ENFORCEMENT
The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the Chief of Police, the Fire Chief, the
Director of Public Works, and the Health Officer of the Town of Fairfield. The provisions of this
ordinance shall be prosecuted at any hearing or trial by the Chief of Police and/or the town
attorney.
SECTION 11 PENALTIES
Any person violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50), nor more than two hundred and fifty ($250) for each separate incident. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 35 of 47
ARTICLE 9
Dogs
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
This ordinance is adopted in the exercise of municipal home rule powers under the Maine
Constitution and 30-A MRSA Section 3001. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate dogs in
the Town of Fairfield, to end the problems caused by dangerous dogs, dogs running at large,
barking dogs, and property damage occasioned by dogs held to a minimum or eliminated, for the
protection of the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the residents of the
town, without unreasonably restricting owners and their dogs in their normal activities, while
holding owners responsible, where it is appropriate to do so, for the deleterious conduct of their
dog.
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, unless the text clearly otherwise indicates, the following words and
phrases have the following meanings.
A. “Attack”, “attacks”, and “attacking” means an unprovoked actual biting; they also mean,
where they occur without provocation, a mere showing of the teeth, or growling or barking,
or any combination of these acts, from which a person reasonably receives an impression of
impending or imminent physical harm by the dog to himself or herself, to another or others,
or to a domestic pet or farm animal.
B. “Dog” includes both genders of dogs.
C. “Owner” means any person or persons, firm, association, or corporation, or other legal entity
amenable to civil process, owning, keeping, or harboring, or in possession of, or having the
control of a dog, and includes the parent or parents, or guardian, of a minor who owns, keeps,
harbors, or is in possession or control of a dog.
D. “Dangerous dog” means the following, regardless of whether the dog is on or off the
premises of its owner at the relevant time:
1. A dog that attacks a person, regardless of whether it causes physical harm to the
person, provided at the time of the attack the person is not trespassing with criminal
intent on the owners premises.
2. A dog that attacks a domestic pet or farm animal and causes harm to the domestic pet
or farm animal.
3. A dog that causes serious injury or death to an animal other than a domestic pet or
farm animal. It is irrelevant to these definitions of a dangerous dog that an attack
occurs outside the Town of Fairfield, or even outside the State of Maine.
E. “Running at large” means off the premises of the dog’s owner and not under the control of an
owner of the dog who is physically capable of controlling and restraining the dog by a leash,
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 36 of 47
cord, or chain, or by “at heel” or other voice or other command control to which the dog is
obedient.
SECTION 3 NUISANCE
Dangerous dogs, dogs running at large, and barking dogs are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
SECTION 4 IDENTIFICATION
An owner shall ensure that the owner’s dog , if two months old or older and out of doors,
whether on or off the premises of the owner, unless confined within a secure enclosure or
container, wears a collar or harness which there must be securely attached an identification tag
with the owner’s name, address (if any), and telephone number (if any). Alternatively, an owner
may provide for identification by having the dog wear such a collar that is at all times clearly and
legibly embroidered with the information required by this section, or by having the dog wear
such an embroidered collar which in combination with one or more security tags shows the
required information.
SECTION 5 RUNNING AT LARGE
Special restrictions governing dogs on municipal property. No owner of a dog shall cause or
permit that dog to run at large within the town. A dog, while in or on the way or place other than
a public way or other municipal property, shall be deemed to be under restraint within the
meaning of this ordinance if it is otherwise if it is controlled by a leash, chord, or chain, or is “at
heel” or otherwise under the voice or other command control of a person and obedient to that
person’s command. An owner of a dog shall ensure that dog, when on any public way, and on all
municipal property, including but not limited to the towns parks and public ways, municipal
sidewalks and recreational and athletic fields, is on a leash or tether at all times and is
accompanied by an owner who is physically or by effective voice or other command able to
control and restrain the dog from an attack and who tends the leash or tether at all times while
the dog is on municipal property, and who does not permit the dog to run at large on municipal
property. An owner accompanying a dog on municipal property, other than an owner with visual
acuity accompanying a Seeing Eye dog, so-called, on municipal property, shall collect any feces
or vomitus deposited by the dog and dispose of the same in a sanitary lawful manner.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be held to require the leashing or restraint of any dog other than a
dangerous dog while on the owner’s premises.
SECTION 6 DANGEROUS DOGS
An owner who is given notice (which need not be in writing) by the town’s Animal Control
officer, any law enforcement officer, or any state official that the owner’s dog has bitten or is
reasonably believed to have bitten any person, or has or is reasonably believed to have in any
way injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin to that person, shall not without
further written authorization by an officer or official, sell, give, or otherwise convey the
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 37 of 47
ownership or possession of that dog, or remove or suffer or permit that dog to be moved beyond
the boundaries of the town, except to or under the care of a licensed veterinarian, or of an animal
control officer, or a law enforcement officer. An owner receiving such notice shall immediately
place the dog under confinement for a period of at least 10 days and shall promptly obey all
rabies detection and control directions of and animal control officer, licensed veterinarian, law
enforcement officer, or state official concerning that dog. An owner receiving such notice shall
comply with all applicable regulations of the Maine Commissioner of Agriculture and the Maine
Commissioner of Human Services and their authorized officials, employees, and agents in
matters of rabies detection and control.
SECTION 7 SPECIAL RESTRAINT OF DANGEROUS DOGS
An owner of a dog that has been determined by a court to be a dangerous dog shall ensure that
the dog is restricted at all times to the premises of the owner, except when being transported by a
secure motor vehicle to a veterinarian or to some other premises of that owner, or to the custody
of an animal control officer or law enforcement officer. The owner of such a dog will ensure that
the dog , when out of doors on the owners premises, is either contained within secure enclosure
or is fastened with a secured latch to a reinforced chain restraint, the length of which is such that
the dog may in no event approach any closer than three (3) feet to any mail receptacle or
entrance or exit to a house or other building, end or edge of a driveway, walkway, stoop or stairs
leading to an entrance, edge of a lawn, property boundary or public sidewalk, or home fill pipe or
utility meter or point on the ground generally below any other wiring or piping. The owner shall
ensure that the restraint is maintained and secure at all times the dog is out of doors on the
owner’s premises and not in a secure fenced in enclosure.
SECTION 8 BARKING DOGS
No owner of a dog shall suffer or permit that dog by loud, frequent, or habitual barking, howling,
or yelping to disturb the peace of another person. [An incident of such disturbance of the peace
not occurring not less than twelve (12) hours after another violation of this ordinance.]
SECTION 9 PENALTIES
For an initial violation of this ordinance by an owner, the owner shall be ordered to pay a penalty
of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). In
determining the amount to be forfeited the court shall consider any evidence in mitigation,
extenuation, or aggravation it considers pertinent to the offense, including but not limited to the
civility and degree of cooperation exhibited by the owner, the penalty shall be increased by a
minimum of 50.00 above the penalty for the immediate proceeding violation. All penalties
awarded, and all the sums recovered, shall accrue to benefit the Town Of Fairfield. An owner
found to have violated this ordinance shall pay all fees and surcharges assessed or required by a
court or court order or rule and shall pay court costs.
For purposes of illustration of the penalty provision only, if an owner were found, in a single
court proceeding to have committed four violations, and if the penalty for the initial violation
were set at $100, then the penalties for the seceding violations would be $150, $200, and $250,
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 38 of 47
for a total of $700 in penalties; similarly, if there occurred thereafter a second enforcement action
for a new single violation against the same owner and if there were a finding of a violation, then
the penalty for the violation would be $300.
SECTION 10 PROCEDURE ON VIOLATION
Any law enforcement officer, on complaint of any person on his or her own initiative, may
initiate prosecution for violation of this ordinance by filing a complaint with the Maine District
court for the division that includes the Town of Fairfield and serving a summons and a copy of
the complaint upon the owner. Any law enforcement officer certified by the Maine Criminal
Justice Academy may represent the town in District Court in the prosecution of alleged
violations of this ordinance. In the alternative, the municipal officers may, if they desire and if
the funds are available, engage and appoint counsel to prosecute the alleged violations.
A. ORDER OF THE COURT. If, upon hearing, the court determines that the ordinance has been
violated, the court shall impose an appropriate penalty. If the court determines that a dog is a
dangerous dog, the court may order the owner to muzzle the dog, and to restrain it, and
confine it to the owner’s premises; however, if the court finds that the dog has killed,
maimed, or inflicted more than de minimis bodily injury upon a person, or upon a domestic
pet or farm animal, or the court determines that the dog has a history of attacks, then the
court should ordinarily order the dog to be euthanized. Such euthanasia shall be at the
owner’s expense.
B. FAILURE TO ABIDE BY A COURT ORDER. An owner’s failure to comply with an order
issued pursuant to Paragraph A, immediately above, constitutes a violation of this ordinance,
and may be punishable upon a new summons or as contempt, following issuance of a show
cause order on affidavit of a law enforcement officer. If an order of euthanasia is not
complied with by the time set by the court, the court may, upon application by any law
enforcement officer or other person, upon notice to the owner, issue a warrant to any law
enforcement officer or constable in the municipality where the dog is found to destroy the
dog and make return of the warrant to the court within 14 days from the date of the warrant.
The owner shall pay all costs of any supplementary proceedings and all reasonable costs for
seizure and euthanasia of the dog. A failure to pay such costs by any time stated in the order
of the court for making such a payment constitutes a distinct violation of this ordinance,
which may also be punished on proceedings for contempt after issuance of a show cause
order.
C. COMPLAINT FOR DOGS PRESENTING IMMEDIATE THREAT TO PUBLIC. After
filing a complaint in District Court and before hearing the dog shall be subject to muzzling,
restraint, or confinement upon it’s owners premises upon order of the law enforcement
officer who filed the complaint to the owner, if that officer’s belief that the dog poses
immediate threat to the public. The officer may proscribe the degree and means of restraint or
confinement. Failure to comply shall constitute a distinct violation of this ordinance. Upon
failure to comply and after notice to the owner, the officer may apply to the district court for
an order of authorization to take possession of the dog that poses immediate threat to the
public and turn it over to the care of a suitable person or organization, at the owner’s
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 39 of 47
expense. The court in its final order shall include an order to the owner to pay such expense
in a stated amount.
Nothing in this ordinance is intended to bar or limit the right of the individuals to make written
complaint concerning dangerous dogs pursuant to State Law, or bar or limit any law enforcement
officer form proceeding to act upon such a written complaint in accordance with the State Law.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 40 of 47
ARTICLE 10
Fireworks
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the use, sale, and storage of fireworks in the Town of
Fairfield, and to prevent damage or injury caused by the use of fireworks. Possession, Use, Sale
and Storage of Fireworks in the Town of Fairfield shall follow MRSA Title 8 ch. 9-A and this
ordinance.
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
As used in this ordinance, the following items shall follow and have the same meaning as found
in MRSA Title 8 ch. 9-A Sec 221-A:
A. Display
B. Fireworks
C. Fireworks Technician
D. Permit
E. Person
F. Possession
G. Sale or Sell
H. Special Effects Display
I. Value
SECTION 3 USE RESTRICTED
A. The use of fireworks of any type is restricted from all public property, including:
1. Public Lands adjacent to Municipal or School Buildings and Facilities
2. Parking Lots, Streets, and Public Ways
3. Parks, Playgrounds, Athletic Fields, and Public Boat Landings
4. Exception: Special Effects and/or Fireworks Displays for a public event may be
authorized upon approval of the Chiefs of the Fire and Police Departments, and also
by the State of Maine Fire Marshal’s Office
B. The use of fireworks within the Town of Fairfield shall conform to state laws that regulate
the discharge of firearms, with the following exceptions:
1. Fireworks shall be legal to use only on the following days:
i. A total of five days per year during the week of Independence Day,
comprising the two days preceding and the two days following July 4th,
including the holiday.
2. Fireworks may only be used on days that are Fire Class 1 or 2.
3. Use of fireworks within the urban compact shall be limited to ground displays. Aerial
fireworks that are propelled by mortar or rocket are not permitted within the urban
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 41 of 47
compact except that during Town-sanctioned public events a licensed professional
may receive permission from the Town to conduct an aerial display.
C. Aerial displays shall not be ignited within 100 feet of any neighboring structure not owned
by the user, and Ground displays shall not be ignited within 25 feet of any neighboring
structure, unless the user has gained permission from the property owner(s). Furthermore, the
use of fireworks shall not cause debris or ashes to be deposited on any neighboring land or
buildings without permission from the property owner(s). A “structure” is defined as
anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
D. The time of day fireworks may be used shall conform to MRSA Title 8 ch. 9-A.
SECTION 4 PENALTIES
Those persons found to be in violation of this ordinance shall first receive a written warning. A
second violation may warrant a fine of $150. A third violation may warrant a fine of $300. Any
subsequent violation may warrant a fine of $600.
SECTION 5 SALES AND STORAGE
As authorized under MRSA Title 8 ch. 9-A Sec. 223-A (2), a conditional use permit shall be
required for a commercial enterprise to sell and/or store consumer fireworks. Applications for
permits must meet:
A. The requirements of MRSA Title 8 ch. 9-A Sec. 223-A, Sale of Consumer Fireworks
B. Approval of the Town of Fairfield Planning Board
1. Commercial enterprises seeking to sell and/or store consumer fireworks shall
NOT be permitted to operate in any Village or Residential Zone as defined by the
Town of Fairfield Land use Ordinance
C. Approval of the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments
SECTION 6 EMERGENCY SERVICES RESPONSE
If the use of consumer fireworks requires the response of emergency services for injury, fire, or
damage to property, the owner of the property from which the fireworks were ignited shall be
liable for full reimbursement cost of such a response. This shall apply even if the injured
person(s) or property owner is the responsible party. Billing may include any cost incurred by
neighboring municipalities’ departments responding through mutual aid.
SECTION 7 ENFORCEMENT
A. Any State or Local Fire Safety Official or Law Enforcement Officer may enforce State Law
and this Ordinance
B. See also: Town of Fairfield Ordinance # PD95-01 Prosecution of Town Ordinances
Article XIII was adopted by the Town Council on the 14th day of December, 2011.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 42 of 47
ARTICLE 11
Bicycle Ordinance
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide regulations, due to the considerable increase in the
number of bicycles in the Town of Fairfield, to control all bicycles within the Fairfield
jurisdiction, and mandatory annual reporting of information, in order to provide an identification
record should any bicycle become stolen, and an annual inspection of bicycles prior to
registration to insure safety to all riders.
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
A. Bicycle: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having a
minimum of two tandem wheels, including but not limited to bicycles, motorized bicycles, or
motorized tricycles.
B. Driver: Every person who drives, operates, attempts to operate, or is in actual physical
control of a device.
SECTION 3 SAFETY RULES
A. Every driver of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid collision with any pedestrian and
shall use audible signals when necessary, such as before overtaking and passing such
pedestrian.
B. Every driver of a bicycle shall exercise proper precaution upon observing a child or any
obviously confused, incapacitated, or intoxicated person.
C. Every person propelling a bicycle by human power or riding a bicycle shall have all of the
rights and all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle and shall, when on a
roadway, conform to all traffic laws, ordinances, and regulations.
D. Every person propelling a bicycle by human power upon and along a sidewalk, or across a
roadway upon and along a crosswalk, shall have all the rights and duties applicable to a
pedestrian under the same circumstances.
E. The driver of a bicycle crossing a sidewalk or crosswalk shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian and all other traffic on the sidewalk.
F. No person shall drive any bicycle other than by human power upon a sidewalk except on a
permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
G. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a
roadway.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 43 of 47
H. Every person operating a bicycle on a roadway shall ride and adhere to the right side of the
road as practical, except when making a left turn, and shall exercise due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
I. Persons riding bicycles on a roadway should not ride more than two abreast except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. Persons riding two abreast
shall not impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a paved roadway,
shall ride within the single lane.
J. No person shall operate any bicycle that is not in such mechanical condition so as to be
operated safely.
K. No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article which prevents the
use of one hand in the control and operation of the bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall
keep at least one hand on the handlebars at all times.
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. No person shall park a bicycle on a sidewalk as to impede the normal and reasonable
movements of pedestrian traffic.
B. Bicycle racing on highways is prohibited. Exception to this section may be waived with
agreement of the Chief of Police.
C. Every bicycle upon a highway within this town at any time from a half an hour after sunset to
a half an hour before sunrise and at any other time when due to insufficient light, persons and
bicycles on highways shall be equipped with a lamp on the front, emitting a white light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front.
D. Every bicycle, when in use between dusk and dawn, shall be equipped with reflective
material of sufficient size and reflectivity to be visible from both sides for 600 feet.
E. Every bicycle shall be equipped with brakes which will enable its driver to stop the bicycle
within 25 feet from a speed of 10 miles an hour.
F. A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, a siren or
whistle.
SECTION 5 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION
Any person of age 17 years or older who violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall,
upon adjudication, be punished by a fine of not more than $10.00 or by impounding of such
person’s bicycle for a period not to exceed 30 days or any combinations thereof. Such person so
charged or ticketed may waive his rights to a Court appearance by paying a penalty of $3.00
within 7 days of the violation, in person at the Fairfield Police Department, 74 Water Street,
Fairfield, Maine or by mailing the notice with a check or money order payable to Fairfield Police
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 44 of 47
Department, 74 Water Street, Fairfield, Maine 04937.
The Chief of Police of Fairfield, when satisfied that a juvenile under age 17 years has ridden a
bicycle in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance, may impound the bicycle for a
period not to exceed 5 days for the first offense, for a period not to exceed 10 days for a second
offense, and for a period not to exceed 30 days f or any subsequent offense.
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 45 of 47
ARTICLE 12
Curfew Ordinance
SECTION 1 DEFINITIONS
A. Curfew Hours means the hours from 11:00 p.m. until 5:59 a.m. of the following day for
those persons fourteen years of age and older, but under eighteen years of age.
B. Curfew Hours means the hours from 9:00 p.m. until 5:59 a.m. of the following day for
those persons under fourteen years of age.
C. Emergency means unforeseen circumstances, or the resulting situation, calling for immediate
action. This includes, but is not limited to, fire, natural disaster, or vehicular accident, as well
as any situation requiring action to avert serious injury or the loss of life.
D. Guardian means a person or a public or private agency who, either pursuant to court order or
acceptance of testamentary appointment, is the legal guardian of the minor. This definition
also includes a person to whom parental powers have been delegated under 18-A M.R.S.A. §
5-104.
E. Minor means any person who is seventeen years of age or younger.
F. Parent means a person who is the natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of the minor.
G. Public place means a place located in the Town of Fairfield to which the public, or a
substantial group of the public, has access, including, but not limited to, streets, highways,
sidewalks, parking lots, vacant lots, parks, cemeteries, and the common areas in and about
apartment buildings, office buildings, hospitals, schools, shops, and places of entertainment
such as movie theaters.
H. Remain means to linger or stay, as well as to refuse to leave when requested to do so by a
police officer, or the owner or other person in control of a public place. This term also
encompasses activities which may be mobile, such as walking, driving, and riding about in a
public place.
SECTION 2 OFFENSES
A. It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in a public place during curfew hours without
being directly supervised by a parent or legal guardian.
B. It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or to allow by
exercising insufficient control, the minor to remain in a public place during curfew hours.
SECTION 3 DEFENSES
It is a defense to prosecution under Section 2 of this ordinance that the minor was:
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 46 of 47
A. Involved in an emergency or on an errand necessitated by an emergency;
B. Taking measures to protect himself/herself from injury whether perceived or actual;
C. Engaged in an employment activity, or on the way to or from an employment activity,
without any detour or stop except as necessary to drop off or pick up a co-employee;
D. Travelling in a motor vehicle and there is no reasonable belief that a crime is being, or will
be committed;
E. Patronizing, or intending to patronize, an open commercial establishment, as permitted by a
parent or guardian;
F. On an errand directed by a parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
G. On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s home, subject to parental control;
H. Attending a school, religious, or governmental activity, which is supervised by adults, or
traveling to or from such a school, religious, or governmental activity without detour or stop;
I. Attending a recreational activity sponsored by the Town of Fairfield, a civic organization, or
a similar entity, which is supervised by adults, or traveling to or from such an activity
without detour or stop;
J. Participating in physical activity or exercise, as permitted by a parent or guardian.
K. Exercising rights protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution;
L. Married, or otherwise legally emancipated.
SECTION 4 ENFORCEMENT
Before taking any action to enforce this ordinance, a police officer of the Fairfield Police
Department shall ask the apparent offender’s age. The officer may ask for proof of the apparent
offender’s age, and shall be justified in taking action to ascertain the apparent offender’s age in
the absence of identification, such as taking the apparent offender into custody while contacting
his or her parent or guardian, or accompanying the apparent offender to his or her residence for
the purpose of obtaining identification.
If the apparent offender is a minor, or cannot produce identification proving otherwise
immediately, the officer shall ask the reason for the apparent offender’s being in a public place.
The officer shall not take any action to enforce this section unless the officer reasonably believes
that an offense has occurred and, based on any response as well as other circumstances, no
defense provided in Section 4 is applicable. If the officer does have such a reasonable belief, the
FAIRFIELD PUBLIC SAFETY ORDINANCE
Page 47 of 47
officer may take the minor into custody for the purposes of contacting the minor’s parent or
guardian, to come to take control of the minor. The police officer shall summons the minor and
the minor’s parent to the District Court for violation of this ordinance. During this period, the
officer may require the minor or the minor’s parent or guardian or both to remain in the officer’s
presence for a period of up to two hours, so long as the officer complies with all requirements of
law, including, without limitation, 17-A M.R.S.A. §17.
SECTION 5 PENALTIES
Penalties shall be enforced only after the juvenile and parent have been notified and warned of
the provisions of the Municipal Curfew Ordinance.
A. The penalty for a minor who violates this ordinance shall be:
1. For the first offense, five hours of community service and a fine of not less than
$25.00; and
2. For each subsequent offense, ten hours of community service and a fine of up to
$100.00.
B. The penalty for a parent or guardian who violates this ordinance shall be:
1. For the first offense, a fine of $50.00; and
2. For each subsequent offense, a fine of $100.00.
ARTICLE 13
Severability
Should any portion of this ordinance be found invalid for any reason by a court of competent
jurisdiction, then all portions not found invalid shall remain unaffected and continue in full force
and effect.
RADIOACTIVE WASTE ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The regulations set forth in this Ordinance are adopted to:
A. Provide for the protection of ground water and surface water quality through
the control of radioactive waste handling, storage or disposal;
B. Protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Fairfield,
Maine.
SECTION 2 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
A. Authority
1. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to Home Rule Powers as provided
for in Article VII of the Maine Constitution and Title 30-A, MRSA Section
3001.
B. Administration
1. The Town Council of the Town of Fairfield, Maine or its designee shall
administer this Ordinance.
SECTION 3 REQUIREMENTS
A. Waste defined as radioactive waste materials by Title 38, MRSA Section 1451
Subsections 6 & 11, within the boundaries of the Town is prohibited.
B. Any request for an except ion to the prohibit ion shall be submitted in writing
to the Councilors and brought to the whole Town of Fairfield, acting as a body
politic, to be voted on by all registered voters. any person intending to construct
or operate any temporary or permanent radioactive waste repository shall at
least one year prior to commencing any construct ion or operation notify the
Town Officers in writing of his or her intent and of the nature and location of the
facility, together with any other information the Town Council may require
SECTION 4 APPEALS
A. An aggrieved party or landowner may appeal a decision to Superior Court
within thirty (30) days from the final decision in accordance with Rule 808 of the
Maine Rules of Civil Procedure.
SECTION 5 AMENDMENTS
A. This Ordinance may be amended by a majority vote of the voters of the Town.
Amendments may be initiated by a majority vote of Town voters or on petition of
ten percent (10%) of the voters casting votes in the last gubernatorial election in
the Town. The Council shall conduct a public hearing on any proposed
amendment.
SECTION 6 SITE CHARACTERIZATION
A. Any testing or drilling pertaining to the siting of a high or low level radioactive
waste repository within the town limits of Fairfield will be prohibited.
B. Any request for exception to this section shall be handled under Sect ion 3 of
the Radioactive Waste Ordinance, Subsection B.
SECTION 7 VIOLATIONS
A. Any violations of the Ordinance shall be dealt with under the provisions of
Title 30-A, MRSA Section 4452.
B. It shall be the duty of the Town Council or its designee to immediately notify
in writing any person responsible for violating any provision of this Ordinance
and to order the action necessary to correct any such violations.
C. Legal action: When a violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be
found to exist, the Municipal Attorney, as designated by the Town Council, either
on his own initiative, or upon the notice of the Town Council or’ its designee, is
hereby authorized and directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings,
either legal or equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the Town.
D. Fines: Any person, firm, corporation or entity who violates any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a civil violation and on convict ion
shall be fined no less than $100 nor more than $2500. Each day such a violation
is permitted to exist after the notification shall constitute an additional and
separate offense.
SECTION 8 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
If any provision of the Ordinance is held invalid, the other provisions of the
Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. If the application of this Ordinance or
any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
application of this Ordinance and its provisions to other persons or circumstances
shall not be affected thereby.
Public Hearing Date: February 18, 1992
Adopted: March 3, 1992
Attest: Terry A. York, Town Clerk
Town of Fairfield, Maine
Road Opening Ordinance
Section 01. Permit Required.
No person except the Director of Public Works or his Designee shall make or cause to
be made any excavation or dig up paving in any street until applicant has paid the
required fee and has received a written permit therefore from the Director of Public
Works, except in an emergency, in which case such permit shall be secured within
twenty-four (24) hours after the street has been opened.
Section 02. Record of Permits.
The Director of Public Works or such officer as the municipal officers may appoint shall
be authorized to issue permits, shall keep a record of all permits granted by the Director,
work done by the Town employees excepted.
Section 03. Fee Schedule.
A non-refundable fee of $50.00, payable to the Town of Fairfield, shall be paid for
openings made within the right-of-way of any accepted Town street or within the Urban
Compact Zone.
For excavation and related construction work, a deposit fee shall be as follows:
Paved Surface $ 50.00 per Sq. Yard
Concrete Surface $ 75.00 per Sq. Yard
All other Surfaces $ 9.00 per Sq. Yard
Direct Buried Cable $ 0.20 per Lineal Foot
Low impact, outside of travel way/shoulder
Curb Replacement $ 10.00 per Lineal Foot
Driveway Entrance $35.00 per Entrance
Large scale non-residential projects ~The contractor/owner can request that a portion of
the deposit fee be covered by providing a performance bond in the amount of the work
and establishing an escrow account in the amount, at minimum, of 10% of the work.
Deposit Fee Returns
(1) Except as noted in (2) below, upon review and acceptance by the Director of
Public Works, and after 90 days from the completion of the work, 90% of the
deposit shall be refunded. If any part of the work is found to be defective, the
contractor/owner shall be given a 24 hour deadline to correct the problem(s). If
the corrective work is not completed within that time period, the deposit shall be
forfeited and the town authorized to complete the work in accordance with
Section 15.
(2) To ensure quality of work and warranty of placed materials. All non-residential
work, meaning and intending work not for the benefit of a single private Fairfield
citizen will be subject to performance bonds and/or retainage of 20% of the
deposit for a length of time equal to a minimum of 1 year from date of completion.
Remaining 10% deposit to be returned upon review and acceptance by the
Director of Public Works after the 1 year period.
Quasi-municipal utilities, including Kennebec Water District and Kennebec Sanitary
Treatment District, shall be exempt from paying deposit fees for a permit, but are
required to pay the Town for administrative costs associated with project inspection and
are subject to Section 15.
Section 04. Qualifications of Applicant.
Before any permit shall be issued, the applicant shall satisfy the Director of Public Works
that the applicant possesses the financing, insurance, knowledge, skill, equipment, and
material to perform the complete scope of the work.
Section 05. Planning, Inspection, and Approval Procedures.
Before any permit shall be issued, a plot plan and a time schedule for any street opening
shall be filed with the Director of Public Works. The work in progress shall be open to the
Director of Public Works and his/her designated inspectors for the purpose of inspecting
and enforcing the provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable regulations. Upon
completion of any project, the Director of Public Works shall inspect the resurfacing to
determine whether it meets the standards set forth by this ordinance. For large-scale
projects, the Director of Public Works, at his/her sole discretion, may require the
contractor to pay the cost of a Town approved third party inspector to represent the
Town during construction.
Section 06. Excavation Requirements.
All pavement shall be cut before excavation in such manner that the road surface shall
be exposed in a clean, sharp, straight edge. Trench sides shall be shored so as to
prevent any fall-out from under the undisturbed pavement. All safety equipment
necessary to perform the work in a safe, workmanlike manner will be followed.
Section 07. Backfilling.
Backfilling shall consist of placing suitable material in all spaces excavated and not
occupied by drainage or other underground structures, up to the existing surface level at
the bottom layer of existing asphalt. Backfill material shall consist of fine, readily
compressible soil or granular material, near optimum moisture content, and shall not
contain large stone, frozen material, or any other objectionable material. The final 18" of
fill under road surfaces, shoulders or sidewalks shall consist of graded gravel to the
specification of the Director of Public Works. All material shall be distributed in not more
than 12" layers, and each layer compacted by approved compaction methods before
another layer is placed. Water may be added only to improve mechanical compaction.
All sheeting and bracing material must be removed as backfill operation is in progress.
Section 08. Replacement of Surface.
Paved surfaces shall be repaired temporarily with an approved cold patch to a
compacted depth of 3", rounding about 1" above the existing pavement surface.
Shoulders shall be brought level with existing grades with coursed gravel. Surfaces
outside the pavement line, but within the right-of-way shall be filled to existing grade to
match existing material. Lawn surfaces within the right-of-way shall be finished with 6"
of loam, raked, seeded and rolled. All trenches shall be repaved or resurfaced within
thirty (30) days or less at the contractor’s expense, and shall be paved back to the
existing thickness of the pavement with a minimum of 2” of base pavement and at least
1” of surface.
Section 09. Responsibility of Maintenance.
It shall be the responsibility of the contractor, utility, and/or permit-holder to repair any
trench settling for three (3) years from the date of paving.
Section 10. Responsibility of Safety.
After excavation and before permanent pavement, the trench remains the responsibility
of the contractor and/or permit-holder. When a person is permitted, in accordance with
the provisions of this Ordinance, to occupy any part of a street for building purposes,
such person shall erect and maintain around the part so occupied, a sufficient fence to
prevent injury to persons, animals or vehicles passing the premises, and keep the same
property lighted at night. Temporary sidewalks shall be provided when requested by the
Director of Public Works. If the road will be temporarily closed due to construction, it is
the contractor’s responsibility to notify the Fairfield Police Department, Public Works
Department, Fire Department and the M.S.A.D. #49 Bus Garage.
Section 11. Unaccepted Streets and New Construction.
Permits shall not be required on unaccepted streets or new construction, but the
requirements of Section 07 shall be in effect on any project under the jurisdiction of the
Director of Public Works.
Section 12. Street Openings Beyond the Scope of this Ordinance.
It is the intent of this article to authorize the Director of Public Works to control all
excavation, backfill, and surface procedures within any Town right-of-way. The fee
schedule is based on a value that will incur no cost to the Town. Large project costs
may be negotiated with the Director of Public Works, and a permit issued to an applicant
at a cost of less than that specified in Section 03, this cost to be actual cost to the Town
for inspection. Surfacing on large projects may be performed by a contractor or
applicant approved by the Director of Public Works. No project under twenty (20) square
yards of surface opening shall be deemed "large."
Section 13. Unpaved Streets and Roads.
Street openings and unpaved streets and roads shall conform to all the sections of this
Ordinance with the following exceptions:
(A) Under Section 08, the requirement for applying cold patch shall not pertain. Gravel
surface shall be brought slightly above existing roadbed and compacted.
(B) Under Section 06, it will not be necessary to cut the road surface before
excavation.
Section 14. Winter Openings.
Any road or sidewalk opening after October 1st shall be paved immediately after project
completion. No permits shall be issued between October 31 and March 31, except on an
emergency basis, to be determined by the Director of Public Works.
Section 15. Penalties Provided.
If a person or firm improperly repairs or fills an opening, the municipal officers or their
appointees may have the work redone properly and shall keep an account of the cost of
redoing this work.
A person or firm in default shall pay a penalty equal to the cost of redoing the work plus
50%, but in no case shall the total of work and penalty be less than $100.00. After the
work is completed and the cost of the work is determined, the municipality may not issue
a new permit to a person or firm in default until it has received, in addition to the fees
provided in Section 3 and the amount of the penalty provided in this section.
Adopted by the Town Council on June 15, 2011, and amended on June 12, 2013, April
9, 2014, April 13, 2016, and May 25, 2016.
__________________________
Robert Sezak, Chairman
__________________________
John Picchiotti, Vice-Chairman
__________________________
Michael Taylor, Secretary
__________________________
Aaron Rowden
__________________________
Stephanie Thibodeau
ATTEST, A True Copy,
_________________________
Christine Keller, Town Clerk
Appendix A
Town of Fairfield
Utility Separations
Utilities Minimum Separation
Recommended
Separation
Water and sewers 6 feet 10 feet
Water and storm drains 6 feet 10 feet
Water and natural gas 6 feet 10 feet
Water and electric 6 feet 6 feet
Water and telephone/cable 6 feet 6 feet
Sewer and storm drains 6 feet 10 feet
Sewer and natural gas 6 feet 6 feet
Sewer and electric 6 feet 6 feet
Sewer and telephone/cable 6 feet 6 feet
Storm drains and natural gas 4 feet 6 feet
Storm drains and electric 4 feet 6 feet
Storm drains and
telephone/cable
4 feet 6 feet
Electric and natural gas 4 feet 4 feet
Electric and telephone 4 feet 4 feet
Telephone, cable and natural
gas
4 feet 4 feet
Separation distances include from utility poles. These separation distances are from
outside edge to outside edge of utilities.
1 | P a g e
SEWER USE ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the health and general welfare of the
citizens of the Town of Fairfield by regulating and restricting the construction and use of
sewerage systems and the accumulation, transportation, treatment and disposal of
sewage in such a manner that the creation of any sewerage system, whether public,
private or industrial, shall not result in pollution, health hazard or other nuisance.
ARTICLE II SCOPE
Hereafter any person owning any building or structure within the Town of Fairfield
which is the source of sewage and/or industrial wastes or who proposes to erect such
building or structure shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance.
ARTICLE III DEFINITIONS
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise the meaning of terms used in this
ordinance shall be as follows:
Section 1 “Town” shall mean the Town of Fairfield, Maine.
Section 2 “Town Council” shall mean the duly elected Town Council of the Town of
Fairfield.
Section 3 “Superintendent” shall mean the Superintendent of the Sewer Department of
the Town of Fairfield, Maine, who is also the Director of Public Works, or his authorized
representative.
Section 4 “Engineer’ shall mean a Professional Engineer retained by the Town of
Fairfield.
Section 5 “Plumbing Inspector” shall mean the Plumbing Inspector of the Town of
Fairfield, Maine.
Section 6 “BOD” (denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand) shall mean the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five (5) days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
Section 7 “Building Drain” shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning
eight (8) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
2 | P a g e
Section 8 “Building Sewer” shall mean the extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
Section 9 “Combined Sewer” shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
Section 10 “Garbage” shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale
of produce.
Section 11 “Industrial Wastes” shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage.
Section 12 “Natural Outlet” shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
Section 13 “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation, or group.
Section 14 “PH” shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of Hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution.
Section 15 “Properly Shredded Garbage” shall mean the wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half () inch in any dimension.
Section 16 “Public Sewer” shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
Section 17 “Sanitary Sewer” shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
Section 18 “Sewage” shall mean a combination of the water—carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present.
Section 19 “Sewage Treatment Plant” shall mean any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
Section 20 “Sewage Works” shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating
and disposing of sewage.
Section 21 “Sewer” shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
3 | P a g e
Section 22 “Shall is mandatory; “May” is permissive.
Section 23 “Storm Drain” (sometimes termed “Storm sewer”) shall mean a sewer
which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and
industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
Section 24 “Suspended Solids” shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
Section 25 “Watercourse” shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
Section 26 “Appeals Board” shall mean that Board appointed according to provision of
Article XI.
Section 27 “Developer” shall mean any Person or Persons who undertake to construct
simultaneously or in planned sequence more than one housing unit on a given tract or
land subdivision.
Section 28 “Industrial User” shall mean any person connected to a public sewer and
discharging industrial waste.
Section 29 “Categorical Pretreatment Standards” shall mean discharge limitations for
specific industrial user categories promulgated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency under Sections 307 of the Act.
Section 30 “Interfere” shall mean an inhibition or disruption of the treatment works,
its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal which is a
cause of or significantly contributes to either a violation of any requirement of the
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or to
the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with the following
Statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued there under (or more stringent
State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal
Act (SWDA) (more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Pct (RCRA) and including State Regulations contained in any State sludge management
plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA, the Clean Air Act, and the Toxic
Substances Control Act. A user significantly contributes to such a permit violation or
prevention of sludge use or disposal violation or prevention of sludge use or disposal in
accordance with above-cited authorities whenever such user:
4 | P a g e
1) Discharges a daily pollutant loading in excess of that allowed by contract with
the Town or by Federal, or State law;
2) Discharges waste water which substantially differs in nature or constituent
from the user’s average discharge, or;
3) Knows or has reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would result in a permit violation or prevent
sewage sludge use or disposal in accordance with the above-cited authorities as
they apply to the selected method of sludge management.
Section 31 “Slug Loading” shall mean discharge at a flow rate or pollutant
concentration that may interfere with the public sewer or wastewater treatment
facilities.
Section 32 “KSTD” shall mean the Kennebec Sanitary Treatment District.
ARTICLE IV
Section 1 It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the Town of
Fairfield, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any human or animal
excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
Section 2 It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town of
Fairfield, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said town, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this ordinance.
Section 3 Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
Section 4 The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes requiring the disposal of sewage situated
within the town and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is
located a public sanitary sewer of the town, is hereby required at his expense to install
suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, within ninety (90) days
after date of official notice to do so, provided that said, public sewer is within one
hundred (100) feet of the property line as measured along any public way. When
gravity flow cannot be obtained from the building or the property, the connection to
said public sewer is not required. However, this does not preclude waste flows from
5 | P a g e
being pumped to the public sewer should the property owner so wish.
ARTICLE V PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section 1 Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
Section 4, Article IV, the building sewer shall be connected to a private disposal system
complying with State Law and the rules and regulations of the Maine Departments of
Health and Human Services and Environmental Protection dealing with septic tank
installations and system operation.
Section 2 Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system
the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Plumbing Inspector. The
application for such permit shall be made on an HHE-200 SUBSURFACE
WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM APPLICATION form as required by the State of
Maine, and other information as deemed necessary by the Plumbing Inspector.
Section 3 A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Plumbing Inspector. The
Plumbing Inspector shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Plumbing Inspector when
the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are
covered. The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the
Plumbing Inspector.
Section 4 The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Town.
Section 5 No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
Section 6 When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to the public sewer upon the failure of the private septic system and within
ninety days (90) after date of official notice. The private septic tank or cesspool shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank run gravel or dirt, as soon as possible, and
not to exceed 180 days.
Section 7 The contents from septic tanks of Fairfield properties or boat holding tanks
located anywhere in Fairfield must be trucked to the KSTD. A fee set by the KSTD shall
be paid directly to the KSTD prior to discharge.
ARTICLE VI BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Section 1 No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
6 | P a g e
obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
Section 2 There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits; (a) for residential
and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. This permit application shall be supplemented by any plans
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $25.00 for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit and $50.00 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to
the Town at the time the application is filed.
Section 3 All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the Town from
any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of
the building sewer.
Section 4 A separate and independent sewer shall be provided for every building;
except where one building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private
sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley
courtyard, or driveway, the Building sewer from the front building may be extended to
the rear build in and whole considered as one building sewer except for purposes of
Article XII and if approved by the Superintendent.
Section 5 Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent, to meet all
requirements of this ordinance.
Section 6 The building sewer shall be tar-coated polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe
conforming to the following standards: PVC pipe shall be schedule 40 or SDR 35 or
ASTM D3034.
Section 7 The diameter of the building sewer shall not be less than four (4) inches nor
shall the slope of the pipe be less than one-quarter (1/4) in. per ft.
Section 8 The depth of building sewers installed after January 1, 1973 shall be
sufficient to afford protection from frost, but in no event shall be less than three (3)
feet. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar
as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and
fittings. The ends of building sewers which are not connected to the building drain of
the structure for any reason, shall be sealed against infiltration by a suitable stopper,
plug, or other approved means.
Section 9 In all buildings, constructed after January 1, 1973, in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage or industrial wastes
carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved mechanical means (pumped) and
7 | P a g e
discharged to the building sewer. The pump and facility shall be installed on private
property and owned and operated by the property owner.
Section 10 All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specifications except that no
backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and except that trench width
measured at the top of the installed pipe shall not exceed twenty—four (24) inches.
Section 11 All joints and connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. The
transition joint between pipes of different materials shall be made with adaptors and
joint materials approved by the Superintendent. Pre-molded gasket joints shall be used
and shall be neoprene compression type gaskets which provides a positive double seal
in the assembled joint. The gasket shall be a pre— molded, one piece unit designed for
joining the pipe material used. The assembled joint shall be sealed by compression of
the gasket between the exterior surface of the spigot and the interior surface of the
hub. The joint shall be assembled and special pipe coupling tools designed for that
purpose. Lubricant shall be a bland, flax base, non-toxic material, and shall not
chemically attack the gasket material.
Section 12 The connection of the building sewer into an existing public sewer shall be
made at the existing public sewer. All costs and expense incidental to the installation
and connection of the entire length of building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The
owner shall indemnify the Town from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. The method of connection of
the building sewer to the public sewer will be dependent upon the type of pipe material
used and in all cases shall be approved by the Superintendent. The connection of the
building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the “Y” or “T” branch. If none is
available a connection may be made by tapping the existing sewer by a method
approved by the Superintendent.
Section 13 The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent.
When trenches are opened for the laying of building sewer pipes, such trenches shall be
inspected by the Superintendent before the trenches are filled; and the person
performing such work shall notify the Superintendent when the installation of the
building sewer is completed. If the trench is filled before inspection, the Superintendent
shall require it to be re-excavated for inspection.
Section 14 When any building sewer is to serve a school, hospital, or similar institution
or public building, or is to serve a complex of industrial or commercial buildings, or
which, in the opinion of the Superintendent will receive sewage or industrial wastes of
such volume or character that frequent maintenance of said building sewer is
8 | P a g e
anticipated, then such building sewer shall be connected to the public sewer through a
manhole. The Superintendent shall determine if and where this type of connection to
the public sewer is required. Connections to existing manholes shall be made as
directed by the Superintendent. If required a new manhole shall be installed in the
public sewer pursuant to Article VII, Section 3 and the building sewer connection made
thereto as directed by the Superintendent.
Section 15 All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks,
park— ways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be
restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendant.
ARTICLE VII SEWER EXTENSION
Section 1 Sewer extensions, including individual building sewers from the sewer to the
property line, may be constructed by the Town under public contract if, in the opinion
of the Town Council, the number of properties to be served by such extension warrants
its cost. Under this arrangement the property owner shall pay for and install the
building sewer from the public sewer to his residence or place of business in accordance
with the requirements of Article IV. Property owners may propose sewer extensions
within the incorporated town by drafting a written petition, signed by a majority of the
benefiting property owners, and filing it with the Town Council. The cost of such
extensions may be assessed to the benefited property owners in any manner
determined by the Town Council.
Section 2 If the town does not elect to construct a sewer extension under public
contract, the property owner, builder or developer may construct the necessary sewer
extension, if such extension is approved by the Town Council in accordance with the
requirements of Section 1. The property owner must pay for the entire installation,
including all expenses incidental thereto. Each building sewer must be installed and
inspected as previously required and the inspection fees shall be paid. Design of sewers
shall be as specified in Section 3, Article VII. The installation of the sewer extension
must be subject to periodic inspection by the Superintendent and the expenses for this
inspection shall be paid for by the owner, builder or developer. The Superintendent’s
decisions shall be final in matters of quality and methods of construction. The sewer, as
constructed, must pass the exfiltration test required in Section 4, Article VII before it is
to be used. The cost of sewer extension thus made shall be absorbed by the developers
or the property owners, including all building sewers.
Section 3 Sewer design shall be in accordance with the following provisions. Pipe
material shall be polyvinylchloride (PVC). No standard strength clay pipe or concrete
pipe shall be used. Minimum internal pipe diameter shall be 8 inches. Joints for each
kind of pipe shall be designed and manufactured such that “0” ring gaskets of the
“snap— on” type are employed. Gaskets shall be continuous solid natural or synthetic
9 | P a g e
rubber and shall provide a positive compression seal in the assembled joints such that
the requirements of Section 4, Article VII are met. Joint preparation and assembly shall
be in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Wye or Tee branch fittings
shall be installed for connection to building sewers in accordance with Section 4, Article
VI. Trench widths, as measured just above the crown of the pipe, shall not exceed 4/3
0.D.+ 1.5 ft. If the trench widths are found during field inspection to exceed the above
limits the sewer pipe shall be encased with a minimum of 6 inches of concrete. Pipe
shall be firmly and evenly bedded on a minimum of 6 inches of free draining granular
base with a stone size not exceeding 1 inch. Pipe thickness and field strength shall be
calculated on the following criteria:
Safety Factor 1.9
Load Factor 1.7
Weight of Soil 120 lbs. per cu. ft.
Wheel Loading 16,000 lbs.
Utilizing the above information, the design shall then be made as outlined in Chapter IX
of the Pollution Control Federation Manual, Practice No. 9 “Design and Construction of
Sanitary and Storm Sewers.”
Manholes shall be constructed at all changes in slope or alignment or at intervals not
exceeding 400 linear feet. The manholes shall be constructed with 4 ft. diameter
monolythic pre-cast base sections and 4 ft. diameter pre-cast concrete manhole barrel
sections with concentric tapered top sections as specified by ASTM Specification 0-478.
The tongue and groove in manhole sections shall be formed of concrete so as to receive
an “O” ring rubber gasket, or Ram-Nek joint, as required by the Superintendent. The
manhole frame and cover shall be as approved by the Superintendent and shall be set
with no less than two courses of brick underneath to allow for later adjustments and
elevations. All manholes shall be constructed with forged aluminum safety type steps
cast into the walls of the precast sections.
Section 4 Leakage in the gravity sewers shall not exceed 100 gals, per in. dia. per day
per mile of pipe when tested by either internal pressure or external pressure means.
Where ground water is high the Superintendent may elect to accept infiltration
measurements in lieu of exfiltration tests. All manholes shall be tested as to water
tightness, if required by the Superintendent as follows:
The inlet and outlet of the manhole shall be plugged by watertight plugs and the
manhole shall have 4 feet of water placed therein. The water shall remain for sufficient
time to allow for absorption into the concrete pipe. The amount of water loss from the
manhole shall then be determined. The rate shall not exceed 5 gals. per manhole per
24 hours for 4 ft. diameter manholes. All infiltration leaks shall be repaired by
excavation outside of the manhole if required.
10 | P a g e
If approved by the Superintendent, a low pressure air test may be used to test the
gravity sewers. The test shall be performed using the equipment stated below,
according to stated procedures and under the supervision of the Superintendent.
The equipment used shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(a) Pneumatic plugs shall have a sealing length equal to or greater than the
diameter of the pipe to be inspected.
(b) Pneumatic plugs shall resist internal test pressures without requiring external
bracing or blocking.
(c) All air used shall pass through a single control panel.
(d) Three individual holes shall be used for the following connections:
1. From control panel to pneumatic plugs for inflation.
2. From control panel to sealed line for introducing the low pressure air.
3. From sealed line to control panel for continuously monitoring the air
pressure rise in the seal line.
After a manhole to manhole reach of pipe has been backfilled and cleaned the plugs
shall be placed in the line at each manhole and inflated to 25 PSIG. Low pressure air
shall be introduced into the sealed line until the internal air pressure reaches 4 PSIG
greater than the average back pressure of any ground water that may be over the pipe.
After this stabilization period (3.5 PSIG minimum pressure in the pipe), the air hose
from the control panel to the air supply shall be disconnected. The portion of line being
tested shall be termed acceptable if the time required in minutes for the pressure to
decrease from 3.5 to 2.5 PSIG (greater than the average back pressure of any ground
water that may be over the pipe) shall not be less than the time shown f or the given
diameters in the following table:
Pipe Diameter (inches) Minutes
4 2.0
6 3.0
8 4.0
10 5.0
12 5.5
15 7.5
18 8.5
21 10.0
24 11.5
In areas where ground water is known to exist its height over the invert of the pipe
shall be determined. The height in feet shall be divided by 2.3 to establish the pounds
of pressure that will be added to all readings (i.e. if the height of water is 11 ½ ft. then
the added pressure will be 5 PSIG. The allowable drop of 1 lb. and the timing remain
the same).
11 | P a g e
All testing of sewer shall be conducted in the presence of the Superintendent. If the
installation fails any test, the source of leakage shall be found and repaired and all
defective materials shall be replaced.
Section 5 All sewer extensions constructed at the property owner’s, builder’s or
developer’s expense, after final approval and acceptance by the Superintendent, shall
become the property of the town and shall thereafter be maintained by the town. Said
sewers, after their acceptance by the town, shall be guaranteed against defects in
materials or workmanship for twelve (12) months. The guarantee shall be in the form of
a maintenance guarantee bond in an amount not less than 10% of the Engineer’s
estimate of the cost of the extension.
Section 6 No builder or developer shall be issued a building permit for a new dwelling
or structure requiring sanitary facilities within the town, unless a suitable and approved
method of sewage disposal is proposed.
ARTICLE VIII USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Section 1 No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, sub- surface drainage, uncontaminated cooling
water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer except in those
instances where private associations have allowed storm water connections to be made
to their sewer and which associations have deeded their rights to the town.
Section 2 Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the Superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the Superintendent, to a storm sewer, or natural outlet.
Section 3 Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
(a) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104 degrees F.
(b) Any waters or wastes which contain grease or oil or other substances that
will solidify or become discernibly viscous at temperatures between 32 and 104
degrees F.
c) Any waters or wastes containing fats, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or
not, exceeding an average of 50 parts per million (417 pounds per million
gallons) ether soluble matter, including waters or wastes from grease traps.
12 | P a g e
d) Any gasoline, benzine, naptha, fuel oil, mineral oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(e) Any noxious or malodorous gas such as hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or
nitrous oxide or other substance, which either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing
entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(f) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 horsepower or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent.
(g) Any ashes, cinder, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers,
tar, plastic, cardboard, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime
slurry, lime residues, beer or distillery slops, whey, chemical residues, paint
residues, cannery waste, bulk solids, or any other solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstruction to the flow of the sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works.
(h) Any waters or wastes, acid and alkaline in reaction, having corrosive
properties capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and
personnel of the sewage works. Free acids and alkalis must be neutralized, at all
times, within a permissible pH range of 6.0 to 9.5.
(i) Any cyanides, in excess of 2 parts per million by weight as CN.
(j) Any long half-life (over 100 days) of toxic radioactive isotopes, without a
special permit.
(k) Any waters or wastes that for a duration of 15 minutes has a concentration
greater than 5 times that of “normal” sewage as measured by suspended solids
and B.0.D. and/or which is discharged continuously at a rate exceeding 1,000
gallons per minute except by special permit. Normal sewage shall be construed
to fall within the following ranges:
Constituents Permissible Range
Suspended Solids 180 to 350 ppm
B.O.D. 140 to 300 ppm
Chlorine Requirements 5 to 15 ppm
(l) Any storm water, roof drains, spring water, cistern or tank overflow, footing
drain, discharge from any vehicle wash rack or water motor, or the contents of
any privy vault, septic tank or cesspool, or the discharge or effluent from any air
conditioning machine or refrigeration unit except as provided in Article VIII,
13 | P a g e
Section 1.
(m) No person shall discharge or cause to he discharged any waters or wastes in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any hazard in the receiving
waters or the effluent of the Town’s sewage treatment plant. Such toxic
substances shall be limited to the average concentrations listed hereinafter in the
sewage as it arrives at the treatment and at no time shall the hourly
concentration at the sewage treatment plant exceed three times the average
concentration. If concentrations listed are exceeded, individual establishments
will be subject to control by the Engineer in volume and concentration of wastes
discharged.
For Limits of Toxic Substances in Sewage, refer to KSTD Local Limit, Appendix B.
Section 4 Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when the above set limits
or those substances are exceeded or when, in the opinion of the Superintendant or
Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other harmful ingredients;
except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Engineer, and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperatures. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted
in place shall be gas-tight and water-tight.
Section 5 Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times and shall be
readily accessible and open to inspection by the Superintendent at any time.
Section 6 The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having (a) a 5
day Biochemical Oxygen Demand greater than 300 parts per million or (b) containing
more than 350 parts per million of suspended solids, or Cc) containing more than 15
parts per million of chlorine requirement, or (d) containing any quantity of substances
having the characteristics described in Section 3, Article VIII or (e) having an average
daily flow greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Town, shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Engineer. There necessary, in the opinion of
the Engineer, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as
may be necessary to, (1) reduce the Biochemical Oxygen Demand to 300 parts per
million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or (2) reduce the
Chlorine requirements to 15 parts per million, or (3) reduce objectionable characteristics
or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in Section 3, or (4) control
the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications,
14 | P a g e
and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the Engineer, and no construction of such
facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. Failure to
comply with one or more of the remedial procedures as required by the Engineer will
constitute a violation of this ordinance. In addition to the aforementioned limits set by
the Town of Fairfield, additional limits may be set by the KSTD.
Section 7 Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any
waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
Section 8 When required by the Engineer, the owner of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Engineer. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
Section 9 All measurements, tests, and analyses of the Characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in Sections 3 and 6, shall be determined in
accordance with “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage,” upon
suitable samples taken at control manhole provided for in Section 8. In the event that
no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.
Section 10 No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste o± unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
Town for treatment, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern.
Section 11 All of the preceding standards are to apply at the point where the industrial
wastes are discharged into the public sanitary sewerage system and any chemical or
mechanical corrective treatment required must be accomplished to practical completion
before the wastes reach that point. The laboratory methods used in the examination of
all industrial wastes shall be those set forth in the latest edition of “Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Sewage,” published by the American Public Health
Association. However, alternate methods for the analysis of industrial wastes may be
used subject to mutual agreement between the Town Council and the producer of such
wastes. The frequency and duration of the sampling of any industrial waste shall not be
less than once every three months for a 24 hour period. However, more frequent and
longer periods may be required at the discretion of the Town Council.
15 | P a g e
ARTICLE IX MISCELLANEOUS INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS
Section 1 All persons discharging wastes into the public shall comply with applicable
requirements of federal and state industrial pretreatment regulations and the Industrial
Pretreatment Program of the KSTD.
Section 2 Industrial users shall comply with federal and state general pretreatment
standards and applicable categorical pretreatment standards. Such noncompliance with
categorical standards shall be achieved within three years of the date such standard is
effective, unless a shorter compliance time is specified, but in no case later than July 1,
1984.
Section 3 The Superintendent may, after formal notice to the public sewer user,
immediately halt or prevent any discharge of pollutants reasonably appearing to present
an imminent endangerment of the health and welfare of persons, or any discharge
presenting, or which may present, endangerment to the environment, or which
threatens to interfere with operation of the public sewer or wastewater treatment
facilities. Actions which may be taken by the Superintendent include seeking ex-parts
temporary judicial injunctive relief, entry on private property to halt such discharge,
blockage of a public sewer to halt such discharge, or demand of specific action by the
discharger.
Section 4 The Superintendent shall investigate instances of non-compliance with
industrial pretreatment standards and requirements, as requested by the KSTD.
Section 5 Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment
standard, existing industrial users subject to such standards shall submit to the KSTD
an application for a categorical permit containing information required under applicable
federal and state industrial pretreatment regulations. Such information, as a minimum,
shall include:
1. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operators and
owners;
2. A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility;
3. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and Standard
Industrial Classification of the operations carried out at such facility;
4. A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with the categorical standards;
5. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in
gallons per day, to the public sewer from regulated process streams and from
other streams;
6. An identification of the industrial pro-treatment standards applicable to each
regulated process; and
7. An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge.
16 | P a g e
The Superintendent may require additional information to be included in such
application.
Section 6 Within 90 days after the date for final compliance by existing industrial users
with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the public sewer,
industrial users shall submit to the KSTD a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process(es) governed by
pretreatment standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process
units. Such report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance
practices or pre- treatment is necessary. Such industrial users shall submit to the KSTD
during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge. Additional
requirements for such report may be imposed by the Superintendent.
Section 7 Industrial users shall give written notice to the Superintendent and the KSTD
at least 45 calendar days before making significant changes in the nature, quantity, or
rate of discharge of industrial waste.
Section 8 Industrial users shall immediately notify the Superintendent and the KSTD of
any slug loading discharged by such user.
Section 9 All reports submitted by industrial users under this Article shall be signed by
an authorized representative. An authorized representative may be:
1. A principal executive officer of at least a level of vice president, if the
industrial user is a corporation; or
2. A duly authorized representative of either of the individuals designated above,
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the subject
facility.
Section 10 Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements under this Article
shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities
required to prepare such reports. Such records shall include for each sample:
1. the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of’
person or persons taking the sample;
2. the dates analyses were performed;
3. who performed the analyses;
4. the analytical techniques and methods used; and the results of such analyses.
17 | P a g e
Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years and shall be made
available for inspection and copying by the Superintendent and the KSTD.
Section 11 Information and data submitted to the Superintendent and the KSTD under
this Article relating to waste water discharge characteristics shall be available to the
public without restriction. Other such information shall be available to the public at least
to the extent provided by 40 CFR Section 2.302.
Section 12 The Superintendent may temporarily exclude from the public sewer
industrial wastes from one or more industrial users, whether pretreated or not, if
necessary or helpful in determining the effects of’ such wastes upon the public sewer or
KSTD facilities.
ARTICLE X PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE
Section 1 No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
Section 2 A contractor must present a certificate of insurance showing minimum
liability coverage of $100,000/$300,000 for bodily injury and a $25,000 limit for
property damage including collapse and underground coverage before a permit will be
issued for construction of building sewers or sewer extensions. Sewer extensions may
require higher coverage if so recommended by the Engineer.
Article XI INSPECTION
Section 1 The Superintendent, the Engineer, or other duly authorized employees of
the Town bearing proper credentials and identifications shall be permitted to enter upon
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Section 2 The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes
of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry
and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with
the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
18 | P a g e
ARTICLE XII BOARD OF SEWER APPEALS
Section 1 Creation and Appointment. The establishment of a Board of Sewer Appeals
is hereby authorized. The members of the Board shall be residents of the Town and
shall serve at the discretion of the Town Council. In accordance with the laws of the
State of Maine, the following provisions shall apply:
(a) The Board shall consist of three members, including the two appointed
representatives to the KSTD and the Chairperson of the Planning Board.
(b) No municipal officer shall be a member or associate member of the Board of
Sewer Appeals.
(c) When a member is unable to act because of conflict of interest, physical
incapacity or planned absence, the Vice-Chairperson of the Planning Board shall
assume the seat of that member.
(d) The Board of Sewer Appeals shall elect a chairperson and a secretary from its
own membership at the first meeting of each calendar year.
Section 2 Jurisdiction. The Board of Sewer Appeals shall have the following powers
and duties and be exercised only upon written appeal by a party aggrieved by a
decision of the Superintendent, the Town Health Officer and/or the Plumbing Inspector
insofar as such decision arises from requirements of this ordinance.
(a) To determine whether the decisions of the said officers are in conformity with
the provisions of this ordinance, and to interpret the meaning of this ordinance in
cases of uncertainty.
(b) To grant variances from the terms of the ordinance where there is no
substantial departure from the intent of the ordinance and/or where necessary to
avoid undue hardship. A projected expenditure of an amount exceeding 15% of
the assessed value of the buildings on the land to be served by the public sewer
shall be considered as prima facie evidence of undue hardship.
(c) To permit an exception to this ordinance only when the terms of the
exception have been specifically set forth by this ordinance.
Section 3 Hearings. The Board of Sewer Appeals shall annually determine a regular
monthly meeting date. All appeals or other matters to come before the Board requiring
a notice as prescribed herein shall be filed with the Town Clerk at least fifteen days
prior to said monthly meeting day who shall cause to be advertised in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Town of Fairfield a notice of such appeal identifying the
property involved, the nature of the appeal and stating the time and place of a public
hearing of such appeal which shall not be earlier than ten (10) days after the date of
such publications. Owners of properties within three hundred feet of the property for
19 | P a g e
which the appeal is made shall be notified by mail. Failure of any such owner to receive
this notice shall not invalidate the proceedings herein prescribed.
The Board of Sewer Appeals shall not continue hearings on an appeal to a future date
except for good cause. Written notice of the decision of the Board shall be sent to the
appellant and to the officer concerned, forthwith. Failure of the Board to issue such
notice within 30 day-s of the date of the hearing shall constitute a denial of said appeal.
Section 4 Appeal Procedure.
(a) Any person and any municipal department aggrieved by the decision of the
Superintendent, the Town Health Officer and/or the Plumbing Inspector, which decision
arises from provisions of this ordinance, may appeal such decision to the Board of
Sewer Appeals.
(b) Within 30 days of the date of the decisions of the Superintendent, Health Officer
and/or Plumbing Inspector, the appeal shall be entered at the office of the Clerk upon
forms to be approved by the Board of Appeals. The appellant shall set forth in said form
the grounds of his appeal and shall refer to the specific provisions of the Sewerage
Ordinance involved. Following the receipt of any appeal, the Town Clerk shall notify
forthwith the officer concerned and the Chairman of the Board of Appeals. The
appellant shall pay to the Town Treasurer a fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
(c) An aggrieved party may appeal from the decision of the Board of Sewer Appeals to
the Superior Court as provided by the laws of the State of Maine.
Section 5 Successive Appeals. After a decision has been made by the Board of Sewer
Appeals, a new appeal of similar import shall not be entertained by the Board until one
year shall have elapsed from the date of said decision, except that the Board may
entertain a new appeal if the Chairman believes that, owing to a mistake of law or
misunderstanding of fact, an injustice was done, or if he believes that a change has
taken place in some essential aspect of the appeal.
ARTICLE XIII SEWER SERVICE CHARGES
Section 1 The source of not less than 50% of the revenues needed for retiring debt
services, capital expenditures, operation and maintenance of the public sewerage works
shall be Sewer Service Charges.
Section 2 Sewer Service Charge rates including readiness to serve charges shall be
determined by the Town Council. This charge will be billed on a quarterly basis
throughout each calendar year, regardless of water consumption.
20 | P a g e
Section 3 The Town Council reserves the right, from time to time, to change Sewer
Service Charges originally or previously assigned to any property owner.
Section 4 All sewer charges shall be collected by the Treasurer of the Town on a
quarterly basis and shall be due and payable 30 days after date of billing.
Section 5 There shall be a lien on real estate served or benefited by a municipal sewer
and sewer disposal system to secure the payment of service charges duly established
hereunder which shall take precedence over all other claims on such real estate
excepting only claims for taxes. The Treasurer of the municipality shall have the same
authority and power to collect such service charges as are granted by Title 38, Section
1208, to treasurers of sanitary sewer districts. In addition to the lien established
hereby, the town may maintain a civil action against the party so charged for the
amount of said sewer charge in any court competent to try the same, and in such
action may recover the amount of such charge with legal interest on the same from the
date of said charge and costs.
Section 6 An interest charge at the same rate as established by the Town Council for
uncollected taxes will be made on all bills not paid within 31 days after date of billing.
Section 7 A special Sewer Service Charge shall be established for any industrial firm or
organization who, by virtue of the volume, strength or unusual characteristic of their
waste alone, would overload or upset the capacity or efficiency of the sewerage works
or any part thereof if such waste entered the public sewer, or whose waste disposal
situation is such that it would be in the public interest to waive the basic requirements.
The Town Council, after appropriate study, and advice from the Engineer, shall
establish a Special Sewer Service Charge to the industrial firm by separate agreement
with said firm. The applicable portions of the preceding sections, as well as the
equitable rights of the public shall be the basis for such an arrangement.
Section 8 In the event that a rate payer will be using a substantial amount of water
that will not be entering the sewer system, an external flow meter may be rented from
the Town, under certain terms and conditions, so that a credit towards consumption
amounts may be calculated. Example: pool fill-up.
ARTICLE XIV PENALTY
Section 1 Any person found to be violating any provision of this ordinance except
Section 1, Article IX shall be served by the Town with written notice stating the nature
of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violations.
Section 2 Any person, individual, firm, corporation, or partnership who fails to comply
with the provisions of this ordinance other than those provisions pertaining to the
21 | P a g e
payment of charges for services established herein, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct
and shall be subject to fine not exceeding $100 dollars for each offense. The continued
violation of any provision of any section of this ordinance, other than those pertaining
to the payment of charges for services established herein, shall constitute a separate
offense for each and every day such violation of any provision hereof shall continue.
Section 3 The proper authorities of the Town, in addition to other remedies, may
institute any appropriate action or proceedings including an injunction to prevent such
unlawful use, construction or maintenance of cesspools, septic tanks, sewage disposal
systems, pipes or drains to restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent the
occupancy of any building structure or land where said violations of this ordinance are
found.
Section 4 Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall become
liable to the Town for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the Town by reason of
such violation.
ARTICLE XV VALIDITY
Section 1 All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
Section 2 The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this ordinance
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this ordinance which can be given effect
without such invalid part or parts.
Adopted by the Town Council on June 15, 2011
Amended on July 12, 2017
ATTEST, A True Copy:
__________________________
Christine Keller, Town Clerk
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
1
TOWN OF FAIRFIELD SHORLAND ZONING ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
1. Purposes.................................................................................................................................................. 1
2. Authority ................................................................................................................................................ 1
3. Applicability ........................................................................................................................................... 1
4. Effective Date ......................................................................................................................................... 1
A. Effective Date and Repeal of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments ............................................. 1
B. Sections 15(O) and 15(O-1) ............................................................................................................... 1
5. Availability ............................................................................................................................................. 2
6. Severability ............................................................................................................................................. 2
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances ............................................................................................................ 2
8. Amendments ........................................................................................................................................... 2
9. Districts and Zoning Map ....................................................................................................................... 2
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map ....................................................................................................... 2
B. Scale of Map .................................................................................................................................... 2
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map .............................................................................. 2
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries ...................................................................................................... 3
11. Land Use Requirements ......................................................................................................................... 3
12. Non-conformance ................................................................................................................................... 3
A. Purpose ............................................................................................................................................. 3
B. General ............................................................................................................................................. 3
C. Non-conforming Structures ............................................................................................................. 3
D. Non-conforming Uses ...................................................................................................................... 6
E. Non-conforming Lots....................................................................................................................... 6
13. Establishment of Districts....................................................................................................................... 7
A. Resource Protection District ............................................................................................................ 7
B. Limited Residential District ............................................................................................................. 8
C. General Development District ......................................................................................................... 8
D. Stream Protection District ................................................................................................................ 9
14. Table of Land Uses ................................................................................................................................. 9
15. Land Use Standards .............................................................................................................................. 11
A. Minimum Lot Standards ................................................................................................................ 11
B. Principal and Accessory Structures ............................................................................................... 12
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or
Beyond the Normal High-Water Line of a Water body or Within a Wetland ............................... 14
D. Campgrounds ................................................................................................................................. 15
E. Individual Private Campsites ......................................................................................................... 15
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses .................................................................................................... 16
G. Parking Areas ................................................................................................................................. 16
H. Roads and Driveways .................................................................................................................... 17
I. Signs............................................................................................................................................... 18
J. Storm Water Runoff ....................................................................................................................... 19
K. Septic Waste Disposal ………………………………………………………………………… ... 19
L. Essential Services........................................................................................................................... 20
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction ............................................................................................... 20
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
2
N. Agriculture ..................................................................................................................................... 21
O. Timber Harvesting (Repealed) ....................................................................................................... 22
O-1 Timber Harvesting – Statewide Standards ..................................................................................... 24
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other than Timber Harvesting ........................ 31
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Control ............................................................................................... 33
R. Soils ............................................................................................................................................... 34
S. Water Quality ................................................................................................................................. 34
T. Archaeological Site ........................................................................................................................ 35
16. Administration ...................................................................................................................................... 35
A. Administering Bodies and Agents ................................................................................................. 35
B. Permits Required ............................................................................................................................ 35
C. Permit Application ......................................................................................................................... 36
D. Procedure for Administering Permits ............................................................................................ 36
E. Special Exceptions ......................................................................................................................... 37
F. Expiration of Permit ....................................................................................................................... 38
G. Installation of Public Utility Service .............................................................................................. 38
H. Appeals .......................................................................................................................................... 38
J. Enforcement ................................................................................................................................... 41
17. Definitions ............................................................................................................................................ 42
1
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zoning Ordinance
1. Purposes. The purposes of this Ordinance are to further the maintenance of safe and healthful
conditions; to prevent and control water pollution; to protect fish spawning grounds, aquatic life, bird
and other wildlife habitat; to protect buildings and lands from flooding and accelerated erosion; to
protect archaeological and historic resources; to protect freshwater and coastal wetlands; to control
building sites, placement of structures and land uses; to conserve shore cover, and visual as well as
actual points of access to inland waters; to conserve natural beauty and open space; and to anticipate
and respond to the impacts of development in shoreland areas.
2. Authority. This Ordinance has been prepared in accordance with the provisions of Title 38 sections
435-449 of the Maine Revised Statutes Annotated (M.R.S.A.).
3. Applicability. This Ordinance applies to all land areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the
Kennebec River and the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, and Martin Stream and Lost Brook;
within 250 feet horizontal distance , of the upland edge of a freshwater wetland and all land areas
within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream. This Ordinance also
applies to any structure built on, over or abutting a dock, wharf or pier, or other structure extending or
located below the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland.
4. Effective Date
A. Effective Date of Ordinance and Ordinance Amendments. This Ordinance, which was
adopted by the municipal legislative body on _May 8, 2013_, shall not be effective unless
approved by the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection. A certified copy
of the Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be
forwarded to the Commissioner for approval. If the Commissioner fails to act on this Ordinance
or Ordinance Amendment, within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the Ordinance, or
Ordinance Amendment, it shall be automatically approved. Upon approval of this Ordinance, the
shoreland zoning ordinance previously adopted on June 30, 1992, and amended on February 13,
2013, is hereby repealed.
Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the forty-five (45) day period
shall be governed by the terms of this Ordinance, or Ordinance Amendment, if the Ordinance, or
Ordinance Amendment, is approved by the Commissioner.
B. Sections 15(O) and 15(O-1).
Repeal of Section 15(O) Municipal Timber Harvesting Regulation. The Municipal Regulation of
Timber Harvesting activities is repealed on the statutory date established under 38 M.R.S.A.
section 438-A(5), at which time Section 15(O-1) the State of Maine Department of
Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry shall administer timber harvesting standards in the shoreland
zone. On the date established under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-B(5), the following provisions of
this ordinance are repealed:
Section 14- Table of Land Uses #3 Forest Management activities, #4 Timber Harvesting and #27
Land Management Roads.
Section15- Land Use Standard 15(O) Timber Harvesting
Section 17- Definitions, the definitions of “cross-sectional area, disruption of shoreline integrity,
forest management activities, forest stand, harvest area, land management road, licensed forester,
residual basal area, residual stand, skid road or skid trail, slash, timber harvesting, timber
harvesting and related activities, and wind firm”.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
2
(Legislative Updates LD 1739- Statewide regulation of timber harvesting in the shoreland
zone effective January 1, 2013)
5. Availability. A certified copy of this Ordinance shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and shall be
accessible to any member of the public. Copies shall be made available to the public at reasonable
cost at the expense of the person making the request. Notice of availability of this Ordinance shall be
posted.
6. Severability. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be
invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of the Ordinance.
7. Conflicts with Other Ordinances. Whenever a provision of this Ordinance conflicts with or is
inconsistent with another provision of this Ordinance or of any other ordinance, regulation or statute
administered by the municipality, the more restrictive provision shall control.
8. Amendments. This Ordinance may be amended by majority vote of the legislative body. Copies of
amendments, attested and signed by the Municipal Clerk, shall be submitted to the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Protection following adoption by the municipal legislative body
and shall not be effective unless approved by the Commissioner. If the Commissioner fails to act on
any amendment within forty-five (45) days of his/her receipt of the amendment, the amendment is
automatically approved. Any application for a permit submitted to the municipality within the fortyfive
(45) day period shall be governed by the terms of the amendment, if such amendment is
approved by the Commissioner.
9. Districts and Zoning Map
A. Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The areas to which this Ordinance is applicable are hereby
divided into the following districts as shown on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map(s) which is
(are) made a part of this Ordinance:
(1) Resource Protection
(2) Limited Residential
(3) General Development
(4) Stream Protection
B. Scale of Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be drawn at a scale of not less than: 1
inch = 2000 feet. District boundaries shall be clearly delineated and a legend indicating the
symbols for each district shall be placed on the map.
C. Certification of Official Shoreland Zoning Map. The Official Shoreland Zoning Map shall be
certified by the attested signature of the Municipal Clerk and shall be located in the municipal
office.
D. Changes to the Official Shoreland Zoning Map. If amendments, in accordance with Section 8,
are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Shoreland Zoning Map within thirty (30) days
after the amendment has been approved by the Commissioner of the Department of
Environmental Protection.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
3
10. Interpretation of District Boundaries. Unless otherwise set forth on the Official Shoreland Zoning
Map, district boundary lines are property lines, the centerlines of streets, roads and rights of way, and
the boundaries of the shoreland area as defined herein. Where uncertainty exists as to the exact
location of district boundary lines, the Board of Appeals shall be the final authority as to location.
11. Land Use Requirements. Except as hereinafter specified, no building, structure or land shall
hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected,
constructed, expanded, moved, or altered and no new lot shall be created except in conformity with
all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, unless a variance is
granted.
12. Non-conformance
A. Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to promote land use conformities, except that nonconforming
conditions that existed before the effective date of this Ordinance or amendments
thereto shall be allowed to continue, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 12. Except as
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a non-conforming condition shall not be permitted to
become more non-conforming.
B. General
(1) Transfer of Ownership. Non-conforming structures, lots, and uses may be transferred, and
the new owner may continue the non-conforming use or continue to use the non-conforming
structure or lot, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) Repair and Maintenance. This Ordinance allows, without a permit, the normal upkeep and
maintenance of non-conforming uses and structures including repairs or renovations that do
not involve expansion of the non-conforming use or structure, and such other changes in a
non-conforming use or structure as federal, state, or local building and safety codes may
require.
C. Non-conforming Structures
ALTERNATIVE TO 30% EXPANSION RULE PURSUANT TO 38 M.R.S.A. SECTION
439-A SUBSECTION 4-A
(1) Expansions. A non-conforming structure may be added to or expanded after obtaining a
permit from the same permitting authority as that for a new structure, if such addition or
expansion does not increase the non-conformity of the structure, and is in accordance with
subparagraphs (a), and (b) below.
(a) Legally existing non-conforming principal and accessory structures that do not meet the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback requirements may be expanded or
altered as follows, as long as all other applicable standards contained in this Ordinance
are met.
i. Expansion of any portion of a structure within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland is
prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the water body,
tributary stream or wetland setback requirement.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
4
ii. Expansion of an accessory structure that is located closer to the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland than the principal structure is
prohibited, even if the expansion will not increase nonconformity with the water body or
wetland setback requirement.
iii. For structures located less than 75 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland, the maximum
combined total floor area for all portions of those structures within that 75-foot distance
is 1,000 square feet, and the maximum height of any portion of a structure that is within
75 feet, horizontal distance, of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland
is 20 feet or the height of the existing structure, whichever is greater.
iv. For structures located less than 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a great pond classified as GPA or a river flowing to a great pond classified as
GPA, the maximum combined total floor area for all portions of those structures within
that 100-foot distance is 1,500 square feet, and the maximum height of any portion of a
structure that is within 100 feet, horizontal distance, of a great pond is 25 feet or the
height of the existing structure, whichever is greater, except that any portion of those
structures located less than 75 feet, horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland must meet the floor area
and height limits of division (iii).
For the purposes of Section 12(C)(1)(a), a basement is not counted toward floor area.
(b) Whenever a new, enlarged, or replacement foundation is constructed under a nonconforming
structure, the structure and new foundation must be placed such that the
setback requirement is met to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning
Board or its designee, basing its decision on the criteria specified in Section 12(C)(2)
Relocation, below. If the completed foundation does not extend beyond the exterior
dimensions of the structure and the foundation does not cause the structure to be elevated
by more than three (3) additional feet, as measured from the uphill side of the structure, it
shall not be considered to be an expansion of the structure.
(2) Relocation. A non-conforming structure may be relocated within the boundaries of the parcel
on which the structure is located provided that the site of relocation conforms to all setback
requirements to the greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its
designee, and provided that the applicant demonstrates that the present subsurface sewage
disposal system meets the requirements of State law and the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules (Rules), or that a new system can be installed in compliance with
the law and said Rules. In no case shall a structure be relocated in a manner that causes the
structure to be more non-conforming.
In determining whether the building relocation meets the setback to the greatest practical
extent, the Planning Board or its designee shall consider the size of the lot, the slope of the
land, the potential for soil erosion, the location of other structures on the property and on
adjacent properties, the location of the septic system and other on-site soils suitable for septic
systems, and the type and amount of vegetation to be removed to accomplish the relocation.
When it is necessary to remove vegetation within the water or wetland setback area in order
to relocate a structure, the Planning Board shall require replanting of native vegetation to
compensate for the destroyed vegetation. In addition, the area from which the relocated
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
5
structure was removed must be replanted with vegetation. Replanting shall be required as
follows:
(a) Trees removed in order to relocate a structure must be replanted with at least one native
tree, three (3) feet in height, for every tree removed. If more than five trees are planted,
no one species of tree shall make up more than 50% of the number of trees planted.
Replaced trees must be planted no further from the water or wetland than the trees that
were removed.
Other woody and herbaceous vegetation, and ground cover, that are removed or
destroyed in order to relocate a structure must be re-established. An area at least the same
size as the area where vegetation and/or ground cover was disturbed, damaged, or
removed must be reestablished within the setback area. The vegetation and/or ground
cover must consist of similar native vegetation and/or ground cover that was disturbed,
destroyed or removed.
(b) Where feasible, when a structure is relocated on a parcel the original location of the
structure shall be replanted with vegetation which may consist of grasses, shrubs, trees, or
a combination thereof.
(3) Reconstruction or Replacement. Any non-conforming structure which is located less than
the required setback from a water body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed,
or damaged or destroyed, regardless of the cause, by more than 50% of the market value of
the structure before such damage, destruction or removal, may be reconstructed or replaced
provided that a permit is obtained within eighteen (18) months of the date of said damage,
destruction, or removal, and provided that such reconstruction or replacement is in
compliance with the water body, tributary stream or wetland setback requirement to the
greatest practical extent as determined by the Planning Board or its designee in accordance
with the purposes of this Ordinance. In no case shall a structure be reconstructed or replaced
so as to increase its non-conformity. If the reconstructed or replacement structure is less than
the required setback it shall not be any larger than the original structure, except as allowed
pursuant to Section 12(C)(1) above, as determined by the non-conforming floor area and
volume of the reconstructed or replaced structure at its new location. If the total amount of
floor area and volume of the original structure can be relocated or reconstructed beyond the
required setback area, no portion of the relocated or reconstructed structure shall be replaced
or constructed at less than the setback requirement for a new structure. When it is necessary
to remove vegetation in order to replace or reconstruct a structure, vegetation shall be
replanted in accordance with Section 12(C)(2) above.
Any non-conforming structure which is located less than the required setback from a water
body, tributary stream, or wetland and which is removed by 50% or less of the market value,
or damaged or destroyed by 50% or less of the market value of the structure, excluding
normal maintenance and repair, may be reconstructed in place if a permit is obtained from the
Planning Board within one year of such damage, destruction, or removal.
In determining whether the building reconstruction or replacement meets the setback to the
greatest practical extent the Planning Board or its designee shall consider, in addition to the
criteria in Section 12(C)(2) above, the physical condition and type of foundation present, if
any.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
6
(4) Change of Use of a Non-conforming Structure. The use of a non-conforming structure may
not be changed to another use unless the Planning Board, after receiving a written
application, determines that the new use will have no greater adverse impact on the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland, or on the subject or adjacent properties and resources than
the existing use.
In determining that no greater adverse impact will occur, the Planning Board shall require
written documentation from the applicant, regarding the probable effects on public health and
safety, erosion and sedimentation, water quality, fish and wildlife habitat, vegetative cover,
visual and actual points of public access to waters, natural beauty, floodplain management,
archaeological and historic resources, and other functionally water-dependent uses.
D. Non-conforming Uses
(1) Expansions. Expansions of non-conforming uses are prohibited, except that non-conforming
residential uses may, after obtaining a permit from the Planning Board, be expanded within
existing residential structures or within expansions of such structures as allowed in Section
12(C)(1)(a) above.
(2) Resumption Prohibited. A lot, building or structure in or on which a non-conforming use is
discontinued for a period exceeding one year, or which is superseded by a conforming use,
may not again be devoted to a non-conforming use except that the Planning Board may, for
good cause shown by the applicant, grant up to a one year extension to that time period. This
provision shall not apply to the resumption of a use of a residential structure provided that the
structure has been used or maintained for residential purposes during the preceding five (5)
year period.
(3) Change of Use. An existing non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming
use provided that the proposed use has no greater adverse impact on the subject and adjacent
properties and resources, than the former use, as determined by the Planning Board. The
determination of no greater adverse impact shall be made according to criteria listed in
Section 12(C)(4) above.
E. Non-conforming Lots
(1) Non-conforming Lots: A non-conforming lot of record as of the effective date of this
Ordinance or amendment thereto may be built upon, without the need for a variance,
provided that such lot is in separate ownership and not contiguous with any other lot in the
same ownership, and that all provisions of this Ordinance except lot area, lot width and shore
frontage can be met. Variances relating to setback or other requirements not involving lot
area, lot width or shore frontage shall be obtained by action of the Board of Appeals.
(2) Contiguous Built Lots: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are in a single or joint
ownership of record at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, if all or part of the lots do not
meet the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance, and if a principal use or structure exists
on each lot, the non-conforming lots may be conveyed separately or together, provided that
the State Minimum Lot Size Law (12 M.R.S.A. sections 4807-A through 4807-D) and the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules are complied with.
If two or more principal uses or structures existed on a single lot of record on the effective
date of this ordinance, each may be sold on a separate lot provided that the above referenced
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
7
law and rules are complied with. When such lots are divided each lot thus created must be as
conforming as possible to the dimensional requirements of this Ordinance.
(3) Contiguous Lots - Vacant or Partially Built: If two or more contiguous lots or parcels are
in single or joint ownership of record at the time of or since adoption or amendment of this
Ordinance, if any of these lots do not individually meet the dimensional requirements of this
Ordinance or subsequent amendments, and if one or more of the lots are vacant or contain no
principal structure the lots shall be combined to the extent necessary to meet the dimensional
requirements.
This provision shall not apply to 2 or more contiguous lots, at least one of which is nonconforming,
owned by the same person or persons on the effective date of this Ordinance and
recorded in the registry of deeds if the lot is served by a public sewer or can accommodate a
subsurface sewage disposal system in conformance with the State of Maine Subsurface
Wastewater Disposal Rules; and
(a) Each lot contains at least 100 feet of shore frontage and at least 20,000 square feet of lot
area; or
(b) Any lots that do not meet the frontage and lot size requirements of Section 12(E)(3)(a)
are reconfigured or combined so that each new lot contains at least 100 feet of shore
frontage and 20,000 square feet of lot area.
13. Establishment of Districts
A. Resource Protection District. The Resource Protection District includes areas in which
development would adversely affect water quality, productive habitat, biological ecosystems,
or scenic and natural values. This district shall include the following areas when they occur
within the limits of the shoreland zone, exclusive the Stream Protection District, except that
areas which are currently developed and areas which meet the criteria for the Limited
Residential District or General Development Districts need not be included within the
Resource Protection District.
(1) Areas within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of freshwater wetlands, and
wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers, which are rated moderate or high value
waterfowl and wading bird habitat, including nesting and feeding areas, by the Maine
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife (MDIF&WW) that are depicted on a Geographic
Information System (GIS) data layer maintained by MDIF&W as of December 21, 2008. For
the purposes of this paragraph “wetlands associated with great ponds and rivers shall mean
areas characterized by non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils that are contiguous
with a great pond or river, and have a surface elevation at or below the water level of the
great pond or rivers during the period of normal water. Wetland associated with great ponds
or rivers are considered to be part of that great pond or river.
(2) Floodplains along rivers and floodplains along artificially formed great ponds along rivers,
defined by the 100 year floodplain as designated on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency's (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood
of record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent floodplain soils.
(3) Areas of two or more contiguous acres with sustained slopes of 20% or greater.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
8
(4) Areas of two (2) or more contiguous acres supporting wetland vegetation and hydric soils,
which are not part of a freshwater wetland as defined, and which are not surficially connected
to a water body during the period of normal high water.
(5) Land areas along rivers subject to severe bank erosion, undercutting, or river bed movement.
(6) Also included are the following other areas which have been identified for protection:
A. Other important wildlife habitat;
B. Natural sites of significant scenic or aesthetic value;
C. Areas designated by federal, state or municipal government as natural areas of significance to be
protected from development; and
D. Other significant areas which should be included in this district to fulfill the purposes of this
Ordinance, such as, but not limited to, land surrounding public water supplies, existing public
access areas and certain significant archaeological and historic sites deserving of long-term
protection as determined by the municipality after consultation with the Maine Historic
Preservation Commission.
B. Limited Residential District. The Limited Residential District includes those areas suitable for
residential and recreational development. It includes areas other than those in the Resource
Protection District, or Stream Protection District, and areas which are used less intensively than
those in the General Development District.
C. General Development District. The General Development District includes the following types
of existing, intensively developed areas:
(1) Areas of two or more contiguous acres devoted to commercial, industrial or intensive
residential, recreational activities, or a mix of such activities, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) Transportation rights of way;
(b) Communication and utility rights of way;
(c) Areas used for the extraction or processing of mineral resources;
(d) Areas devoted to manufacturing, fabricating or other industrial activities;
(e) Areas devoted to wholesaling, warehousing, retail trade and service activities, or other
commercial activities; and
(f) Areas devoted to intensive recreational development and activities, such as, but not
limited to amusement parks, race tracks and fairgrounds.
(2) Areas otherwise discernible as having patterns of intensive commercial, industrial or
recreational uses.
Portions of the General Development District may also include residential development.
However, no area shall be designated as a General Development District based solely on
residential use.
In areas adjacent to the Kennebec River, Martin Stream from Lost Brook to the confluence with the
Kennebec River, and the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, the designation of an area as a General
Development District shall be based upon uses existing at the time of adoption of this Ordinance.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
9
There shall be no newly established General Development Districts or expansions in area of existing
General Development Districts adjacent to said areas.
D. Stream Protection District. The Stream Protection District includes all land areas within
seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a stream, exclusive of
those areas within two-hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of the Kennebec River, the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, Martin Stream and Lost
Brook; or within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
freshwater wetland. Where a stream and its associated shoreland area are located within twohundred
and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance, of the above water bodies or wetlands, that land
area shall be regulated under the terms of the shoreland district associated with that water body or
wetland.
14. Table of Land Uses. All land use activities, as indicated in Table 1, Land Uses in the Shoreland
Zone, shall conform with all of the applicable land use standards in Section 15. The district
designation for a particular site shall be determined from the Official Shoreland Zoning Map.
Key to Table 1:
Yes - Allowed (no permit required but the use must comply with all applicable land use
standards.)
No - Prohibited
PB - Allowed with permit issued by the Planning Board.
CEO - Allowed with permit issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
LPI - Allowed with permit issued by the Local Plumbing Inspector
Abbreviations:
RP - Resource Protection
LR - Limited Residential
GD - General Development
SP - Stream Protection
The Land Uses Table is on the following page:
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
10
TABLE 1. LAND USES IN THE SHORELAND ZONE
LAND USES
DISTRICT
SP RP LR GD
1. Non-intensive recreational uses not requiring structures such as hunting, fishing
and hiking
yes
yes
yes
yes
2. Motorized vehicular traffic on existing roads and trails yes yes yes yes
3. Forest management activities except for timber harvesting & land management
roads
yes yes yes yes
4. Timber harvesting CEO CEO1 CEO CEO
5. Clearing or removal of vegetation for activities other than timber harvesting CEO2 CEO1 CEO2 CEO2
6. Fire prevention activities yes yes yes yes
7. Wildlife management practices yes yes yes yes
8. Soil and water conservation practices yes yes yes yes
9. Mineral exploration no no PB PB
10. Mineral extraction including sand and gravel extraction no no PB PB
11. Surveying and resource analysis yes yes yes yes
12. Emergency operations yes yes yes yes
13. Agriculture yes PB yes yes
14. Aquaculture PB PB PB PB
15. Principal structures and uses
A. One and two family residential, including driveways
PB4
no
PB
PB
B. Multi-unit residential no no PB PB
C. Commercial no no no PB
D. Industrial no no no no
E. Governmental and institutional no no no PB
F. Small non-residential facilities for educational, scientific, or nature
interpretation purposes
PB4 PB CEO CEO
16. Structures accessory to allowed uses PB4 PB CEO yes
17. Piers, docks, wharfs, bridges and other structures and uses extending
over or below the normal high-water line or within a wetland
a. Temporary
b. Permanent
CEO11
PB
CEO11
PB
CEO11
PB
CEO11
PB
18. Conversions of seasonal residences to year-round residences LPI no LPI LPI
19. Home occupations PB no PB yes
20. Private sewage disposal systems for allowed uses LPI no LPI LPI
21. Essential services PB6 PB6 PB PB
A. Roadside distribution lines (34.5kV and lower) CEO
6 CEO
6 PB
12 PB
12
B. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving ten poles or less
in the shoreland zone
PB
6 PB6
PB PB
C. Non-roadside or cross-country distribution lines involving eleven or more
poles in the shoreland zone
PB6 PB6
PB PB
D. Other essential services PB6
PB
6
PB PB
22. Service drops, as defined, to allowed uses yes yes yes yes
23. Public and private recreational areas involving minimal structural development PB PB PB CEO
24. Individual, private campsites CEO CEO CEO CEO
25. Campgrounds no no7 PB PB
26. Road construction PB no8 PB PB
27. Land management roads yes PB yes yes
28. Parking facilities no no7 PB PB
29. Marinas PB no PB PB
30. Filling and earth moving of <10 cubic yards CEO CEO yes yes
31. Filling and earth moving of >10 cubic yards PB PB CEO CEO
32. Signs yes yes yes yes
33. Uses similar to allowed uses CEO CEO CEO CEO
34. Uses similar to uses requiring a CEO permit CEO CEO CEO CEO
35. Uses similar to uses requiring a PB permit PB PB PB PB
1In RP not allowed within 75 feet horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of great ponds, except to remove safety hazards.
2Requires permit from the Code Enforcement Officer if more than 100 square feet of surface area, in total, is disturbed.
3In RP not allowed in areas so designated because of wildlife value.
4Provided that a variance from the setback requirement is obtained from the Board of Appeals.
5Functionally water-dependent uses and uses accessory to such water dependent uses only (See note on previous page).
6See further restrictions in Section 15( L)(2).
7Except when area is zoned for resource protection due to floodplain criteria in which case a permit is required from the PB.
8Except as provided in Section 15(H)(4).
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
11
9Single family residential structures may be allowed by special exception only according to the provisions of Section 16(E), Special
Exceptions. Two-family residential structures are prohibited.
10
Except for commercial uses otherwise listed in this Table, such as marinas and campgrounds, that are allowed in the respective district.
11
Excluding bridges and other crossings not involving earthwork, in which case no permit is required.
12Permit not required, but must file a written “notice of intent to construct” with CEO.
NOTE: A person performing any of the following activities shall require a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant
to 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C, if the activity occurs in, on, over or adjacent to any freshwater wetland, great pond, river, stream or brook
and operates in such a manner that material or soil may be washed into them:
A. Dredging, bulldozing, removing or displacing soil, sand, vegetation or other materials;
B. Draining or otherwise dewatering;
C. Filling, including adding sand or other material to a sand dune; or
D. Any construction or alteration of any permanent structure.
15. Land Use Standards. All land use activities within the shoreland zone shall conform with the
following provisions, if applicable.
A. Minimum Lot Standards
Minimum Lot/Minimum Area (sq. ft.)/Shore Frontage (ft.)
(1)
(a) Residential per dwelling unit
(i) Within the Shoreland Zone
Adjacent to Non-Tidal Areas
40,000sf / 200ft
(b) Governmental, Institutional, Commercial or Industrial per principal structure
(i) Within the Shoreland Zone
Adjacent to Non-tidal Areas
60,000sf / 300ft
(c) Public and Private Recreational Facilities
(i) Within the Shoreland Zone
40,000sf / 200ft
(2) Land below the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and land
beneath roads serving more than two (2) lots shall not be included toward calculating
minimum lot area.
(3) Lots located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered each a separate
tract or parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of land on both sides
thereof after September 22, 1971.
(4) The minimum width of any portion of any lot within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, of the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland shall be
equal to or greater than the shore frontage requirement for a lot with the proposed use.
(5) If more than one residential dwelling unit, principal governmental, institutional, commercial or
industrial structure or use, or combination thereof, is constructed or established on a single
parcel, all dimensional requirements shall be met for each additional dwelling unit, principal
structure, or use.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
12
B. Principal and Accessory Structures
(1) All new principal and accessory structures shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet,
horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of the Kennebec River, the Kennebec
Water District Reservoir, Martin Stream and Lost Brook; and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland
edge of a wetland, except that in the General Development District the setback from the normal
high-water line shall be at least twenty five (25) feet, horizontal distance. In the Resource
Protection District the setback requirement shall be 250 feet, horizontal distance.
In addition:
(a) The water body, tributary stream, or wetland setback provision shall neither apply to
structures which require direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational
necessity, such as piers, docks and retaining walls, nor to other functionally waterdependent
uses.
(b) On a non-conforming lot of record on which only a residential structure exists, and it is not
possible to place an accessory structure meeting the required water body, tributary stream
or wetland setbacks, the code enforcement officer may issue a permit to place a single
accessory structure, with no utilities, for the storage of yard tools and similar equipment.
Such accessory structure shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet
in height, and shall be located as far from the shoreline or tributary stream as practical and
shall meet all other applicable standards, including lot coverage and vegetation clearing
limitations. In no case shall the structure be located closer to the shoreline or tributary
stream than the principal structure.
NOTE: A municipality may within its ordinance, authorize the Planning Board to increase the
required setback of a proposed structure, as a condition to permit approval, if necessary
to accomplish the purposes of this ordinance. Instances where a greater setback may be
appropriate include, but are not limited to: areas of steep slope; shallow or erodible soils;
or where an adequate vegetative buffer does not exist.
NOTE: A tributary stream may be perennial or intermittent. Where a tributary stream is present
within the shoreland zone, setback standards from that tributary stream are applicable.
(2) Principal or accessory structures and expansions of existing structures which are permitted in
the Resource Protection, Limited Residential, and Stream Protection Districts, shall not exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in height. This provision shall not apply to structures such as transmission
towers, windmills, antennas, and similar structures having no floor area.
(3) The lowest floor elevation or openings of all buildings and structures, including basements,
shall be elevated at least one foot above the elevation of the 100 year flood, the flood of
record, or in the absence of these, the flood as defined by soil types identified as recent floodplain
soils.
(4) The total footprint area of all structures, parking lots and other non-vegetated surfaces, within
the shoreland zone shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the lot or a portion thereof, located
within the shoreland zone, including land area previously developed, except in the General
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
13
Development District adjacent to Kennebec River, where lot coverage shall not exceed
seventy (70) percent.
(5) Retaining walls that are not necessary for erosion control shall meet the structure setback
requirement, except for low retaining walls and associated fill provided all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The site has been previously altered and an effective vegetated buffer does not exist;
(b) The wall(s) is(are) at least 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of
a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland;
(b) The site where the retaining wall will be constructed is legally existing lawn or is a site
eroding from lack of naturally occurring vegetation, and which cannot be stabilized with
vegetative plantings;
(c) The total height of the wall(s), in the aggregate, are no more than 24 inches;
(e) Retaining walls are located outside of the 100-year floodplain on rivers, streams, and
tributary streams, as designated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s
(FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Maps or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, or the flood of
record, or in the absence of these, by soil types identified as recent flood plain soils.
(f) The area behind the wall is revegetated with grass, shrubs, trees, or a combination
thereof, and no further structural development will occur within the setback area,
including patios and decks; and
(g) A vegetated buffer area is established within 25 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland when a
natural buffer area does not exist. The buffer area must meet the following
characteristics:
(i) The buffer must include shrubs and other woody and herbaceous vegetation. Where
natural ground cover is lacking the area must be supplemented with leaf or bark
mulch;
(ii) Vegetation plantings must be in quantities sufficient to retard erosion and provide for
effective infiltration of stormwater runoff;
(iii) Only native species may be used to establish the buffer area;
(iv) A minimum buffer width of 15 feet, horizontal distance, is required, measured
perpendicularly to the normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland;
(v) A footpath not to exceed the standards in Section 15(P)(2)(a), may traverse the
buffer;
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
14
NOTE: If the wall and associated soil disturbance occurs within 75 feet, horizontal distance,
of a water body, or tributary stream, a permit pursuant to the Natural Resource
Protection Act is required from the Department of Environmental Protection.
(6) Notwithstanding the requirements stated above, stairways or similar structures may be allowed
with a permit from the Code Enforcement Officer, to provide shoreline access in areas of steep
slopes or unstable soils provided: that the structure is limited to a maximum of four (4) feet in
width; that the structure does not extend below or over the normal high-water line of a water
body or upland edge of a wetland, (unless permitted by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C); and
that the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable access alternative exists on the property.
C. Piers, Docks, Wharves, Bridges and Other Structures and Uses Extending Over or Below the
Normal High-Water Line of a Water Body or Within a Wetland.
(1) Access from shore shall be developed on soils appropriate for such use and constructed so as to
control erosion.
(2) The location shall not interfere with existing developed or natural beach areas.
(3) The facility shall be located so as to minimize adverse effects on fisheries.
(4) The facility shall be no larger in dimension than necessary to carry on the activity and be
consistent with the surrounding character and uses of the area. A temporary pier, dock or wharf
in non-tidal waters shall not be wider than six feet for non-commercial uses.
(5) No new structure shall be built on, over or abutting a pier, wharf, dock or other structure
extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland unless the
structure requires direct access to the water body or wetland as an operational necessity.
(6) New permanent piers and docks on non-tidal waters shall not be permitted unless it is clearly
demonstrated to the Planning Board that a temporary pier or dock is not feasible, and a permit
has been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to the Natural
Resources Protection Act.
(7) No existing structures built on, over or abutting a pier, dock, wharf or other structure
extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body or within a wetland shall be
converted to residential dwelling units in any district.
(8) Except in the General Development District, structures built on, over or abutting a pier,
wharf, dock or other structure extending beyond the normal high-water line of a water body
or within a wetland shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height above the pier, wharf, dock or
other structure.
NOTE: New permanent structures, and expansions thereof, projecting into or over water bodies
shall require a permit from the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to
the Natural Resources Protection Act, 38 M.R.S.A. section 480-C. Permits may also be
required from the Army Corps of Engineers if located in navigable waters.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
15
D. Campgrounds. Campgrounds shall conform to the minimum requirements imposed under State
licensing procedures and the following:
(1) Campgrounds shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet of land, not
including roads and driveways, for each site. Land supporting wetland vegetation, and land
below the normal high-water line of a water body shall not be included in calculating land
area per site.
(2) The areas intended for placement of a recreational vehicle, tent or shelter, and utility and
service buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of the Kennebec River and the area of the Kennebec Water
District Reservoir, and Martin Stream and Lost Brook; and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance, from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland.
E. Individual Private Campsites. Individual private campsites not associated with campgrounds
are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
(1) One campsite per lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance, or thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet of lot area within the shoreland zone, whichever is less, may be
permitted.
(2) Campsite placement on any lot, including the area intended for a recreational vehicle or tent
platform, shall be set back one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal highwater
line of the Kennebec River and the area of the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, and
Martin Stream, and Lost Brook, and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of a
wetland.
(3) Only one recreational vehicle shall be allowed on a campsite. The recreational vehicle shall
not be located on any type of permanent foundation except for a gravel pad, and no structure
except a canopy shall be attached to the recreational vehicle.
(4) The clearing of vegetation for the siting of the recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter in a
Resource Protection District shall be limited to one thousand (1000) square feet.
(5) A written sewage disposal plan describing the proposed method and location of sewage
disposal shall be required for each campsite and shall be approved by the Local Plumbing
Inspector. Where disposal is off-site, written authorization from the receiving facility or land
owner is required.
(6) When a recreational vehicle, tent or similar shelter is placed on-site for more than one
hundred and twenty (120) days per year, all requirements for residential structures shall be
met, including the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system in compliance with the
State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules unless served by public sewage
facilities.
F. Commercial and Industrial Uses. The following new commercial and industrial uses are
prohibited within the shoreland zone adjacent to great ponds classified GPA, and rivers and
streams which flow to great ponds classified GPA:
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
16
(1) Auto washing facilities
(2) Auto or other vehicle service and/or repair operations, including body shops
(3) Chemical and bacteriological laboratories
(4) Storage of chemicals, including herbicides, pesticides or fertilizers, other than amounts
normally associated with individual households or farms
(5) Commercial painting, wood preserving, and furniture stripping
(6) Dry cleaning establishments
(7) Electronic circuit assembly
(8) Laundromats, unless connected to a sanitary sewer
(9) Metal plating, finishing, or polishing
(10) Petroleum or petroleum product storage and/or sale except storage on same property as use
occurs and except for storage and sales associated with marinas
(11) Photographic processing
(12) Printing
G. Parking Areas
(1) Parking areas shall meet the shoreline and tributary stream setback requirements for
structures for the district in which such areas are located. The setback requirement for parking
areas serving public boat launching facilities in Districts other than the General Development
District be no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, from the shoreline or tributary
stream if the Planning Board finds that no other reasonable alternative exists further from the
shoreline or tributary stream.
(2) Parking areas shall be adequately sized for the proposed use and shall be designed to prevent
stormwater runoff from flowing directly into a water body, tributary stream or wetland and
where feasible, to retain all runoff on-site.
(3) In determining the appropriate size of proposed parking facilities, the following shall apply:
(a) Typical parking space: Approximately ten (10) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long,
except that parking spaces for a vehicle and boat trailer shall be forty (40) feet long.
(b) Internal travel aisles: Approximately twenty (20) feet wide.
H. Roads and Driveways. The following standards shall apply to the construction of roads and/or
driveways and drainage systems, culverts and other related features.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
17
(1) Roads and driveways shall be set back at least one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance,
from the normal high-water line of Kennebec River and the area of the Kennebec Water
District Reservoir, and Martin Stream and Lost Brook; and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal
distance from the normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the
upland edge of a wetland unless no reasonable alternative exists as determined by the
Planning Board. If no other reasonable alternative exists, the road and/or driveway setback
requirement shall be no less than fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, upon clear showing by
the applicant that appropriate techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the
installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
turnouts placed so as to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland.
On slopes of greater than twenty (20) percent the road and/or driveway setback shall be
increased by ten (10) feet, horizontal distance, for each five (5) percent increase in slope
above twenty (20) percent.
Section 15 (H)(1) does not apply to approaches to water crossings or to roads or driveways
that provide access to permitted structures and facilities located nearer to the shoreline or
tributary stream due to an operational necessity, excluding temporary docks for recreational
uses. Roads and driveways providing access to permitted structures within the setback area
shall comply fully with the requirements of Section 15(H)(1) except for that portion of the
road or driveway necessary for direct access to the structure.
(2) Existing public roads may be expanded within the legal road right of way regardless of their
setback from a water body, tributary stream or wetland.
(3) New permanent roads are not allowed within the shoreland zone along Significant River
Segments except:
(a) To provide access to structures or facilities within the zone; or
(b) When the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable alternative route exists outside the
shoreland zone. When roads must be located within the shoreland zone they shall be set
back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line and screened from the river by
existing vegetation.
(4) New roads and driveways are prohibited in a Resource Protection District except to provide
access to permitted uses within the district, or as approved by the Planning Board upon
finding that no reasonable alternative route or location is available outside the district. When
a road or driveway is permitted in a Resource Protection District the road and/or driveway
shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line of a water body,
tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland.
(5) Road and driveway banks shall be no steeper than a slope of two (2) horizontal to one (1)
vertical, and shall be graded and stabilized in accordance with the provisions for erosion and
sedimentation control contained in Section 15(Q).
(6) Road and driveway grades shall be no greater than ten (10) percent except for segments of
less than two hundred (200) feet.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
18
(7) In order to prevent road and driveway surface drainage from directly entering water bodies,
tributary streams or wetlands, roads and driveways shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained to empty onto an unscarified buffer strip at least (50) feet plus two times the
average slope, in width between the outflow point of the ditch or culvert and the normal highwater
line of a water body, tributary stream, or upland edge of a wetland. Surface drainage
which is directed to an unscarified buffer strip shall be diffused or spread out to promote
infiltration of the runoff and to minimize channelized flow of the drainage through the buffer
strip.
(8) Ditch relief (cross drainage) culverts, drainage dips and water turnouts shall be installed in a
manner effective in directing drainage onto unscarified buffer strips before the flow gains
sufficient volume or head to erode the road, driveway, or ditch. To accomplish this, the
following shall apply:
(a) Ditch relief culverts, drainage dips and associated water turnouts shall be spaced along
the road or driveway at intervals no greater than indicated in the following table:
Grade Spacing
(Percent) (Feet)
0-2 250
3-5 200-135
6-10 100-80
11-15 80-60
16-20 60-45
21 + 40
(b) Drainage dips may be used in place of ditch relief culverts only where the grade is ten
(10) percent or less.
(c) On sections having slopes greater than ten (10) percent, ditch relief culverts shall be
placed at approximately a thirty (30) degree angle downslope from a line perpendicular to
the centerline of the road or driveway.
(d) Ditch relief culverts shall be sufficiently sized and properly installed in order to allow for
effective functioning and their inlet and outlet ends shall be stabilized with appropriate
materials.
(9) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other storm water runoff control
installations associated with roads and driveways shall be maintained on a regular basis to
assure effective functioning.
I Signs. The following provisions shall govern the use of signs in the Resource Protection, Stream
Protection, Limited Residential and Limited Commercial Districts:
(1) Signs relating to goods and services sold on the premises shall be allowed, provided that such
signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and shall not exceed two (2) signs per
premises. Signs relating to goods or services not sold or rendered on the premises shall be
prohibited.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
19
(2) Name signs are allowed, provided such signs shall not exceed two (2) signs per premises, and
shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in the aggregate.
(3) Residential users may display a single sign not over three (3) square feet in area relating to
the sale, rental, or lease of the premises.
(4) Signs relating to trespassing and hunting shall be allowed without restriction as to number
provided that no such sign shall exceed two (2) square feet in area.
(5) Signs relating to public safety shall be allowed without restriction.
(6) No sign shall extend higher than twenty (20) feet above the ground.
(7) Signs may be illuminated only by shielded, non-flashing lights.
J. Storm Water Runoff
(1) All new construction and development shall be designed to minimize storm water runoff from
the site in excess of the natural predevelopment conditions. Where possible, existing natural
runoff control features, such as berms, swales, terraces and wooded areas, shall be retained in
order to reduce runoff and encourage infiltration of stormwater.
(2) Storm water runoff control systems shall be maintained as necessary to ensure proper
functioning.
NOTE: The Stormwater Management Law (38 M.R.S.A. section 420-D) requires a full permit to
be obtained from the DEP prior to construction of a project consisting of 20,000 square
feet or more of impervious area or 5 acres or more of a developed area in an urban
impaired stream watershed or most-at-risk lake watershed, or a project with 1 acre or
more of developed area in any other stream, coastal or wetland watershed. A permit-byrule
is necessary for a project with one acre or more of disturbed area but less than 1 acre
impervious area (20,000 square feet for most-at-risk lakes and urban impaired streams)
and less than 5 acres of developed area. Furthermore, a Maine Construction General
Permit is required if the construction will result in one acre or more of disturbed area.
K. Septic Waste Disposal
(1) All subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed in conformance with the State of
Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules, and the following: a) clearing or removal
of woody vegetation necessary to site a new system and any associated fill extensions, shall
not extend closer than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water
line of a water body or the upland edge of a wetland and b) a holding tank is not allowed for a
first-time residential use in the shoreland zone.
NOTE: The Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules require new systems, excluding fill
extensions, to be constructed no less than one hundred (100) horizontal feet from the normal
high-water line of a perennial water body. The minimum setback distance for a new
subsurface disposal system may not be reduced by variance.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
20
L. Essential Services
(1) Where feasible, the installation of essential services shall be limited to existing public ways
and existing service corridors.
(2) The installation of essential services, other than road-side distribution lines, is not allowed in
a Resource Protection or Stream Protection District, except to provide services to a permitted
use within said district, or except where the applicant demonstrates that no reasonable
alternative exists. Where allowed, such structures and facilities shall be located so as to
minimize any adverse impacts on surrounding uses and resources, including visual impacts.
(3) Damaged or destroyed public utility transmission and distribution lines, towers and related
equipment may be replaced or reconstructed without a permit.
M. Mineral Exploration and Extraction. Mineral exploration to determine the nature or extent of
mineral resources shall be accomplished by hand sampling, test boring, or other methods which
create minimal disturbance of less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground surface. A permit
from the Code Enforcement Officer shall be required for mineral exploration which exceeds the
above limitation. All excavations, including test pits and holes, shall be immediately capped,
filled or secured by other equally effective measures to restore disturbed areas and to protect the
public health and safety.
Mineral extraction may be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) A reclamation plan shall be filed with, and approved, by the Planning Board before a permit
is granted. Such plan shall describe in detail procedures to be undertaken to fulfill the
requirements of Section 15 (M)(4) below.
(2) No part of any extraction operation, including drainage and runoff control features, shall be
permitted within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
the Kennebec River and the area of the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, and Martin
Stream and Lost Brook, and within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland.
Extraction operations shall not be permitted within fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, of any
property line without written permission of the owner of such adjacent property.
(3) Developers of new gravel pits along Significant River Segments shall demonstrate that no
reasonable mining site outside the shoreland zone exists. When gravel pits must be located
within the zone, they shall be set back as far as practicable from the normal high-water line
and no less than seventy-five (75) feet and screened from the river by existing vegetation.
(4) Within twelve (12) months following the completion of extraction operations at any
extraction site, which operations shall be deemed complete when less than one hundred (100)
cubic yards of materials are removed in any consecutive twelve (12) month period, ground
levels and grades shall be established in accordance with the following:
(a) All debris, stumps, and similar material shall be removed for disposal in an approved
location, or shall be buried on-site. Only materials generated on-site may be buried or
covered on-site.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
21
NOTE: The State of Maine Solid Waste Laws, 38 M.R.S.A., section 1301 and the solid waste
management rules, Chapters 400-419 of the Department of Environmental Protection's
regulations may contain other applicable provisions regarding disposal of such materials.
(b) The final graded slope shall be two and one-half to one (2 1/2:1) slope or flatter.
(c) Top soil or loam shall be retained to cover all disturbed land areas, which shall be
reseeded and stabilized with vegetation native to the area. Additional topsoil or loam
shall be obtained from off-site sources if necessary to complete the stabilization project.
(5) In keeping with the purposes of this Ordinance, the Planning Board may impose such
conditions as are necessary to minimize the adverse impacts associated with mineral
extraction operations on surrounding uses and resources.
N. Agriculture
(1) All spreading of manure shall be accomplished in conformance with the Manure Utilization
Guidelines published by the Maine Department of Agriculture on November 1, 2001, and the
Nutrient Management Law (7 M.R.S.A. sections 4201-4209).
(2) Manure shall not be stored or stockpiled within one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance,
of a the Kennebec River and the area of the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, and Martin
Stream and Lost Brook, or within seventy-five (75) feet horizontal distance, of other water
bodies, tributary streams, or wetlands. All manure storage areas within the shoreland zone
must be constructed or modified such that the facility produces no discharge of effluent or
contaminated storm water. Existing facilities which do not meet the set-back requirement
may remain, but must meet the no discharge provision.
(3) Agricultural activities involving tillage of soil greater than forty thousand (40,000) square
feet in surface area, within the shoreland zone shall require a Conservation Plan to be filed
with the Planning Board. Non-conformance with the provisions of said plan shall be
considered to be a violation of this Ordinance.
(4) There shall be no new tilling of soil within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of the Kennebec River, the area of the Kennebec Water District
Reservoir, Martin Stream and Lost Brook; within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
from other water bodies; nor within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal distance, of tributary
streams and freshwater wetlands. Operations in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance and not in conformance with this provision may be maintained.
(5) Newly established livestock grazing areas shall not be permitted within one hundred (100)
feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of the Kennebec River, the area of the
Kennebec Water District Reservoir, Martin Stream, and Lost Brook within seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance, of other water bodies, nor; within twenty-five (25) feet, horizontal
distance, of tributary streams and freshwater wetlands. Livestock grazing associated with
ongoing farm activities, and which are not in conformance with the above setback provisions
may continue, provided that such grazing is conducted in accordance with a Conservation
Plan.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
22
NOTE: 17 M.R.S.A. section 2805(4) requires a municipality to provide the Commissioner of
Agriculture, Food and Rural Resources with a copy of any proposed ordinance that
impacts farm operations. The law further requires the Commissioner to review the
proposed ordinance and advise the municipality if the proposed ordinance would
restrict or prohibit the use of best management practices. A copy of a shoreland
zoning ordinance that regulates no more restrictively than contained in these
Guidelines need not be provided to the Commissioner of Agriculture, Food and
Rural Resources.
NOTE RELATING TO TIMBER HARVESTING STANDARDS:
Title 38 MRSA section 438-B of the Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act addresses timber harvesting and
timber harvesting activities in shoreland areas. Section 438-B establishes three options from which each
municipality may choose as the State moves toward a set of statewide timber harvesting standards in
shoreland areas.
The Town of Fairfield chooses Option #1 and Section 15 (O) is repealed on the statutory date established
under 38 M.R.S.A. section 438-A (5), at which time Section 15(0-1) shall become effective.
O. Timber Harvesting
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, timber harvesting shall be limited to
the following:
(a) Within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal
high-water line, timber harvesting may be conducted when the following conditions
are met:
(1) The ground is frozen;
(2) There is no resultant soil disturbance;
(3) The removal of trees is accomplished using a cable or boom and there is no entry of
tracked or wheeled vehicles into the 75-foot strip of land;
(4) There is no cutting of trees less than 6 inches in diameter; no more than 30% of the
trees 6 inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 ½ feet above ground level, are cut
in any 10-year period; and a well-distributed stand of trees and other natural
vegetation remains; and
(5) A licensed professional forester has marked the trees to be harvested prior to a permit
being issued by the municipality.
(b) Beyond the 75 foot strip referred to in Section 15(O)(1)(a) above, timber harvesting is
permitted in accordance with paragraph 2 below except that in no case shall the average
residual basal area of trees over 4 ½ inches in diameter at 4 1/2 feet above ground level
be reduced to less than 30 square feet per acre.
(2) Except in areas as described in Section 15(O)(1) above, timber harvesting shall conform with
the following provisions:
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
23
(a) Selective cutting of no more than forty (40) percent of the total volume of trees four (4)
inches or more in diameter measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level on any lot in any
ten (10) year period is permitted. In addition:
(i) Within one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of
the Kennebec River and the area of the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, Martin
Stream and Lost Brook, and within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of other water bodies, tributary streams, or the upland edge of
a wetland, there shall be no clearcut openings and a well-distributed stand of trees
and other vegetation, including existing ground cover, shall be maintained.
(ii) At distances greater than one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, of the
Kennebec River, and the area of the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, Martin
Stream, and Lost Brook, and greater than seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of other water bodies or the upland edge of a wetland,
harvesting operations shall not create single clearcut openings greater than tenthousand
(10,000) square feet in the forest canopy. Where such openings exceed fivethousand
(5000) square feet they shall be at least one hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, apart. Such clearcut openings shall be included in the calculation of total
volume removal. Volume may be considered to be equivalent to basal area.
(b) Timber harvesting operations exceeding the 40% limitation in Section 15(O)(2)(a) above,
may be allowed by the planning board upon a clear showing, including a forest
management plan signed by a Maine licensed professional forester, that such an
exception is necessary for good forest management and will be carried out in accordance
with the purposes of this Ordinance. The planning board shall notify the Commissioner of
the Department of Environmental Protection of each exception allowed, within fourteen
(14) days of the planning board's decision.
(c) No accumulation of slash shall be left within fifty (50) feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line of a water body. In all other areas slash shall either be removed or
disposed of in such a manner that it lies on the ground and no part thereof extends more
than four (4) feet above the ground. Any debris that falls below the normal high-water
line of a water body or tributary stream shall be removed.
(d) Timber harvesting equipment shall not use stream channels as travel routes except when:
(i) Surface waters are frozen; and
(ii) The activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
(e) All crossings of flowing water shall require a bridge or culvert, except in areas with low
banks and channel beds which are composed of gravel, rock or similar hard surface
which would not be eroded or otherwise damaged.
(f) Skid trail approaches to water crossings shall be located and designed so as to prevent
water runoff from directly entering the water body or tributary stream. Upon completion
of timber harvesting, temporary bridges and culverts shall be removed and areas of
exposed soil revegetated.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
24
(g) Except for water crossings, skid trails and other sites where the operation of machinery
used in timber harvesting results in the exposure of mineral soil shall be located such that
an unscarified strip of vegetation of at least seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, in
width for slopes up to ten (10) percent shall be retained between the exposed mineral soil
and the normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland. For each ten
(10) percent increase in slope, the unscarified strip shall be increased by twenty (20) feet,
horizontal distance. The provisions of this paragraph apply only to a face sloping toward
the water body or wetland, provided, however, that no portion of such exposed mineral
soil on a back face shall be closer than twenty five (25) feet, horizontal distance, from the
normal high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland.
O-1. Timber Harvesting – Statewide Standards
(1) Shoreline integrity and sedimentation. Persons conducting timber harvesting and related
activities must take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of water body and tributary stream
banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within water
bodies, tributary streams and wetlands. If, despite such precautions, the disruption of
shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or the disturbance of water body and tributary
stream banks, water body and tributary stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within
water bodies, tributary streams and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(2) Slash treatment. Timber harvesting and related activities shall be conducted such that slash
or debris is not left below the normal high-water line of any water body or tributary stream,
or the upland edge of a wetland. Section 15(O-1)(2) does not apply to minor, incidental
amounts of slash that result from timber harvesting and related activities otherwise conducted
in compliance with this section.
(a) Slash actively used to protect soil from disturbance by equipment or to stabilize exposed
soil, may be left in place, provided that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet above the
ground.
(b) Adjacent to great ponds, rivers and wetlands:
(i) No accumulation of slash shall be left within 50 feet, horizontal distance, of the
normal high-water line or upland edge of a wetland; and
(ii) Between 50 feet and 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line or
upland edge of a wetland, all slash larger than 3 inches in diameter must be disposed
of in such a manner that no part thereof extends more than 4 feet above the ground.
(3) Timber harvesting and related activities must leave adequate tree cover and shall be
conducted so that a well-distributed stand of trees is retained. This requirement may be
satisfied by following one of the following three options:
(a) Option 1 (40% volume removal), as follows:
(i) Harvesting of no more than 40 percent of the total volume on each acre of trees 4.5
inches DBH or greater in any 10 year period is allowed. Volume may be considered
to be equivalent to basal area;
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
25
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation including
existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of rivers, streams,
and great ponds, and within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of a
freshwater or coastal wetlands, there must be no cleared openings. At distances greater
than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of a river or great pond
or upland edge of a wetland, timber harvesting and related activities must not create
single cleared openings greater than 14,000 square feet in the forest canopy. Where
such openings exceed 10,000 square feet, they must be at least 100 feet, horizontal
distance, apart. Such cleared openings will be included in the calculation of total
volume removal. Volume may be considered equivalent to basal area.
(b) Option 2 (60 square foot basal area retention), as follows:
(i) The residual stand must contain an average basal area of at least 60 square feet per
acre of woody vegetation greater than or equal to 1.0 inch DBH, of which 40 square
feet per acre must be greater than or equal to 4.5 inches DBH;
(ii) A well-distributed stand of trees which is windfirm, and other vegetation including
existing ground cover, must be maintained; and,
(iii) Within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water line of water bodies and
within 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of wetlands, there must be no
cleared openings. At distances greater than 75 feet, horizontal distance, of the normal
high-water line of a river or great pond, or upland edge of a wetland, timber
harvesting and related activities must not create single cleared openings greater than
14,000 square feet in the forest canopy. Where such openings exceed 10,000 square
feet, they must be at least 100 feet, horizontal distance, apart. Such cleared openings
will be included in the calculation of the average basal area. Volume may be
considered equivalent to basal area.
(c) Option 3 (Outcome based), which requires: An alternative method proposed in an
application, signed by a Licensed Forester or certified wildlife professional, submitted by
the landowner or designated agent to the State of Maine Department of Conservation’s
Bureau of Forestry (Bureau) for review and approval, which provides equal or better
protection of the shoreland area than this rule.
Landowners must designate on the Forest Operations Notification form required by 12 M.R.S.A.
chapter 805, subchapter 5 which option they choose to use. If landowners choose Option 1 or
Option 2, compliance will be determined solely on the criteria for the option chosen. If
landowners choose Option 3, timber harvesting and related activities may not begin until the
Bureau has approved the alternative method.
The Bureau may verify that adequate tree cover and a well-distributed stand of trees is retained
through a field procedure that uses sample plots that are located randomly or systematically to
provide a fair representation of the harvest area.
(4) Skid trails, yards, and equipment operation. This requirement applies to the construction,
maintenance, and use of skid trails and yards in shoreland areas.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
26
(a) Equipment used in timber harvesting and related activities shall not use river, stream or
tributary stream channels as travel routes except when surface waters are frozen and snow
covered, and the activity will not result in any ground disturbance.
(b) Skid trails and yards must be designed and constructed to prevent sediment and concentrated
water runoff from entering a water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Upon termination of
their use, skid trails and yards must be stabilized.
(c) Setbacks:
(i) Equipment must be operated to avoid the exposure of mineral soil within 25 feet,
horizontal distance, of any water body, tributary stream, or wetland. On slopes of 10
percent or greater, the setback for equipment operation must be increased by 20 feet,
horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal distance, for each 5 percent
increase in slope above 10 percent. Where slopes fall away from the resource, no increase
in the 25-foot setback is required.
(ii) Where such setbacks are impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid
sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland. Such techniques may
include the installation of sump holes or settling basins, and/or the effective use of
additional ditch relief culverts and ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of
the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation
or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(5) Land Management Roads. Land management roads, including approaches to crossings of water
bodies, tributary stream channels, and freshwater wetlands, ditches and other related structures,
must be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent sediment and concentrated water runoff
from directly entering the water body, tributary stream or wetland. Surface water on or adjacent
to water crossing approaches must be diverted through vegetative filter strips to avoid
sedimentation of the watercourse or wetland. Because roadside ditches may not extend to the
resource being crossed, vegetative filter strips must be established in accordance with the setback
requirements in Section 15(O-1)(7) of this rule.
(a) Land management roads and associated ditches, excavation, and fill must be set back at least:
(i) 100 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of a great pond, river or
freshwater or coastal wetland;
(ii) 50 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of streams; and
(iii) 25 feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of tributary streams
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
27
(b) The minimum 100 foot setback specified in Section 15(O-1)(5)(a)(i) above may be reduced
to no less than 50 feet, horizontal distance, and the 50 foot setback specified in
Section 15(O-1)(5)(a)(ii) above may be reduced to no less than 25 feet, horizontal distance,
if, prior to construction, the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent demonstrates to
the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate
techniques will be used to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. Such techniques may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling
basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to
avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream or wetland. If, despite such
precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions
must be corrected.
(c) On slopes of 10 percent or greater, the land management road setback must be increased by at
least 20 feet, horizontal distance, plus an additional 10 feet, horizontal distance, for each 5
percent increase in slope above 10 percent.
(d) New land management roads are not allowed within the shoreland area along Significant
River Segments as identified in 38 M.R.S.A. section 437, nor in a Resource Protection
District, unless, prior to construction, the landowner or the landowner’s designated agent
makes a clear demonstration to the Planning Board’s satisfaction that no reasonable
alternative route exists outside the shoreland zone, and that the new road must be set back
as far as practicable from the normal high-water line and screened from the river by
existing vegetation.
(e) Ditches, culverts, bridges, dips, water turnouts and other water control installations associated
with roads must be maintained on a regular basis to assure effective functioning. Drainage
structures shall deliver a dispersed flow of water into an unscarified filter strip no less than
the width indicated in the setback requirements in Section 15(O-1)(7). Where such a filter
strip is impracticable, appropriate techniques shall be used to avoid sedimentation of the
water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques may include the installation of
sump holes or settling basins, and/or the effective use of additional ditch relief culverts and
ditch water turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or
wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity
occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(f) Road closeout and discontinuance. Maintenance of the water control installations required
in Section 15(O-1)(5)(e) must continue until use of the road is discontinued and the road is
put to bed by effective installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage structures at
appropriate intervals, constructed to avoid surface water flowing over or under the water bar,
and extending a sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that water does not reenter the
road surface.
(g) Upgrading existing roads. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads must
conform to the provisions of Section 15(O-1). Any nonconforming existing road may
continue to exist and to be maintained, as long as the nonconforming conditions are not made
more nonconforming.
(h) Exception. Extension or enlargement of presently existing roads need not conform to the
setback requirements of Section 15(O-1)(5)(a) if, prior to extension or enlargement, the
landowner or the landowner’s designated agent demonstrates to the Planning Board’s
satisfaction that no reasonable alternative exists and that appropriate techniques will be used
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
28
to prevent sedimentation of the water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Such techniques
may include, but are not limited to, the installation of settling basins, and/or the effective use
of additional ditch relief culverts and turnouts placed to avoid sedimentation of the water
body, tributary stream, or wetland. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the
disruption of shoreline integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(i) Additional measures. In addition to the foregoing minimum requirements, persons
undertaking construction and maintenance of roads and river, stream and tributary stream
crossings must take reasonable measures to avoid sedimentation of surface waters.
(6) Crossings of waterbodies. Crossings of rivers, streams, and tributary streams must allow for fish
passage at all times of the year, must not impound water, and must allow for the maintenance of
normal flows.
(a) Determination of flow. Provided they are properly applied and used for the circumstances
for which they are designed, methods including but not limited to the following are
acceptable as a means of calculating the 10 year and 25 year frequency water flows and
thereby determining water crossing sizes as required in Section 15(O-1): The United States
Geological Survey (USGS) Methods; specifically: Hodgkins, G. 1999. Estimating the
Magnitude of Peak Flows for Streams in Maine for Selected Recurrence Intervals. U.S.
Geological Survey. Water Resources Investigations Report 99-4008. 45 pp.
(b) Upgrading existing water crossings. Extension or enlargement of presently existing water
crossings must conform to the provisions of Section 15(O-1). Any nonconforming existing
water crossing may continue to exist and be maintained, as long as the nonconforming
conditions are not made more nonconforming; however, any maintenance or repair work
done below the normal high-water line must conform to the provisions of Section 15(O-1).
(c) Other Agency Permits. Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design,
construction, and maintenance of crossings on waterbodies other than a river, stream or
tributary stream may require a permit from the Land Use Regulation Commission, the
Department of Environmental Protection, or the US Army Corps of Engineers.
(d) Any timber harvesting and related activities involving the design, construction, and
maintenance of crossings of freshwater wetlands identified by the Department of Inland
Fisheries and Wildlife as essential wildlife habitat require prior consultation with the
Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife.
(e) Notice to Bureau of Forestry. Written notice of all water crossing construction maintenance,
alteration and replacement activities in shoreland areas must be given to the Bureau prior to
the commencement of such activities. Such notice must contain all information required by
the Bureau, including:
(i) a map showing the location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(ii) the GPS location of all proposed permanent crossings;
(iii) for any temporary or permanent crossing that requires a permit from state or federal
agencies, a copy of the approved permit or permits; and
(iv) a statement signed by the responsible party that all temporary and permanent
crossings will be constructed, maintained, and closed out in accordance with the
requirements of this Section.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
29
(f) Water crossing standards. All crossings of rivers require a bridge or culvert sized according
to the requirements of Section 15(O-1)(6)(g)) below. Streams and tributary streams may be
crossed using temporary structures that are not bridges or culverts provided:
(i) concentrated water runoff does not enter the stream or tributary stream;
(ii) sedimentation of surface waters is reasonably avoided;
(iii) there is no substantial disturbance of the bank, or stream or tributary stream channel;
(iv) fish passage is not impeded; and,
(v) water flow is not unreasonably impeded.
Subject to Section 15(O-1)(6)(f)(i-v) above, skid trail crossings of streams and tributary
streams when channels of such streams and tributary streams are frozen and snow-covered or
are composed of a hard surface which will not be eroded or otherwise damaged are not
required to use permanent or temporary structures.
(g) Bridge and Culvert Sizing. For crossings of river, stream and tributary stream channels with
a bridge or culvert, the following requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts must be installed and maintained to provide an opening sufficient in
size and structure to accommodate 10 year frequency water flows or with a crosssectional
area at least equal to 2 1/2 times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream, or
tributary stream channel.
(ii) Temporary bridge and culvert sizes may be smaller than provided in Section 15(O-
1)(6)(g)(i) if techniques are effectively employed such that in the event of culvert or
bridge failure, the natural course of water flow is maintained and sedimentation of the
water body or tributary stream is avoided. Such crossing structures must be at least as
wide as the channel and placed above the normal high-water line. Techniques may
include, but are not limited to, the effective use of any, a combination of, or all of the
following:
1. use of temporary skidder bridges;
2. removing culverts prior to the onset of frozen ground conditions;
3. using water bars in conjunction with culverts;
4. using road dips in conjunction with culverts.
(iii) Culverts utilized in river, stream and tributary stream crossings must:
1. be installed at or below river, stream or tributary stream bed elevation;
2. be seated on firm ground;
3. have soil compacted at least halfway up the side of the culvert;
4. be covered by soil to a minimum depth of 1 foot or according to the
culvert manufacturer's specifications, whichever is greater; and
5. have a headwall at the inlet end which is adequately stabilized by riprap
or other suitable means to reasonably avoid erosion of material around the
culvert.
(iv) River, stream and tributary stream crossings allowed under Section 15(O-1), but
located in flood hazard areas (i.e. A zones) as identified on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) or Flood Hazard Boundary Maps (FHBM), must be
designed and constructed under the stricter standards contained in that community's
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
30
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). For example, a water crossing may be
required to pass a 100-year flood event.
(v) Exception. Skid trail crossings of tributary streams within shoreland areas and
wetlands adjacent to such streams may be undertaken in a manner not in conformity
with the requirements of the foregoing subsections provided persons conducting such
activities take reasonable measures to avoid the disruption of shoreline integrity, the
occurrence of sedimentation of water, and the disturbance of stream banks, stream
channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds and wetlands. If, despite such
precautions, the disruption of shoreline integrity, sedimentation of water, or the
disturbance of stream banks, stream channels, shorelines, and soil lying within ponds
and wetlands occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(h) Skid trail closeout. Upon completion of timber harvesting and related activities, or upon the
expiration of a Forest Operations Notification, whichever is earlier, the following
requirements apply:
(i) Bridges and culverts installed for river, stream and tributary stream crossings by skid
trails must either be removed and areas of exposed soil stabilized, or upgraded to
comply with the closeout standards for land management roads in
Section15(O-1)(6)(i) below.
(ii) Water crossing structures that are not bridges or culverts must either be removed
immediately following timber harvesting and related activities, or, if frozen into the
river, stream or tributary stream bed or bank, as soon as practical after snowmelt.
(iii) River, stream and tributary stream channels, banks and approaches to crossings of
water bodies and tributary streams must be immediately stabilized on completion of
harvest, or if the ground is frozen and/or snow-covered, as soon as practical after
snowmelt. If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline
integrity occurs, such conditions must be corrected.
(i) Land management road closeout. Maintenance of the water control features must continue
until use of the road is discontinued and the road is put to bed by taking the following actions:
(i) Effective installation of water bars or other adequate road drainage structures at
appropriate intervals, constructed to reasonably avoid surface water flowing over or
under the water bar, and extending sufficient distance beyond the traveled way so that
water does not reenter the road surface.
(ii) Water crossing structures must be appropriately sized or dismantled and removed in a
manner that reasonably avoids sedimentation of the water body or tributary stream.
(iii) Any bridge or water crossing culvert in roads to be discontinued shall satisfy one of the
following requirements:
1. it shall be designed to provide an opening sufficient in size and structure to
accommodate 25 year frequency water flows;
2. it shall be designed to provide an opening with a cross-sectional area at least 3 1/2
times the cross-sectional area of the river, stream or tributary stream channel; or
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
31
3. it shall be dismantled and removed in a fashion to reasonably avoid sedimentation of
the river, stream or tributary stream.
If, despite such precautions, sedimentation or the disruption of shoreline integrity occurs,
such conditions must be corrected.
(7) Slope Table
Filter strips, skid trail setbacks, and land management road setbacks must be maintained as
specified in Section 15(O-1), but in no case shall be less than shown in the following table.
Average slope of land between exposed mineral Width of strip between exposed
soil and the shoreline (percent) mineral soil and
shoreline
(feet along surface of the ground)
0 25
10 45
20 65
30 85
40 105
50 125
60 145
70 165
P. Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting
(1) In a Resource Protection District abutting a great pond, there shall be no cutting of vegetation
within the strip of land extending 75 feet, horizontal distance, inland from the normal highwater
line, except to remove safety hazards.
Elsewhere, in any Resource Protection District the cutting or removal of vegetation shall be
limited to that which is necessary for uses expressly authorized in that district.
(2) Except in areas as described in Section P(1), above, and except to allow for the development
of permitted uses, within a strip of land extending one-hundred (100) feet, horizontal
distance, inland from the normal high-water line of the Kennebec River and the area of the
Kennebec Water District Reservoir, Martin Stream and Lost Brook, and seventy-five (75)
feet, horizontal distance, from any other water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a
wetland, a buffer strip of vegetation shall be preserved as follows:
(a) There shall be no cleared opening greater than 250 square feet in the forest canopy (or
other existing woody vegetation if a forested canopy is not present) as measured from the
outer limits of the tree or shrub crown. However, a footpath not to exceed six (6) feet in
width as measured between tree trunks and/or shrub stems is allowed provided that a
cleared line of sight to the water through the buffer strip is not created.
(b) Selective cutting of trees within the buffer strip is allowed provided that a welldistributed
stand of trees and other natural vegetation is maintained. For the purposes of
Section 15(P)(2)(b) a "well-distributed stand of trees" adjacent to the Kennebec River or
a river or stream flowing to the Kennebec River, shall be defined as maintaining a rating
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
32
score of 24 or more in each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular (1250 square feet) area as
determined by the following rating system.
Diameter of Tree at 4-1/2 feet Above Points
Ground Level (inches)
2 - < 4 in. 1
4 – <8 in. 2
8-< 12 in. 4
12 in. or greater 8
Adjacent to other water bodies, tributary streams, and wetlands, a "well-distributed stand
of trees" is defined as maintaining a minimum rating score of 16 per 25-foot by 50-foot
rectangular area.
NOTE: As an example, adjacent to a great pond, if a 25-foot x 50-foot plot contains four (4)
trees between 2 and 4 inches in diameter, two trees between 4 and 8 inches in
diameter, three trees between 8 and 12 inches in diameter, and two trees over 12
inches in diameter, the rating score is:
(4x1) + (2x2) + (3x4) + (2x8) = 36 points
Thus, the 25-foot by 50-foot plot contains trees worth 36 points. Trees totaling 12
points (36- 24 =12) may be removed from the plot provided that no cleared openings
are created.
The following shall govern in applying this point system:
(i) The 25-foot by 50-foot rectangular plots must be established where the
landowner or lessee proposes clearing within the required buffer;
(ii) Each successive plot must be adjacent to, but not overlap a previous plot;
(iii) Any plot not containing the required points must have no vegetation removed
except as otherwise allowed by this Ordinance;
(iv) Any plot containing the required points may have vegetation removed down to
the minimum points required or as otherwise allowed by is Ordinance;
(v) Where conditions permit, no more than 50% of the points on any 25-foot by 50-
foot rectangular area may consist of trees greater than 12 inches in diameter.
For the purposes of Section 15(P)(2)(b) “other natural vegetation” is defined as retaining
existing vegetation under three (3) feet in height and other ground cover and retaining at
least five (5) saplings less than two (2) inches in diameter at four and one half (4 ½) feet
above ground level for each 25-foot by 50-foot rectangle area. If five saplings do not
exist, no woody stems less than two (2) inches in diameter can be removed until 5
saplings have been recruited into the plot.
Notwithstanding the above provisions, no more than 40% of the total volume of trees
four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level may be
removed in any ten (10) year period.
(c) In order to protect water quality and wildlife habitat, existing vegetation under three (3)
feet in height and other ground cover, including leaf litter and the forest duff layer, shall
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
33
not be cut, covered, or removed, except to provide for a footpath or other permitted uses
as described in Section 15(P) paragraphs (2) and (2)(a) above.
(d) Pruning of tree branches, on the bottom 1/3 of the tree is allowed.
(e) In order to maintain a buffer strip of vegetation, when the removal of storm-damaged,
diseased, unsafe, or dead trees results in the creation of cleared openings, these openings
shall be replanted with native tree species unless existing new tree growth is present.
Section 15(P)(2) does not apply to those portions of public recreational facilities adjacent to
public swimming areas as long as cleared areas are limited to the minimum area necessary.
(3) At distances greater than one hundred (100) feet, horizontal distance, from the Kennebec
River and the area of the Kennebec Water District Reservoir, Martin Stream and Lost Brook,
and seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, from the normal high-water line of any other
water body, tributary stream, or the upland edge of a wetland, there shall be allowed on any
lot, in any ten (10) year period, selective cutting of not more than forty (40) percent of the
volume of trees four (4) inches or more in diameter, measured 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
Tree removal in conjunction with the development of permitted uses shall be included in the
forty (40) percent calculation. For the purposes of these standards volume may be considered
to be equivalent to basal area.
In no event shall cleared openings for any purpose, including but not limited to, principal and
accessory structures, driveways, lawns and sewage disposal areas, exceed in the aggregate,
25% of the lot area within the shoreland zone or ten thousand (10,000) square feet, whichever
is greater, including land previously cleared. This provision shall not apply to the General
Development District.
(4) Legally existing nonconforming cleared openings may be maintained, but shall not be
enlarged, except as allowed by this Ordinance.
(5) Fields and other cleared openings which have reverted to primarily shrubs, trees, or other
woody vegetation shall be regulated under the provisions of Section 15(P).
Q. Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(1) All activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or other similar activities which result
in unstabilized soil conditions and which require a permit shall also require a written soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the permitting
authority for approval and shall include, where applicable, provisions for:
(a) Mulching and revegetation of disturbed soil.
(b) Temporary runoff control features such as hay bales, silt fencing or diversion ditches.
(c) Permanent stabilization structures such as retaining walls or rip-rap.
(2) In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be designed to fit with the
topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be
required shall be avoided wherever possible, and natural contours shall be followed as closely
as possible.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
34
(3) Erosion and sedimentation control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed project
involving land disturbance, and shall be in operation during all stages of the activity. The
amount of exposed soil at every phase of construction shall be minimized to reduce the
potential for erosion.
(4) Any exposed ground area shall be temporarily or permanently stabilized within one (1) week
from the time it was last actively worked, by use of riprap, sod, seed, and mulch, or other
effective measures. In all cases permanent stabilization shall occur within nine (9) months of
the initial date of exposure. In addition:
(a) Where mulch is used, it shall be applied at a rate of at least one (1) bale per five hundred
(500) square feet and shall be maintained until a catch of vegetation is established.
(b) Anchoring the mulch with netting, peg and twine or other suitable method may be
required to maintain the mulch cover.
(c) Additional measures shall be taken where necessary in order to avoid siltation into the
water. Such measures may include the use of staked hay bales and/or silt fences.
(5) Natural and man-made drainage ways and drainage outlets shall be protected from erosion
from water flowing through them. Drainageways shall be designed and constructed in order
to carry water from a twenty five (25) year storm or greater, and shall be stabilized with
vegetation or lined with riprap.
R. Soils. All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed uses or structures can
be established or maintained without causing adverse environmental impacts, including severe
erosion, mass soil movement, improper drainage, and water pollution, whether during or after
construction. Proposed uses requiring subsurface waste disposal, and commercial or industrial
development and other similar intensive land uses, shall require a soils report based on an on-site
investigation and be prepared by state-certified professionals. Certified persons may include
Maine Certified Soil Scientists, Maine Registered Professional Engineers, Maine State Certified
Geologists and other persons who have training and experience in the recognition and evaluation
of soil properties. The report shall be based upon the analysis of the characteristics of the soil and
surrounding land and water areas, maximum ground water elevation, presence of ledge, drainage
conditions, and other pertinent data which the evaluator deems appropriate. The soils report shall
include recommendations for a proposed use to counteract soil limitations where they exist.
S. Water Quality. No activity shall deposit on or into the ground or discharge to the waters of the
State any pollutant that, by itself or in combination with other activities or substances, will impair
designated uses or the water classification of the water body, tributary stream or wetland.
T. Archaeological Site. Any proposed land use activity involving structural development or soil
disturbance on or adjacent to sites listed on, or eligible to be listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, as determined by the permitting authority, shall be submitted by the applicant to
the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment, at least twenty (20) days
prior to action being taken by the permitting authority. The permitting authority shall consider
comments received from the Commission prior to rendering a decision on the application.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
35
NOTE: Municipal officials should contact the Maine Historic Preservation Commission for the
listing and location of Historic Places in their community.
16. Administration
A. Administering Bodies and Agents
(1) Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed or reappointed
annually by July 1st.
(2) Board of Appeals. A Board of Appeals shall be created in accordance with the provisions of
30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691.
(3) Planning Board. A Planning Board shall be created in accordance with the provisions of
State law.
B. Permits Required. After the effective date of this Ordinance no person shall, without first
obtaining a permit, engage in any activity or use of land or structure requiring a permit in the
district in which such activity or use would occur; or expand, change, or replace an existing use
or structure; or renew a discontinued nonconforming use. A person who is issued a permit
pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a copy of the permit on site while the work authorized by
the permit is performed.
(1) A permit is not required for the replacement of an existing road culvert as long as:
(a) The replacement culvert is not more than 25% longer than the culvert being replaced;
(b) The replacement culvert is not longer than 75 feet; and
(c) Adequate erosion control measures are taken to prevent sedimentation of the water, and
the crossing does not block fish passage in the watercourse.
(2) A permit is not required for an archaeological excavation as long as the excavation is
conducted by an archaeologist listed on the State Historic Preservation Officer’s level 1 or
level 2 approved list, and unreasonable erosion and sedimentation is prevented by means of
adequate and timely temporary and permanent stabilization measures.
(3) Any permit required by this Ordinance shall be in addition to any other permit required by
other law or ordinance.
C. Permit Application
(1) Every applicant for a permit shall submit a written application, including a scaled site plan,
on a form provided by the municipality, to the appropriate official as indicated in Section 14.
(2) All applications shall be signed by an owner or individual who can show evidence of right,
title or interest in the property or by an agent, representative, tenant, or contractor of the
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
36
owner with authorization from the owner to apply for a permit hereunder, certifying that the
information in the application is complete and correct.
(3) All applications shall be dated, and the Code Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as
appropriate, shall note upon each application the date and time of its receipt.
(4) If the property is not served by a public sewer, a valid plumbing permit or a completed
application for a plumbing permit, including the site evaluation approved by the Plumbing
Inspector, shall be submitted whenever the nature of the proposed structure or use would
require the installation of a subsurface sewage disposal system.
D. Procedure for Administering Permits. Within 35 days of the date of receiving a written
application, the Planning Board or Code Enforcement Officer, as indicated in Section 14, shall
notify the applicant in writing either that the application is a complete application, or, if the
application is incomplete, that specified additional material is needed to make the application
complete. The Planning Board or the Code Enforcement Officer, as appropriate, shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny all permit applications in writing within 35 days of receiving a
completed application. However, if the Planning Board has a waiting list of applications, a
decision on the application shall occur within 35 days after the first available date on the Planning
Board's agenda following receipt of the completed application, or within 35 days of the public
hearing, if the proposed use or structure is found to be in conformance with the purposes and
provisions of this Ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the proposed land use activity is in conformity
with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance.
After the submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, the Board shall approve an
application or approve it with conditions if it makes a positive finding based on the information
presented that the proposed use:
(1) Will maintain safe and healthful conditions;
(2) Will not result in water pollution, erosion, or sedimentation to surface waters;
(3) Will adequately provide for the disposal of all wastewater;
(4) Will not have an adverse impact on spawning grounds, fish, aquatic life, bird or other wildlife
habitat;
(5) Will conserve shore cover and visual, as well as actual, points of access to inland and coastal
waters;
(6) Will protect archaeological and historic resources as designated in the comprehensive plan;
(7) Will avoid problems associated with floodplain development and use; and
(8) Is in conformance with the provisions of Section 15, Land Use Standards.
If a permit is either denied or approved with conditions, the reasons as well as conditions shall be
stated in writing. No approval shall be granted for an application involving a structure if the
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
37
structure would be located in an unapproved subdivision or would violate any other local
ordinance, or regulation or statute administered by the municipality.
E. Special Exceptions. In addition to the criteria specified in Section 16(D) above, excepting
structure setback requirements, the Planning Board may approve a permit for a single family
residential structure in a Resource Protection District provided that the applicant demonstrates
that all of the following conditions are met:
(1) There is no location on the property, other than a location within the Resource Protection
District, where the structure can be built.
(2) The lot on which the structure is proposed is undeveloped and was established and recorded
in the registry of deeds of the county in which the lot is located before the adoption of the
Resource Protection District on March 28, 1978, and Martin Stream and Lost Brook Resource
Protection District adopted on September 5, 1989.
(3) All proposed buildings, sewage disposal systems and other improvements are:
(a) Located on natural ground slopes of less than 20%; and
(b) Located outside the floodway of the 100-year flood-plain along rivers and artificially
formed great ponds along rivers and outside the velocity zone in areas subject to tides,
based on detailed flood insurance studies and as delineated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps; all buildings, including basements, are elevated at least one foot above the 100-
year flood-plain elevation; and the development is otherwise in compliance with any
applicable municipal flood-plain ordinance.
If the floodway is not shown on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Maps, it is
deemed to be 1/2 the width of the 100-year flood-plain.
(4) The total ground-floor area, including cantilevered or similar overhanging extensions, of all
principal and accessory structures is limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet. This
limitation shall not be altered by variance.
(5) All structures, except functionally water-dependent structures, are set back from the normal
high-water line of a water body, tributary stream or upland edge of a wetland to the greatest
practical extent, but not less than 75 feet, horizontal distance. In determining the greatest
practical extent, the Planning Board shall consider the depth of the lot, the slope of the land,
the potential for soil erosion, the type and amount of vegetation to be removed, the proposed
building site's elevation in regard to the flood-plain, and its proximity to moderate-value and
high-value wetlands.
F. Expiration of Permit. Permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance if a substantial
start is not made in construction or in the use of the property during that period. If a substantial
start is made within one year of the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall have one additional
year to complete the project, at which time the permit shall expire.
G. Installation of Public Utility Service. A public utility, water district, sanitary district or any
utility company of any kind may not install services to any new structure located in the shoreland
zone unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of all local permits
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
38
required under this or any previous Ordinance has been issued by the appropriate municipal
officials or other written arrangements have been made between the municipal officials and the
utility.
H. Appeals
(1) Powers and Duties of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall have the following
powers:
(a) Administrative Appeals: To hear and decide administrative appeals, on an appellate basis,
where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Planning Board in the
administration of this Ordinance; and to hear and decide administrative appeals on a de
novo basis where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by, or failure to act by, the Code Enforcement
Officer in his or her review of and action on a permit application under this Ordinance. Any
order, requirement, decision or determination made, or failure to act, in the enforcement of
this ordinance is not appealable to the Board of Appeals.
(b) Variance Appeals: To authorize variances upon appeal, within the limitations set forth in
this Ordinance.
(2) Variance Appeals. Variances may be granted only under the following conditions:
(a) Variances may be granted only from dimensional requirements including, but not limited
to, lot width, structure height, percent of lot coverage, and setback requirements.
(b) Variances shall not be granted for establishment of any uses otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
(c) The Board shall not grant a variance unless it finds that:
(i) The proposed structure or use would meet the provisions of Section 15 except for the
specific provision which has created the non-conformity and from which relief is
sought; and
(ii) The strict application of the terms of this Ordinance would result in undue hardship.
The term "undue hardship" shall mean:
a. That the land in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless a variance is
granted;
b. That the need for a variance is due to the unique circumstances of the property and
not to the general conditions in the neighborhood;
c. That the granting of a variance will not alter the essential character of the locality;
and
d. That the hardship is not the result of action taken by the applicant or a prior owner.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
39
(d) Notwithstanding Section 16(H)(2)(c)(ii) above, the Board of Appeals may grant a variance
to an owner of a residential dwelling for the purpose of making that dwelling accessible to
a person with a disability who resides in or regularly uses the dwelling. The board shall
restrict any variance granted under this subsection solely to the installation of equipment or
the construction of structures necessary for access to or egress from the dwelling by the
person with the disability. The board may impose conditions on the variance, including
limiting the variance to the duration of the disability or to the time that the person with the
disability lives in the dwelling. The term “structures necessary for access to or egress from
the dwelling" shall include railing, wall or roof systems necessary for the safety or
effectiveness of the structure.
(e) The Board of Appeals shall limit any variances granted as strictly as possible in order to
ensure conformance with the purposes and provisions of this Ordinance to the greatest
extent possible, and in doing so may impose such conditions to a variance as it deems
necessary. The party receiving the variance shall comply with any conditions imposed.
(f) A copy of each variance request, including the application and all supporting information
supplied by the applicant, shall be forwarded by the municipal officials to the
Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection at least twenty (20) days
prior to action by the Board of Appeals. Any comments received from the Commissioner
prior to the action by the Board of Appeals shall be made part of the record and shall be
taken into consideration by the Board of Appeals.
(3) Administrative Appeals
When the Board of Appeals reviews a decision of the Code Enforcement Officer the Board of
Appeals shall hold a “de novo” hearing. At this time the Board may receive and consider new
evidence and testimony, be it oral or written. When acting in a “de novo” capacity the Board of
Appeals shall hear and decide the matter afresh, undertaking its own independent analysis of
evidence and the law, and reaching its own decision.
When the Board of Appeals hears a decision of the Planning Board, it shall hold an appellate
hearing, and may reverse the decision of the Planning Board only upon finding that the decision
was contrary to specific provisions of the Ordinance or contrary to the facts presented to the
Planning Board. The Board of Appeals may only review the record of the proceedings before
the Planning Board. The Board Appeals shall not receive or consider any evidence which was
not presented to the Planning Board, but the Board of Appeals may receive and consider written
or oral arguments. If the Board of Appeals determines that the record of the Planning Board
proceedings are inadequate, the Board of Appeals may remand the matter to the Planning Board
for additional fact finding.
(4) Appeal Procedure
(a) Making an Appeal
(i) An administrative or variance appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by an
aggrieved party from any decision of the Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning
Board, except for enforcement-related matters as described in Section 16(H)(1)(a)
above. Such an appeal shall be taken within thirty (30) days of the date of the official,
written decision appealed from, and not otherwise, except that the Board, upon a
showing of good cause, may waive the thirty (30) day requirement.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
40
(ii) Applications for appeals shall be made by filing with the Board of Appeals a written
notice of appeal which includes:
a. A concise written statement indicating what relief is requested and why the appeal
or variance should be granted.
b. A sketch drawn to scale showing lot lines, location of existing buildings and
structures and other physical features of the lot pertinent to the relief sought.
(iii) Upon receiving an application for an administrative appeal or a variance, the Code
Enforcement Officer or Planning Board, as appropriate, shall transmit to the Board of
Appeals all of the papers constituting the record of the decision appealed from.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing on an administrative appeal or a
request for a variance within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of a complete written
application, unless this time period is extended by the parties.
(b) Decision by Board of Appeals
(i) A majority of the full voting membership of the Board shall constitute a quorum
for the purpose of deciding an appeal.
(ii) The person filing the appeal shall have the burden of proof.
(iii) The Board shall decide all administrative appeals and variance appeals within thirty
five (35) days after the close of the hearing, and shall issue a written decision on all
appeals.
(iv) The Board of Appeals shall state the reasons and basis for its decision, including a
statement of the facts found and conclusions reached by the Board. The Board shall
cause written notice of its decision to be mailed or hand-delivered to the applicant
and to the Department of Environmental Protection within seven (7) days of the
Board’s decision. Copies of written decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be
given to the Planning Board, Code Enforcement Officer, and the municipal
officers.
(5) Appeal to Superior Court. Except as provided by 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), any
aggrieved party who participated as a party during the proceedings before the Board of Appeals
may take an appeal to Superior Court in accordance with State laws within forty-five (45) days
from the date of any decision of the Board of Appeals.
(6) Reconsideration. In accordance with 30-A M.R.S.A. section 2691(3)(F), the Board of Appeals
may reconsider any decision within forty-five (45) days of its prior decision. A request to the
Board to reconsider a decision must be filed within ten (10) days of the decision that is being
reconsidered. A vote to reconsider and the action taken on that reconsideration must occur and
be completed within forty-five (45) days of the date of the vote on the original decision.
Reconsideration of a decision shall require a positive vote of the majority of the Board
members originally voting on the decision, and proper notification to the landowner, petitioner,
planning board, code enforcement officer, and other parties of interest, including abutters and
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
41
those who testified at the original hearing(s). The Board may conduct additional hearings and
receive additional evidence and testimony.
Appeal of a reconsidered decision to Superior Court must be made within fifteen (15) days after
the decision on reconsideration.
I. Enforcement
(1) Nuisances. Any violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed to be a nuisance.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer
(a) It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer to enforce the provisions of this
Ordinance. If the Code Enforcement Officer shall find that any provision of this
Ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify in writing the person responsible for
such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to
correct it, including discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures, or work
being done, removal of illegal buildings or structures, and abatement of nuisance
conditions. A copy of such notices shall be submitted to the municipal officers and be
maintained as a permanent record.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall conduct on-site inspections to insure compliance with
all applicable laws and conditions attached to permit approvals. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall also investigate all complaints of alleged violations of this Ordinance.
(c) The Code Enforcement Officer shall keep a complete record of all essential transactions of
the office, including applications submitted, permits granted or denied, variances granted or
denied, revocation actions, revocation of permits, appeals, court actions, violations
investigated, violations found, and fees collected. On a biennial basis, a summary of this
record shall be submitted to the Director of the Bureau of Land and Water Quality within
the Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) Legal Actions. When the above action does not result in the correction or abatement of the
violation or nuisance condition, the Municipal Officers, upon notice from the Code
Enforcement Officer, are hereby directed to institute any and all actions and proceedings, either
legal or equitable, including seeking injunctions of violations and the imposition of fines, that
may be appropriate or necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance in the name of the
municipality. The municipal officers, or their authorized agent, are hereby authorized to enter
into administrative consent agreements for the purpose of eliminating violations of this
Ordinance and recovering fines without Court action. Such agreements shall not allow an
illegal structure or use to continue unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegal
structure or use was constructed or conducted as a direct result of erroneous advice given by an
authorized municipal official and there is no evidence that the owner acted in bad faith, or
unless the removal of the structure or use will result in a threat or hazard to public health and
safety or will result in substantial environmental damage.
(4) Fines. Any person, including but not limited to a landowner, a landowner's agent or a
contractor, who violates any provision or requirement of this Ordinance shall be penalized in
accordance with 30-A, M.R.S.A. section 4452.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
42
NOTE: Current penalties include fines of not less than $100 nor more than $2500 per violation for
each day that the violation continues. However, in a resource protection district the
maximum penalty is increased to $5000 (38 M.R.S.A. section 4452).
17. Definitions
Accessory structure or use - a use or structure which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use
or structure. Accessory uses, when aggregated, shall not subordinate the principal use of the lot. A deck
or similar extension of the principal structure or a garage attached to the principal structure by a roof or
a common wall is considered part of the principal structure.
Aggrieved party - an owner of land whose property is directly or indirectly affected by the granting or
denial of a permit or variance under this Ordinance; a person whose land abuts land for which a permit
or variance has been granted; or any other person or group of persons who have suffered particularized
injury as a result of the granting or denial of such permit or variance.
Agriculture - the production, keeping or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants and/or animals,
including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental and greenhouse
products. Agriculture does not include forest management and timber harvesting activities.
Aquaculture - the growing or propagation of harvestable freshwater, estuarine, or marine plant or
animal species.
-Basal Area - the area of cross-section of a tree stem at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and inclusive of
bark. (Repeal)
Basement - any portion of a structure with a floor-to-ceiling height of 6 feet or more and having more
than 50% of its volume below the existing ground level.
Boat Launching Facility - a facility designed primarily for the launching and landing of watercraft,
and which may include an access ramp, docking area, and parking spaces for vehicles and trailers.
Bureau – State of Maine Department of Conservation’s Bureau of Forestry
Campground - any area or tract of land to accommodate two (2) or more parties in temporary living
quarters, including, but not limited to tents, recreational vehicles or other shelters.
Canopy – the more or less continuous cover formed by tree crowns in a wooded area.
Commercial use - the use of lands, buildings, or structures, other than a "home occupation," defined
below, the intent and result of which activity is the production of income from the buying and selling
of goods and/or services, exclusive of rental of residential buildings and/or dwelling units.
-Cross-sectional area – the cross-sectional area of a stream or tributary stream channel is determined
by multiplying the stream or tributary stream channel width by the average stream or tributary stream
channel depth. The stream or tributary stream channel width is the straight line distance from the
normal high-water line on one side of the channel to the normal high-water line on the opposite side of
the channel. The average stream or tributary stream channel depth is the average of the vertical
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
43
distances from a straight line between the normal high-water lines of the stream or tributary stream
channel to the bottom of the channel. (Repeal)
DBH – the diameter of a standing tree measured 4.5 feet from ground level.
Development – a change in land use involving alteration of the land, water or vegetation, or the
addition or alteration of structures or other construction not naturally occurring.
Dimensional requirements - numerical standards relating to spatial relationships including but not
limited to setback, lot area, shore frontage and height.
Disability - any disability, infirmity, malformation, disfigurement, congenital defect or mental
condition caused by bodily injury, accident, disease, birth defect, environmental conditions or illness;
and also includes the physical or mental condition of a person which constitutes a substantial
handicap as determined by a physician or in the case of mental handicap, by a psychiatrist or
psychologist, as well as any other health or sensory impairment which requires special education,
vocational rehabilitation or related services.
-Disruption of shoreline integrity - the alteration of the physical shape, properties, or condition of a
shoreline at any location by timber harvesting and related activities. A shoreline where shoreline
integrity has been disrupted is recognized by compacted, scarified and/or rutted soil, an abnormal
channel or shoreline cross-section, and in the case of flowing waters, a profile and character altered
from natural conditions. (Repeal)
Driveway - a vehicular access-way less than five hundred (500) feet in length serving two singlefamily
dwellings or one two-family dwelling, or less.
Emergency operations - operations conducted for the public health, safety or general welfare, such
as protection of resources from immediate destruction or loss, law enforcement, and operations to
rescue human beings, property and livestock from the threat of destruction or injury.
Essential services - gas, electrical or communication facilities; steam, fuel, electric power or water
transmission or distribution lines, towers and related equipment; telephone cables or lines, poles and
related equipment; gas, oil, water, slurry or other similar pipelines; municipal sewage lines, collection
or supply systems; and associated storage tanks. Such systems may include towers, poles, wires,
mains, drains, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and
similar accessories, but shall not include service drops or buildings which are necessary for the
furnishing of such services.
Expansion of a structure - an increase in the floor area or volume of a structure, including all
extensions such as, but not limited to: attached decks, garages, porches and greenhouses.
Expansion of use - the addition of one or more months to a use's operating season; or the use of more
floor area or ground area devoted to a particular use.
Family - one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Floodway - the channel of a river or other watercourse and adjacent land areas that must be reserved
in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
by more than one foot in height.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
44
Floor area - the sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a structure enclosed by exterior walls,
plus the horizontal area of any unenclosed portions of a structure such as porches and decks.
-Forest management activities - timber cruising and other forest resource evaluation activities,
pesticide or fertilizer application, management planning activities, timber stand improvement, pruning,
regeneration of forest stands, and other similar or associated activities, exclusive of timber harvesting
and the construction, creation or maintenance of roads. (Repeal)
Forested wetland - a freshwater wetland dominated by woody vegetation that is six (6) meters tall
(approximately twenty (20) feet) or taller.
-Forest Stand - a contiguous group of trees sufficiently uniform in age class distribution, composition,
and structure, and growing on a site of sufficiently uniform quality, to be a distinguishable unit.
(Repeal)
Foundation - the supporting substructure of a building or other structure, excluding wooden sills and
post supports, but including basements, slabs, frostwalls, or other base consisting of concrete, block,
brick or similar material.
Freshwater wetland - freshwater swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas, other than forested
wetlands, which are:
1. Of ten or more contiguous acres; or of less than 10 contiguous acres and adjacent to a
surface water body, excluding any river, stream or brook, such that in a natural state, the
combined surface area is in excess of 10 acres; and
2. Inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and for a duration
sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
wetland vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils.
Freshwater wetlands may contain small stream channels or inclusions of land that do not conform to
the criteria of this definition.
Functionally water-dependent uses - those uses that require, for their primary purpose, location on
submerged lands or that require direct access to, or location in, coastal or inland waters and that can
not be located away from these waters. The uses include, but are not limited to commercial and
recreational fishing and boating facilities, excluding recreational boat storage buildings, finfish and
shellfish processing, fish storage and retail and wholesale fish marketing facilities, waterfront dock
and port facilities, shipyards and boat building facilities, marinas, navigation aids, basins and
channels, retaining walls, industrial uses dependent upon water-borne transportation or requiring large
volumes of cooling or processing water that cannot reasonably be located or operated at an inland
site, and uses that primarily provide general public access to coastal or inland waters.
Great pond - any inland body of water which in a natural state has a surface area in excess of ten
acres, and any inland body of water artificially formed or increased which has a surface area in excess
of thirty (30) acres except for the purposes of this Ordinance, where the artificially formed or
increased inland body of water is completely surrounded by land held by a single owner,
Great pond classified GPA - any great pond classified GPA, pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. Article 4-A
Section 465-A. This classification includes some, but not all impoundments of rivers that are defined
as great ponds.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
45
Ground cover – small plants, fallen leaves, needles and twigs, and the partially decayed organic
matter of the forest floor.
-Harvest Area - the area where timber harvesting and related activities, including the cutting of trees,
skidding, yarding, and associated road construction take place. The area affected by a harvest
encompasses the area within the outer boundaries of these activities, excepting unharvested areas
greater than 10 acres within the area affected by a harvest. (Repeal)
Height of a structure - the vertical distance between the mean original (prior to construction) grade
at the downhill side of the structure and the highest point of the structure, excluding chimneys,
steeples, antennas, and similar appurtenances that have no floor area.
Home occupation - an occupation or profession which is customarily conducted on or in a residential
structure or property and which is 1) clearly incidental to and compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses; and 2) which employs no more than two (2) persons
other than family members residing in the home.
Increase in nonconformity of a structure - any change in a structure or property which causes
further deviation from the dimensional standard(s) creating the nonconformity such as, but not limited
to, reduction in water body, tributary stream or wetland setback distance, increase in lot coverage, or
increase in height of a structure. Property changes or structure expansions which either meet the
dimensional standard or which cause no further increase in the linear extent of nonconformance of the
existing structure shall not be considered to increase nonconformity. For example, there is no increase
in nonconformity with the setback requirement for water bodies, wetlands, or tributary streams if the
expansion extends no further into the required setback area than does any portion of the existing
nonconforming structure. Hence, a structure may be expanded laterally provided that the expansion
extends no closer to the water body, tributary stream, or wetland than the closest portion of the
existing structure from that water body, tributary stream, or wetland. Included in this allowance are
expansions which in-fill irregularly shaped structures.
Individual private campsite - an area of land which is not associated with a campground, but which
is developed for repeated camping by only one group not to exceed ten (10) individuals and which
involves site improvements which may include but not be limited to a gravel pad, parking area, fire
place, or tent platform.
Industrial - The assembling, fabrication, finishing, manufacturing, packaging or processing of goods,
or the extraction of minerals.
Institutional – a non-profit or quasi-public use, or institution such as a church, library, public or
private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public
purposes.
-Land Management Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, or
other surfacing materials constructed for, or created by, the passage of motorized vehicles and used
primarily for timber harvesting and related activities, including associated log yards, but not including
skid trails or skid roads. (Repeal)
-Licensed Forester - a forester licensed under 32 M.R.S.A. Chapter 76. (Repeal)
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
46
Lot area - The area of land enclosed within the boundary lines of a lot, minus land below the normal
high-water line of a water body or upland edge of a wetland and areas beneath roads serving more
than two lots.
Marina - a business establishment having frontage on navigable water and, as its principal use,
providing for hire offshore moorings or docking facilities for boats, and which may also provide
accessory services such as boat and related sales, boat repair and construction, indoor and outdoor
storage of boats and marine equipment, bait and tackle shops and marine fuel service facilities.
Market value - the estimated price a property will bring in the open market and under prevailing
market conditions in a sale between a willing seller and a willing buyer, both conversant with the
property and with prevailing general price levels.
Mineral exploration - hand sampling, test boring, or other methods of determining the nature or
extent of mineral resources which create minimal disturbance to the land and which include
reasonable measures to restore the land to its original condition.
Mineral extraction - any operation within any twelve (12) month period which removes more than
one hundred (100) cubic yards of soil, topsoil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock, peat, or other like
material from its natural location and to transport the product removed, away from the extraction site.
Minimum lot width - the closest distance between the side lot lines of a lot. When only two lot lines
extend into the shoreland zone, both lot lines shall be considered to be side lot lines.
Multi-unit residential - a residential structure containing three (3) or more residential dwelling units.
Native – indigenous to the local forests.
Non-conforming condition – non-conforming lot, structure or use which is allowed solely because it
was in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendment took effect.
Non-conforming lot - a single lot of record which, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance, does not meet the area, frontage, or width requirements of the district in which it is
located.
Non-conforming structure - a structure which does not meet any one or more of the following
dimensional requirements; setback, height, or lot coverage, but which is allowed solely because it was
in lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Non-conforming use - use of buildings, structures, premises, land or parts thereof which is not
allowed in the district in which it is situated, but which is allowed to remain solely because it was in
lawful existence at the time this Ordinance or subsequent amendments took effect.
Normal high-water line (non-tidal waters) - that line which is apparent from visible markings,
changes in the character of soils due to prolonged action of the water or changes in vegetation, and
which distinguishes between predominantly aquatic and predominantly terrestrial land. Areas
contiguous with rivers and great ponds that support non-forested wetland vegetation and hydric soils
and that are at the same or lower elevation as the water level of the river or great pond during the
period of normal high-water are considered part of the river or great pond.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
47
Person - an individual, corporation, governmental agency, municipality, trust, estate, partnership,
association, two or more individuals having a joint or common interest, or other legal entity.
Piers, docks, wharves, bridges and other structures and uses extending over or beyond the normal
high-water line or within a wetland.
Temporary: Structures which remain in or over the water for less than seven (7) months in
any period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Permanent: Structures which remain in or over the water for seven (7) months or more in any
period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
Principal structure - a building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or
accessory to the use of another building or use on the same premises.
Principal use - a use other than one which is wholly incidental or accessory to another use on the
same premises.
Public facility - any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings, property, recreation areas, and
roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise operated, or funded by a governmental body or public
entity.
Recent floodplain soils - the following soil series as described and identified by the National
Cooperative Soil Survey:
Fryeburg Hadley Limerick
Lovewell Medomak Ondawa
Alluvial Cornish Charles
Podunk Rumney Saco
Suncook Sunday Winooski
Recreational facility - a place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, leisure time
activities, and other customary and usual recreational activities, excluding boat launching facilities.
Recreational vehicle - a vehicle or an attachment to a vehicle designed to be towed, and designed for
temporary sleeping or living quarters for one or more persons, and which may include a pick-up
camper, travel trailer, tent trailer, camp trailer, and motor home. In order to be considered as a vehicle
and not as a structure, the unit must remain with its tires on the ground, and must be registered with
the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
Replacement system - a system intended to replace: 1.) an existing system which is either
malfunctioning or being upgraded with no significant change of design flow or use of the structure, or
2.) any existing overboard wastewater discharge.
Residential dwelling unit - a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as
permanent, seasonal, or temporary living quarters for only one family at a time, and containing
cooking, sleeping and toilet facilities. The term shall include mobile homes and rental units that
contain cooking, sleeping, and toilet facilities regardless of the time-period rented. Recreational
vehicles are not residential dwelling units.
-Residual basal area - the average of the basal area of trees remaining on a harvested site. (Repeal)
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
48
-Residual Stand - a stand of trees remaining in the forest following timber harvesting and related
activities. (Repeal)
Riprap - rocks, irregularly shaped, and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control
and soil stabilization, typically used on ground slopes of two (2) units horizontal to one (1) unit
vertical or less.
River - a free-flowing body of water including its associated floodplain wetlands from that point at
which it provides drainage for a watershed of twenty five (25) square miles to its mouth.
Road - a route or track consisting of a bed of exposed mineral soil, gravel, asphalt, or other surfacing
material constructed for or created by the repeated passage of motorized vehicles, excluding a
driveway as defined.
Service drop - any utility line extension which does not cross or run beneath any portion of a water
body provided that:
1. in the case of electric service
a. the placement of wires and/or the installation of utility poles is located entirely upon the
premises of the customer requesting service or upon a roadway right-of-way; and
b. the total length of the extension is less than one thousand (1,000) feet.
2. in the case of telephone service
a. the extension, regardless of length, will be made by the installation of telephone wires to
existing utility poles, or
b. the extension requiring the installation of new utility poles or placement underground is less
than one thousand (1,000) feet in length.
Setback - the nearest horizontal distance from the normal high-water line of a water body or tributary
stream, or upland edge of a wetland, to the nearest part of a structure, road, parking space or other
regulated object or area.
Shore frontage - the length of a lot bordering on a water body or wetland measured in a straight line
between the intersections of the lot lines with the shoreline.
Shoreland zone - the land area located within two hundred and fifty (250) feet, horizontal distance,
of the normal high-water line of any river; within 250 feet, horizontal distance, of the upland edge of
a freshwater wetland; or within seventy-five (75) feet, horizontal distance, of the normal high-water
line of a stream.
Shoreline – the normal high-water line, or upland edge of a freshwater wetland.
Significant River Segments - See Appendix B or 38 M.R.S.A. section 437.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
49
-Skid Road or Skid Trail - a route repeatedly used by forwarding machinery or animal to haul or drag
forest products from the stump to the yard or landing, the construction of which requires minimal
excavation. (Repeal)
-Slash - the residue, e.g., treetops and branches, left on the ground after a timber harvest. (Repeal)
Stream - a free-flowing body of water from the outlet of a great pond or the confluence of two (2)
perennial streams as depicted on the most recent edition of a United States Geological Survey 7.5
minute series topographic map, or if not available, a 15-minute series topographic map, to the point
where the body of water becomes a river or flows to another water body or wetland within the
shoreland area.
Structure - anything built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, goods or property
of any kind, together with anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground,
exclusive of fences, and poles, wiring and other aerial equipment normally associated with service
drops as well as guying and guy anchors. The term includes structures temporarily or permanently
located, such as decks, patios, and satellite dishes.
Substantial start - completion of thirty (30) percent of a permitted structure or use measured as a
percentage of estimated total cost.
Subsurface sewage disposal system – any system designed to dispose of waste or waste water on or
beneath the surface of the earth; includes, but is not limited to: septic tanks; disposal fields;
grandfathered cesspools; holding tanks; pretreatment filter, piping, or any other fixture, mechanism,
or apparatus used for those purposes; does not include any discharge system licensed under 38
M.R.S.A. section 414, any surface waste water disposal system, or any municipal or quasi-municipal
sewer or waste water treatment system..
Sustained slope - a change in elevation where the referenced percent grade is substantially
maintained or exceeded throughout the measured area.
Tidal waters – all waters affected by tidal action during the maximum spring tide.
-Timber harvesting - the cutting and removal of timber for the primary purpose of selling or
processing forest products. The cutting or removal of trees in the shoreland zone on a lot that has less
than two (2) acres within the shoreland zone shall not be considered timber harvesting. Such cutting or
removal of trees shall be regulated pursuant to Section 15 (P), Clearing or Removal of Vegetation for
Activities Other Than Timber Harvesting. (Repeal)
-Timber harvesting and related activities - timber harvesting, the construction and maintenance of
roads used primarily for timber harvesting and other activities conducted to facilitate timber harvesting.
(Repeal)
Tributary stream – means a channel between defined banks created by the action of surface water,
which is characterized by the lack of terrestrial vegetation or by the presence of a bed, devoid of
topsoil, containing waterborne deposits or exposed soil, parent material or bedrock; and which is
connected hydrologically with other water bodies. “Tributary stream” does not include rills or gullies
forming because of accelerated erosion in disturbed soils where the natural vegetation cover has been
removed by human activity.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
50
This definition does not include the term "stream" as defined elsewhere in this Ordinance, and only
applies to that portion of the tributary stream located within the shoreland zone of the receiving water
body or wetland.
NOTE: Water setback requirements apply to tributary streams within the shoreland zone.
Upland edge of a wetland - the boundary between upland and wetland. For purposes of a coastal
wetland, this boundary is the line formed by the landward limits of the salt tolerant vegetation and/or
the maximum spring tide level, including all areas affected by tidal action. For purposes of a
freshwater wetland, the upland edge is formed where the soils are not saturated for a duration
sufficient to support wetland vegetation; or where the soils support the growth of wetland vegetation,
but such vegetation is dominated by woody stems that are six (6) meters (approximately twenty (20)
foot) tall or taller.
Vegetation - all live trees, shrubs, and other plants including without limitation, trees both over and
under 4 inches in diameter, measured at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
Velocity zone - an area of special flood hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of the
primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
Volume of a structure - the volume of all portions of a structure enclosed by roof and fixed exterior
walls as measured from the exterior faces of these walls and roof.
Water body - any great pond, river or stream.
Water crossing - any project extending from one bank to the opposite bank of a river, stream,
tributary stream, or wetland whether under, through, or over the water or wetland. Such projects
include but may not be limited to roads, fords, bridges, culverts, water lines, sewer lines, and cables
as well as maintenance work on these crossings. This definition includes crossings for timber
harvesting equipment and related activities.
Wetland - a freshwater or coastal wetland.
-Windfirm - the ability of a forest stand to withstand strong winds and resist windthrow, wind rocking,
and major breakage. (Repeal)
Woody Vegetation - live trees or woody, non-herbaceous shrubs.
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
51
STATUTORY AUTHORITY: 38 M.R.S.A. Section 438-A(5)
EFFECTIVE DATE:
January 13, 1988 (filed as 06-101, Ch. 1)
AMENDED:
March 24, 1990 (filed as 06-096, Ch. 1000)
June 19, 1991 - Sections 15 and 17
July 14, 1992 - Sections 4, 8, 9, 12, 15, 16 & 17
August 7, 1994 - Sections 3, 14 & 16
EFFECTIVE DATE (ELECTRONIC CONVERSION): May 5, 1996
NON-SUBSTANTIVE CORRECTIONS:
December 29, 1997 - minor spelling and formatting.
April 1, 1998 - minor renumbering and formatting.
AMENDED:
February 6, 1999
February 13, 2000
May 1, 2006 – filing 2006-115
November 22, 2010 – filing 2010-581
May 5, 2012 – filing 2012-134
February 13, 2013- DEP Department Order #08-2013
June 12, 2013 – DEP Department Order #08-2013amendment
Town of Fairfield Shoreland Zone Ordinance 2013
52
APPENDIX A
38 §437. Significant river segments identified
For purposes of this chapter, significant river segments include the following:
1. Aroostook River. The Aroostook River from St. Croix Stream in Masardis to the Masardis and
T.10, R.6, W.E.L.S. townline, excluding segments in T.9, R.5, W.E.L.S.; including its tributary the
Big Machias River from the Aroostook River in Ashland to the Ashland and Garfield Plantation
townlines;
2. Dennys River. The Dennys River from the railroad bridge in Dennysville Station to the dam at
Meddybemps Lake, excluding the western shore in Edmunds Township and No. 14 Plantation;
3. East Machias River. The East Machias River from 1/4 of a mile above the Route 1 bridge in
East Machias to the East Machias and T.18, E.D., B.P.P. townline, and from the T.19, E.D., B.P.P.
and Wesley townline to the outlet of Crawford Lake in Crawford, excluding Hadley Lake;
4. Fish River. The Fish River from the bridge in Fort Kent Mills to the outlet of Eagle Lake in
Wallagrass, and from the Portage Lake and T.14, R.6, townline to the Portage Lake and T.13, R.7,
W.E.L.S. townline, excluding Portage Lake;
5. Machias River. The Machias River from the Whitneyville and Machias townline to the
Northfield T.19, M.D., B.P.P. townline;
6. Mattawamkeag River. The Mattawamkeag River from the outlet of Mattakeunk Stream in Winn
to the Mattawamkeag and Kingman Township townline, and from the Reed Plantation and Bancroft
townline to the East Branch, including its tributaries the West Branch from the Mattawamkeag River
to the Haynesville T.3, R.3, W.E.L.S. townline and from its inlet into Upper Mattawamkeag Lake to
the Route 2 bridge; the East Branch from the Mattawamkeag River to the Haynesville and Forkstown
Township townline and from the T.4, R 3, W.E.L.S. and Oakfield townline to Red Bridge in
Oakfield; the Fish Stream from the Route 95 bridge in Island Falls to the Crystal-Patten townline; and
the Baskehegan Stream from its inlet into Crooked Brook Flowage in Danforth to the Danforth and
Brookton Township townline;
7. Narraguagus River. The Narraguagus River from the ice dam above the railroad bridge in
Cherryfield to the Beddington and Devereaux Township townline, excluding Beddington Lake;
8. East Branch of Penobscot. The East Branch of the Penobscot from the Route 157 bridge in
Medway to the East Millinocket and Grindstone Township townline;
9. Pleasant River. The Pleasant River from the railroad bridge in Columbia Falls to the Columbia
and T.18, M.D., B.P.P. townline, and from the T.24, M.D., B.P.P. and Beddington townline to the
outlet of Pleasant River Lake;
10. Rapid River. The Rapid River from the Magalloway Plantation and Upton townline to the outlet
of Pond in the River;
11. West Branch Pleasant River. The West Branch Pleasant River from the East Branch to the
Brownville and Williamsburg Township townline; and
12. West Branch of Union River. The West Branch of the Union River from the Route 9 bridge in
Amherst to the outlet of Great Pond in the Town of Great Pond.
Town of Fairfield
SIDEWALK DISPLAY ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to promote and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the
sidewalks of the Town of Fairfield and to promote the safety and convenience of the
pedestrians using said sidewalks by regulating the placement of objects within and above the
said sidewalks.
SECTION 2 AREA OF APPLICABILITY
This ordinance shall apply to the following areas:
a. Both the Easterly and Westerly sidewalks abutting Main Street between the Northerly line of
the City of Waterville and the Northerly corner of the intersection of Main Street and Western
Avenue, including pedestrian gateways between Main Street and Mill Street.
b. Both the Northerly and Southerly sidewalks abutting Lawrence Avenue and Bridge Street
between the Easterly bound of the Maine Central Railroad right of way and the Westerly end
of the most Westerly bridge leading to Benton.
c. The Northerly sidewalk abutting Summit Street between the Easterly bound of the Maine
Central Railroad right of way and Main Street.
SECTION 3 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective on June 13, 2012, and shall supersede and replace any
previously adopted ordinance adopted by the Town of Fairfield regulating the placement of
objects within and above the sidewalks to which this Ordinance applies.
SECTION 4 VALIDITY, SEVERABILITY, AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
a. Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid,
such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
b. In the event that a conflict shall exist between this Ordinance and any other Ordinance of
the Town of Fairfield, Statute of the State of Maine, or Rule or Regulation adopted by any
Agency of the State of Maine, the more stringent provision(s) shall apply.
SECTION 5 PERMITS REQUIRED
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no person shall place, authorize to be placed, or
suffer the placement of any physical object upon the surface area of or within a vertical
distance of eight (8) feet above the surface of any of the sidewalks within the area subject to
this ordinance without a permit issued under this Ordinance.
SECTION 6 PERMIT APPLICATIONS
Applications for annual permits shall be submitted by the person intending to place an object
within or above the affected sidewalks, or by their authorized agent, upon a form to be issued
by the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Town of Fairfield or such other person as may be duly
designated by the Town Manager of the Town of Fairfield, and which shall include such
information as may be required to determine that the applicant shall comply with the
requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 7 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT
Any applicant for a permit under this Ordinance shall present to the person authorized to issue
a permit hereunder the following information:
a. Financial Responsibility: The applicant for the permit shall present to the person authorized
to issue permits under this Ordinance, together with an agreement to indemnify and forever
hold the Town of Fairfield harmless from any loss or damage, in the event that any person
should be harmed in connection with the placement of any object by the applicant within the
subject area, proof of general liability insurance in an amount of at least One Million Dollars
($1,000,000.00) indemnifying the Town of Fairfield from any loss in the event of any such
harm.
b. Description of object intended to be placed: The applicant shall disclose to the person
authorized to issue a permit under this Ordinance an exact description of each object to be
placed within the subject area, except that objects which constitute merchandise for sale may
be generally described while an exact description of any tables, racks, counters or other
objects displaying such objects shall be given. In no event shall a permit be granted for the
placement of any object which shall obstruct one-half (1/2) or more of the surface area of the
sidewalk.
c. Duration of placement of merchandise and displays, and prohibitions:
1. The applicant shall disclose the duration of the intended placement of merchandise
and displays.
2. Placement may not coincide with municipal parking bans; November 1 to March 31
of the following year, between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.
3. Placement shall not impede municipal sidewalk maintenance.
4. Placement and objects will not be allowed to remain within the affected area beyond
the business hours of the applicant on any given day.
d. Duration of placement of amenities for outdoor dining: The applicant shall disclose the
duration of the intended placement of amenities, including tables, chairs, umbrellas, etc. which
may be placed between the months of May through September. Outside of business operating
hours, objects shall be neatly placed against the applicant’s building or, if possible, moved
onto the applicant’s property.
e. The applicant shall be current on all real and personal property taxes owed the Town of
Fairfield before a permit can be issued. Permits shall be immediately revoked by the Code
Enforcement Officer for failure to pay taxes within 30 days after the date which they are due.
SECTION 8 VIOLATION OF THIS ORDINANCE
Any person who shall violate any of the restrictions of this Ordinance shall be liable to pay a
penalty to the Town of Fairfield which shall be assessed at the rate of One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) per day for each and every day that such violation shall continue.
SECTION 9 APPEAL
Any person who shall deem himself aggrieved by the failure or refusal of the person
authorized to issue permits under this Ordinance to issue to him a permit after the filing of a
proper application may appeal the decision of such person not to issue the said permit to the
Town Council of the Town of Fairfie1d at any time within ten (10) days of the denial of such
permit by notifying the Town Manager of the Town of Fairfield, in writing, of his said appeal.
Public Hearing Date: May 21, 1986
Adopted: May 21, 1986
Amended: June 13, 2012
Amended: September 12, 2018
A True Copy
Attest:__________________________
Town Clerk
Town Seal
WASTE DISPOSAL ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to protect the public health and property values
of the citizens of the Town of Fairfield by controlling the disposal of all discarded
matter in such a manner as to prevent:
1. The pollution of air, land, or water resources of the Town;
2. Littering and unsightliness around disposal areas;
3. The destruction of private wells;
4. Erosion;
5. The destruction of Town roads by increased and/or heavy traffic.
SECTION 2 PROHIBITION
The operation of a disposal area in the Town of Fairfield for the disposal of any
waste, unused materials, or discarded matter by any commercial, manufacturing
or industrial organization, governmental or quasi-governmental agency, except
any Town-owned disposal area and the application of stabilized treatment plant
solids to farm land by the Kennebec Sanitary Treatment District, without a permit
from the Town Council is prohibited. This permit is not required by farms for
waste generated directly from the raising of livestock, crops, or poultry.
SECTION 3 PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES
The prospective operator and the owner of such a site must apply for this permit
by writing a letter to the Town Council stating:
1. The weight and volume per day, week and year to be disposed of;
2. There are no toxic or pathegent materials to be disposed of;
3. There will be no open burning and, if the material is combustible, adequate
fire control facilities shall be provided.
4. The site and entrance thereto are properly landscaped to screen, to the
maximum extent possible, the disposal area from all surrounding property, and
that entrance to the site is controlled to prevent accident and public harm if
necessary.
5. Any excavation or open soil will be planned in such a manner as to minimize
erosion and prevent sediment pollution or siltation of any ground or surface
water in the town.
Obtaining this permit in no way relieves the applicant from the requirement to
obtain other applicable Federal, State and local permits. The Town Council may
issue this permit subject to any conditions necessary to ensure compliance with
these criteria and the goals stated in Section 1. If, after investigation, the Town
Council determines that the disposal area is not being operated in accordance
with the criteria herein or conditions on the permit for the area, then the permit
shall be cancelled and rendered null and void.
SECTION 5 EXISTING DISPOSAL SITES
Existing disposal sites covered by the ordinance must obtain a permit within 2
years of adoption of this ordinance by the town.
SECTION 6 CHANGES IN LOCATION, SIZE OR OPERATION
If the operation or location of any disposal area changes from that specified in
the original permit application, an amendment to that permit must be obtained
by the operator and the owner.
2. The consistency and chemical composition and origins of the material to be
disposed of;
3. The location of the proposed disposal area;
4. Existing and planned final contours if excavation and fill are contemplated;
5. Plans to screen and reduce any unsightliness and to control access to the site
for protection against accident and public harm;
6. The manner and frequency in which the material will be transported to the
site;
7. The results of site surveys, engineering, evaluations and other studies
supporting the project.
The Town Council may reduce the amount of information needed in the
application for this permit, provided they determine, after a meeting with the
applicant, the information requested is not applicable to the particular permit. A
public hearing must be held on all applications. The permit shall be granted,
granted with conditions, or denied within 60 days of receipt of a properly
completed application, or if additional information is necessary, within 60 days of
receipt of the additional information.
SECTION 4 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING THE PERMIT
A permit shall be granted after public hearing provided the Town Council find
that;
1. The soils, bedrock formation and ground contours are such that the ground
water and surrounding surface waters will not be affected.
A public hearing on an amendment may or may not be held at the discretion of
the Town Council.
SECTION 7 PENALTY
Any operator or owner who fails to obtain a permit, misrepresents information in
the application, or fails to comply fully with conditions on the permit shall be
individually liable to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day of
each day of violation.
SECTION 8 PERMIT FEE AND TERM
Applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee of $50.00 payable to
the Town of Fairfield. In addition, the Town Council may assess reasonable
additional costs relating to a specific application. The term of the permit shall be
for one year from date of approval by the Town Council.
Permits are subject to termination at the discretion of the Town Council after 60
days upon written notice.
SECTION 9 SEPARABILITY
The invalidity of any provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other
part.
SECTION 10 COMMENCEMENT
This ordinance shall become effective when enacted.
Public Hearing: December 2, 1980
Effective Date: December 16, 1980
TRUE COPY ATTEST: Agnes G. LaPlante, Town Clerk
SMOKE-FREE PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, AND RECREATION AREAS
SECTION 1.0 PURPOSE
This Ordinance is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare,
and quality of life of the children and adults that use parks, playgrounds, and recreation
areas in the Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 2.0 DEFINITIONS
3.0.1 SMOKING: Shall mean inhaling, exhaling, burning, vaporizing or carrying
any lighted cigar, cigarette, weed, plant, vaporizer or other combustible
substance in any manner or in any form.
3.0.2 TOBACCO: Shall mean any product made or derived from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, including any component, part, or accessory of
a tobacco product. This includes, among other products, cigarettes, cigarette
tobacco, roll-your-own tobacco, and smokeless tobacco.
3.0.3 MARIJUANA: means the dried leaves and flowers and the by-products of
the dried leaves and flowers of the marijuana plant that require no further
processing but does not include the seeds, stalks, leaves that are disposed of
and not dried for use and roots of the plant.
3.0.4 ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY DEVICE: means any noncombustible
device containing or delivering nicotine or marijuana tincture or any other
substance intended for human consumption that employs a heating element,
power source, electronic circuit or other electronic, chemical or mechanical
means and that may be used to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or
aerosol from the device, including, without limitation, a device manufactured,
distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah or so-called vape pen. "Electronic nicotine
delivery device" does not include any product regulated as a drug or device by
the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
SECTION 3.0 PROHIBITION
Smoking, tobacco, marijuana use and vaping are prohibited at the following town
recreation areas and adjacent public parking lots and sidewalks:
a. Water Street Playground and Fairfield Community Center, exclusive of the
Mill Street Parking lot. Which is a DRUG FREE ZONE.
b. Fairfield Athletic Complex on Industrial Road and Western Avenue,
including the sports fields and adjacent land and parking area. Which is a
DRUG FREE ZONE.
c. Mill Island Park and the adjacent parking area. Which is a DRUG FREE
ZONE.
d. Monument Park and its adjacent sidewalks, including High Street between
the Park and the Fairfield Primary School. Which is a DRUG FREE ZONE.
SECTION 4.0 ENFORCEMENT
This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Fairfield Police Department.
SECTION 5.0 PENALTIES
Prior to issuing a citation for violation of this Ordinance, a law enforcement officer shall
issue one verbal warning to an individual. If the individual fails to comply after the
warning, the individual shall be issued a citation to appear in court. If the individual is
found to be in violation of this Ordinance, the Court shall impose a fine of $50.00,
which may not be suspended. The municipality may be awarded attorney’s fees and
costs incurred in enforcing this Ordinance.
SECTION 6.0 SEVERABILITY
If any Ordinance in the Town of Fairfield now in effect or any future Ordinance is more
stringent than this one, then that Ordinance shall be in force. If for any reason any
word, clause, paragraph or section of this Ordinance shall be held unconstitutional, this
Ordinance shall not thereby be invalidated and the remainder of this Ordinance shall
continue in effect.
SECTION 7.O EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption by the Town Council of Fairfield.
SECTION 8.0 AMENDMENTS
This Ordinance may be amended by vote of the Town Council.
Adopted on this 9th day of October, 2002.
Amended on the 13th day of August, 2014.
Amended on the 26th day of April, 2017.
ATTEST, A True Copy:
__________________________
Christine Keller, Town Clerk
SOLID WASTE ORDINANCE
Be it enacted by the Town Council of the Town of Fairfield as follows:
Whereas: the Town of Fairfield with the legal authority to control the handling of
solid waste generated within its borders; to promote the public health, safety
and welfare; to gain management control over solid waste and thereby to enable
reclamation of resources; and
Whereas: to provide for the requirement that all residential, commercial, and
institutional solid waste generated within the borders of the Town be delivered to
a designated disposal facility; and
Whereas: to provide the Town with the authority to enforce this requirement;
and
Whereas: to enable the Town to be in compliance with the contract between the
Town of Fairfield and the Penobscot Energy Recovery Company (PERC) entered
into on the 29th day of March 1991; now, therefore
Be it ordained that the following Solid Waste Ordinance be incorporated into the
code of the Town of Fairfield:
SECTION 1 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
No person, corporation or legal entity shall dispose of solid waste in any manner
which is contrary to the provisions herein and all acceptable solid waste
generated within the Town of Fairfield shall be disposed of only at the PERC
disposal facility pursuant to the Town’s March 29, 1991, contract with PERC (a
copy of which is located at the Town Office).
SECTION 2 DEFINITIONS
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
chapter. The definitions set forth in 38 M.R.S.A. Section 1303 also shall apply.
Any word not otherwise defined shall have its ordinary meaning.
2.1 Acceptable Solid Waste. “Acceptable solid waste” shall mean waste which
PERC, by means of its contract with the Town (a copy of which is located at the
Fairfield Town Clerk’s Office), dated March 29, 1991, will accept at its disposal
facility and includes all ordinary household, municipal, institutional, and
commercial waste which consists primarily of combustible materials.
2.2 Solid Waste Hauler. “Solid waste hauler” means anyone collecting and
transporting acceptable solid waste from residential customers, commercial
establishments, and institutional facilities within Town borders.
2.3 Solid Waste. The term “solid waste” shall have the same definition as set
forth in Title 38 M.R.S.A., section 1303, as the same may be amended from time
to time.
2.4 Town. The term ‘9’own” herein shall mean the Town of Fairfield, Maine, and
its applicable officers, officials, representatives, employees, agents, designees, as
well as the Town Manager and Town Council and his or her or their designees.
2.5 Unacceptable Solid Waste. “Unacceptable solid waste” means all solid waste
that is not acceptable solid waste.
SECTION 3 LICENSING
3.1 All solid waste haulers must obtain an annual license from the office of the
Town Manager, or his/her designee, of the Town of Fairfield. The license for the
first year, notwithstanding when that license is obtained, shall expire on February
29, 1996, and on the last day of February of each year thereafter.
3.2 All solid waste haulers operating in the Town must submit an annual
reporting form by January 31 of each year. Such form indicates the amount (in
pounds) of acceptable solid waste and recyclables collected by the reporting solid
waste hauler in the Town during the previous year. Once a reporting form has
been received by the office of the Town Manager, a licensing application form
will be sent to the reporting solid waste hauler. No license will be issued to an
applicant that operated in the Town during the year previous to application and
does not submit an annual reporting form.
3.3 In the event that a licensed solid waste hauler terminates operation within
Town boundaries, such solid waste hauler shall submit at the time of termination
an annual report for all acceptable solid waste delivered during the year that
operation ceased.
3.4 The Town Manager shall prepare an application form which will include
regulations governing the collection and disposal of solid waste at a Towndesignated
transfer facility or PERC as well as other information that the Town
requires. Such application and regulations shall be approved by the Town Council
prior to its use.
3.5 Each applicant must conform to the following standards:
a. Each application must be accompanied by a current certificate of
insurance.
b. Each application must be accompanied by a list of current license plate
numbers of all trucks owned by the applicant which are to be used to haul
acceptable solid waste to a Town-designated transfer facility or PERC. The
list shall be kept up to date during any year in which a license has been
granted and any changes must be reported immediately to the Town
Manager’s office.
c. Any applicant required to have a permit under the rules of the
Department of Environmental Protection, Chapter 411, shall submit such
permit with the Town’s application form.
d. The Town reserves the right to inspect all vehicles to determine if they
are in good, operating condition and to determine whether they are so
constructed as to enclose loads within the container or to provide for a
secured covering of any load. (Failure to meet the conditions of this
paragraph at all times will result in no license being issued to the applicant
and possible loss of such solid waste hauler license hereunder until such
unsatisfactory conditions are remedied to the Town’s satisfaction.)
e. All applicants’ vehicles must be capable of unloading their loads at a
Town-designated transfer facility or PERC only by mechanical means.
3.6 Once a complete licensing application is received and approved by the Town
Manager, the applicant will be given a new annual report form. Such applicant
also will be issued a license and a certified decal for each truck owned by the
applicant which is used to haul acceptable solid waste. A current license shall be
indicated by an appropriate decal which decal shall be displayed in a prominent
position on the vehicle.
3.7 All licenses are non-transferable.
SECTION 4 FEES
The Town Council may establish from time to time an annual fee for the licensing
of solid waste haulers, which fee shall include a basic fee and an additional fee
for each vehicle to be licensed.
SECTION 5 TONNAGE REPORTING
It shall be the responsibility of the solid waste hauler to ensure that the Town of
Fairfield is given accurate or reasonably estimated tonnage for all acceptable
solid waste collected from within the borders of the Town and delivered to a
Town- designated transfer facility or PERC by said solid waste hauler. Reporting
of these weights shall be submitted with the annual reporting form on January
31 of each year.
SECTION 6 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HAULER
6.1 A solid waste hauler shall be held fully responsible for the presence of
unacceptable solid waste in any load delivered by the solid waste hauler to a
Town- designated transfer facility or PERC. In the event that the solid waste
hauler disposes of any unacceptable solid waste at such facilities, such
unacceptable solid waste shall be removed from the facility by the solid waste
hauler at the hauler’s expense within a 24 hour period following oral notification
by the Town. If the unacceptable solid waste is not removed by said solid waste
hauler within the 24 hour notification period, it will be removed by the Town or
its agents, with double the cost of removal and disposal to be billed to the solid
waste hauler and paid by any such solid waste hauler within thirty (30) days.
Failure or refusal by such solid waste hauler to pay such bill from the Town may
result in loss of such solid waste hauler license hereunder through the process
described in Section 7 until all outstanding amounts due under this ordinance are
paid.
6.2 The solid waste hauler shall be fully responsible for the handling of waste
between its sources from within the borders of the Town and a Town-designated
transfer facility or PERC. The solid waste hauler’s license does not make the
hauler an agent, employee or contractor of the Town. The solid waste hauler is
fully and solely responsible for his/her own negligent and intentional acts or
omissions, and all workers’ compensation costs, insurance costs, and other costs
and obligations associated with hauling solid waste.
SECTION 7 PENALTIES AND LICENSE REVOCATION
7.1 In the event that a solid waste hauler shall have violated the provisions of
this chapter for five (5) days or more, or on ten (10) or more separate occasions,
the Town Manager shall have the right to begin the process of revocation of the
existing license herein described in Section 7.2, and permanently refuse to grant
a license to such solid waste hauler in the future.
7.2 Upon notice by the Town Manager to the solid waste hauler of a proposed
temporary or permanent suspension of its solid waste hauler’s license, a public
notice of said proposed suspension will be issued and will be posted in the
normal posting places within the Town and a copy shall be sent to the solid
waste collection sources of said solid waste hauler. Upon issuance of a notice of
a proposed temporary or permanent suspension, the solid waste hauler will be
entitled to a hearing before a select committee of the Town Council. If the select
committee upholds the decision of the Town Manager, then a suspension of the
solid waste hauler’s license may be enacted and/or a fine may be levied.
7.3 Any solid waste hauler who is responsible for a violation of this Ordinance is
liable for the penalties in Title 30-A, MRSA, Section 4452. Said hauler shall pay
the Town’s court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees in the event that the Town
takes court action to enforce this Ordinance.
7.4 The Town Manager may enter into administrative consent agreements for
the purpose of eliminating violations of this ordinance and imposing fines without
court action. Such agreements should not allow an illegal activity to continue
unless there is clear and convincing evidence that the illegality was a direct result
of erroneous information or advice given by an authorized Town official, and
there is no evidence that the violator acted in bad faith.
SECTION 8 SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT
8.1 In the event that any provision of this ordinance is found to be void and
unenforceable by a court, the remaining provisions continue in full force and
effect.
8.2 If this Ordinance conflicts with other Town ordinances, then the strictest
provisions shall apply.
8.3 Provisions of Federal and State laws and rules adopted pursuant thereto shall
govern if such provisions are more stringent than the provisions of this
Ordinance.
Public Hearing: July 18, 1995
Adopted: July 18, 1995
Effective: July 18, 1995
SPECIAL AMUSEMENT ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I TITLE, PURPOSE & DEFINITIONS
SECTION 101 TITLE
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Special Amusement
Ordinance of the Town of Fairfield, Maine.
SECTION 102 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Ordinance is to control the issuance of special permits for
music, dancing or entertainment in facilities licensed by the State of Maine to sell
liquor as required by 28 MRSA Sub-Section 702.
SECTION 103 DEFINITIONS
103.1 Entertainment. For the purposes of this Ordinance, “entertainment” shall
include any amusement, performance, exhibition or diversion for patrons or
customers of the licensed premises whether provided by professional
entertainers or by full-time or part-time employees of the licensed premises
whose incidental duties include activities with an entertainment value.
103.2 Licensee. For purposes of this Section, “licensee” shall include the holder
of a license issued under the Alcoholic Beverages Statutes of the State of Maine,
or any person, individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or other
legal entity, or any agent, or employee of any such licensee.
ARTICLE II GENERAL
SECTION 201 PERMIT REQUIRED
No licensee for the sale of liquor to be consumed on his licensed premises shall
permit, on his licensed premises, any music, except radio or other mechanical
device, any dancing or entertainment of any sort unless the licensee shall have
first obtained from the municipality in which the licensed premises are situated a
special amusement permit signed by at least a majority of the municipal officers.
Applications for all special amusement permits shall be made in writing to the
municipal officers and shall state the name of the applicant; his residence
address; the name of the business to be conducted; his business address; the
nature of his business; the location to be used; whether the applicant has ever
had a license to conduct the business therein described either denied or revoked
and, if so, the applicant shall describe those circumstances specifically; whether
the applicant, including all partners or corporate officers, has ever been
convicted of a felony and, if so, the applicant shall describe specifically those
circumstances; and any additional information as may be needed by the
municipal officers in the issuing of the permit, including but not limited to a copy
of the applicant’s current liquor license.
No permit shall be issued for any thing, or act, or premises, if the premises and
building to be used for the purposes do not fully comply with all ordinances,
articles, bylaws, or rules and regulations of the municipality.
The fee for a special amusement permit shall be $35.00.
The municipal officers shall, prior to granting a permit and after reasonable
notice to the municipality and the applicant, hold a public hearing within 15 days
of the date of the request was received, at which the testimony of the applicant
and that of any interested members of the public shall be taken.
The municipal officers shall grant a permit unless they find that issuance of the
permit will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or would violate
municipal ordinances, or rules and regulations, articles, or bylaws.
A permit shall be valid only for the license year of the applicant’s existing liquor
license.
SECTION 202 CONDUCT CONSTITUTING OFFENSES BY LICENSEES
202.1 Tumultuous conduct. The licensee shall not knowingly allow on any
licensed premises any person or persons to disturb, tend to disturb, or aid in
disturbing the peace of others of ordinary sensibilities or to be disorderly, riotous
or reveling by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct; or to
permit or gather a crowd, or audience, or patrons to witness any entertainment,
amusement, or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other
risks in derogation of the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, or welfare.
202.2 Riots. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premise any public
entertainments or amusement or show of any kind which tends to or is
calculated to cause or promote any riot or disturbance.
202.3 Unnecessary noise. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises
the making, creation, or maintenance of excessive, or unnecessary, or unnatural,
or unusually loud noises which disturbs, annoys, injures or prejudices, or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of individuals of ordinary
sensibilities or the public in general, or the property rights of others.
202.4 Nuisances. The licensee shall not allow any licensed premises to be so
conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in fact under any ordinances,
or any sections of any ordinances, articles, bylaws, or rules and regulations of
the municipality, or under any statutes of the State of Maine.
202.5 Prostitution and Public Indecency. The licensee shall not allow on any
licensed premises or aid in or offer or agree to or allow in or near such licensed
premises any prostitution, or prostitutes, or any public indecency under any or in
derogation of any statutes of the State of Maine; or, to persons of ordinary
sensibilities, any meretricious display, or lewd act, or act of moral perversion, or
knowingly receive, or offer or agree to receive any person on such licensed
premises for the purpose of performing a lewd act, or an act of prostitution or
moral perversion, or public indecency, or to knowingly permit any person to
remain on such licensed premises for any such purpose, or to aid, abet, allow,
permit, or participate in the commission of any such acts.
202.6 Solicitation of Drinks. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises
any person to frequent or loiter with the purpose of soliciting any other person,
customer, or patron to purchase any drink of any kind.
202.7 Gambling. The licensee shall not allow on any licensed premises the use or
occupancy thereof for gambling or games of chance as prohibited by the statutes
of the State of Maine or ordinances, articles, bylaws or rules and regulations of
the municipality; nor shall any licensee have or keep for gambling purposes on or
about such licensed premises any dice, cards, bowls, quoits or other implements
used in gambling, or allow any person resorting thereto to use or exercise for
gambling purposes any of said games or any other unlawful game or sport
therein.
202.8 Obscenity. The licensee, on any licensed premises, shall not:
1. Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any
obscene material; or
2. Knowingly make available to the public any obscene performance; or
3. Knowingly engage in commerce and/or for commercial gain with
materials depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity, or
excretion utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements, or any other public
sales efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their
prurient appeal; or
4. Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
a. The licensee’s or any of his agents’ or employees’ genitals, pubic
hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region;
b. Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region or pubic hair region; or
c. Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
5. Knowingly promotes the commission of any of the above-listed acts of
this Ordinance section.
6. For the purposes of this Section and any other Section of this
Ordinance, unless specified otherwise, the following terms are defined as
follows:
a. “obscene” means that to the average person applying
contemporary community standards the predominant appeal of the
matter or act taken as a whole, is to prurient interest, and the
matter or act depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner
sexual conduct or lewd exhibition of the genitals or other body
parts mentioned in this Ordinance above, and the matter or act or
performance considered as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, or scientific value; or any matter or acts or performance
which are prohibited by the statutes of the State of Maine.
b. “material” means any book, magazine, newspaper or other
printed or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph,
motion picture or other pictorial representation or any statue or
other figure, or any recording, transcription or mechanical,
chemical, or electrical reproduction or any other articles,
equipment, or machines.
c. “disseminate” means to transfer possession of, with or without
consideration.
d. “knowingly” means being aware of the character and the content
of the material.
e. “performance” means any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance,
or other exhibition, or entertainment performed before an
audience.
f. “available to the public” means that the matter or performance or
act may be purchased or attended on a subscription basis, or
membership fee arrangement, or for a separate fee for each item
or performance or act, or available merely by being a patron of or
present in an establishment that is licensed to sell liquor.
g. “service to patrons” means the provision of services to
customers, patrons, or any other persons present in establishments
providing food and beverages, including but not limited to
hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table
setting and clearing, waiter and waitressing and entertaining.
h. “expose to public view” means that view, glimpse, sight or
reconnoiter by the use of one’s ordinary visual means, which is
revealed, open to plain view, exposed, discovered, distinguished,
recognized, observed, demonstrated, exhibited, perceived,
discerned, displayed, or capable of any or all of such, from any
vantage point where the public or any patron of any licensee is
allowed, authorized, invited, or normally and commonly frequents.
SECTION 203 INSPECTIONS
Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business which has obtained a special amusement permit
are provided for or required by ordinance or State law, or are reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or State law, it
shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be
inspected, to admit any officer, official, or employee of the municipality
authorized to make the inspection at any reasonable time that admission is
requested.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to
secure conformance with any ordinance provision or State law, it shall be the
duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises, to give to any
authorized officer, official, or employee of the municipality requesting the same
sufficient samples of the material or commodity for analysis.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the municipal officers
may revoke the special amusement permit of any licensee in the municipality
who refuses to permit any such officer, official, or employee to make an
inspection or take sufficient samples for analysis, or who interferes with such
officer, official, or employee while in the performance of his duty. Provided, that
no license or special amusement permit shall be revoked unless written demand
for the inspection or sample is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the
premises, at the time it is sought to make the inspection.
SECTION 204 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A PERMIT
The municipal officers may, after a public hearing preceded by notice to
interested parties, suspend, or revoke any special amusement permits which
have been issued under this ordinance on the grounds that the music, dancing,
or entertainment so permitted constitutes a detriment to the public health,
safety, or welfare, or violates any municipal ordinances, articles, bylaws, or rules
and regulations.
SECTION 205 RULES AND REGULATIONS
The municipal officers are hereby authorized, after public notice and hearing, to
establish written rules and regulations governing the issuance, suspension, and
revocation of special amusement permits, the classes of permits, the music,
dancing, or entertainment permitted under each class, and other limitations on
these activities required to protect the public health, safety and welfare. These
rules and regulations may specifically determine the location and size of
permitted premises, the facilities that may be required for the permitted activities
on those premises, and the hours during which the permitted activities are
permitted. Such rules and regulations shall be additional to and consistent with
all sections of this Ordinance.
SECTION 206 PERMIT AND APPEAL PROCEDURES
206.1 Any licensee requesting a special amusement permit from the municipal
officers shall be notified in writing of their decision no later than fifteen (15) days
from the date his request was received. In the event that a licensee is denied a
permit, the licensee shall be provided with the reasons for the denial in writing.
The licensee may not reapply for a permit within 30 days after an application for
a permit which has been denied.
206.2 Any licensee who has requested a permit and has been denied, or whose
permit has been revoked or suspended, may, within 30 days of the denial,
suspension or revocation, appeal the decision to the municipal board of appeals
as defined in 30 NRSA Sub—Section 2411. The municipal board of appeals may
grant or reinstate the permit if it finds that the permitted activities would not
constitute a detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare, or that the denial,
revocation or suspension was arbitrary or capricious, or that the denial,
revocation, or suspension was not based by a preponderance of the evidence on
a violation of any ordinance, article, bylaw, or rule or regulation of the
Municipality.
SECTION 207 ADMISSION
A licensed hotel, Class A restaurant, Class A tavern or restaurant malt liquor
licensee who has been issued a special amusement permit may charge admission
in designated areas approved by the municipal special amusement permit.
ARTICLE III PENALTY, SEPARABILITY & EFFECTIVE DATE
SECTION 301 PENALTY
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a
fine of not more than Fifty Dollars ($50) for the first offense, and up to Twentyfive
Dollars ($25) for the subsequent offenses, to be recovered, on complaint, to
the use of the Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 302 SEPARABILITY
The invalidity of any provision of this Ordinance shall not invalidate any other
part.
SECTION 303 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective when enacted.
Public Hearing: May 20, 1981
Effective Date: May 20, 1981
Town Council
TOWN OF FAIRFIELD
STREET NUMBERING ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to enhance the easy and rapid location of properties by law
enforcement, fire, rescue and emergency medical personnel in the Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 2 AREA OF APPLICABILITY
This ordinance shall apply to any building or vacant lot in the Town of Fairfield as recorded on the local
tax maps.
SECTION 3 AUTHORIZATION OF STREET NUMBERING
This ordinance shall be administered by the Fire Chief or his/her delegate who is authorized to and shall
assign road names and numbers to all properties, both on existing and proposed roads, in accordance
with the criteria in Sections 4 and 5.
SECTION 4 METHOD OF STREET NUMBERING
(A) All properties listed on the Town’s Tax Maps on the North or East side of a street or road will be
assigned an EVEN number.
(B) All properties listed on the Town’s Tax Maps on the South or West side of a street or road will be
assigned an ODD number.
(C) All corner lots will be assigned a number for each street or road that it borders, which will allow for
a building or vacant lot to be numbered according to the front property line. The walk or access
drive to the building will be considered the front.
(D) On all streets and roads running South to North the Lowest numbers will start at the most southerly
point on the Town Tax Maps. EXAMPLE: Properties along Main Street shall be numbered with the
lowest address numbers beginning at the Fairfield-Waterville municipal border and continuing in
sequence travelling northbound toward Skowhegan.
(E) On all streets and roads running East to West the lowest number will start at the most Easterly point
and continue Westerly.
NOTE: An exception to the above numbering system is authorized for the purpose of sequencing
that will conform to existing City of Waterville numbering system on roads that connect Fairfield and
Waterville, such as the Ridge Road and Norridgewock Road.
(F) Names of new streets or roads shall not be duplicated or bear phonetic resemblance to the names
of existing streets or roads within the Town of Fairfield.
SECTION 4-A METHOD OF NUMBERING MULTI-TENANT AND MULTI STORY BUILDINGS
(A) Single story buildings with a single shared main entrance with separate occupancies shall be
numbered as follows: One main address number shall be placed at the main entrance or sign if in
place, then each individual occupancy shall be marked as units within the building with the lowest
number being 1 and continuing 2, 3, 4, or A, B, C, etc. according to section 4(D) and (E). Example: A
building at 357 Main Street with four units should be marked as 357 Main Street, then starting from
the most southern unit 1, 2, 3, 4 or A, B, C, D, northward. (Or east to west depending on how the
building is orientated.) Each unit shall be marked at its entrance. For commercial buildings a
marquee should be placed at the main entrance with the names and numbers of the individual
occupants.
(B) For single story buildings with individual entrances for each occupancy the building shall have one
main address placed in a conspicuous place on the front of the building or sign if in place and each
individual occupancy shall be numbered as units with the lowest number being 1 and continuing 2,
3, 4, or A, B, C, D, etc. in accordance with Section 4(D) and (E).
(C) For multi-story commercial buildings or apartment buildings with more than 4 units with a shared
entrance, one main address number shall be placed at the main entrance or sign if in place. Each
occupancy shall be numbered with numbers and letters with the letter designating the level.
Example: First floor occupancies shall be marked as: 1A, 1B, 1C and so forth. The second floor
occupancies shall be marked 2A, 2B, 2C and so on, for each level or the lowest number may be 100
and continue on 101, 102, for the first floor, and the second floor 200, 201, 202, etc. for each level,
according to Section 4(D) and (E). For commercial buildings a marquee should be placed at the main
entrance with the names, numbers and level of each occupancy.
(D) For multi-story apartment buildings with separate entrances a main address number shall be placed
on front of the building and each individual entrance shall be numbered using 1, 2, 3 or A, B, C, etc.
SECTION 5 COMPLIANCE
All owners of buildings shall, by the date stipulated in Section 7, display and maintain in a conspicuous
place on said building, the assigned numbers in the following manner:
(A) Number on the building or residence: Where the building or residence in within 50 (fifty) feet of the
edge of the right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the building or
residence as near to the front door or entry as practical but in such as a manner it can be seen from
the edge of the right-of-way.
(B) Number at street Line: Where the residence or building is over 50 (fifty) feet from the edge of the
right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on a post, fence, wall, mail box, or some
structure at the property line next to the walk or access drive to the residence or building.
(C) Size and color of number: Numbers shall have a minimum height of 4” and be of a color that
contrasts with their background. Numbers shall be placed on the building or post in such a manner
that they are visible from the roadway.
Recommendations
Do not attach numbers made from solid materials such as brass or wood directly to the siding,
door or painted surface. These types of numbers should be placed on a background of a
contrasting color.
When placing numbers on a roadside mailbox, numbers should be placed on both sides of the
box and snow should be removed from the box.
All numbers should be reflective if possible.
Do not cover numbers with storm doors, decorations, or shrubbery.
Every person whose duty it is to display the assigned number shall remove any different number
that might be mistaken for, or confused with, the number assigned in conformance with this
ordinance.
Interior location: All residences and other occupants are requested to post the assigned number
and road name next to their telephone for emergency reference.
SECTION 6 NEW CONSTRUCTION AND SUBDIVISIONS
All new construction and subdivisions shall be named and numbered in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance and as follows:
(A) New construction: Whenever any residence or other occupied building is constructed or developed,
it shall be the duty of the owner to obtain an assigned number from the Fire Department. This shall
be done at the time of the issuance of the building permit.
(B) New Subdivisions: Any prospective sub-divider shall show a proposed road name and lot numbering
system on the pre-application submission to the Planning Board. Approval by the Planning Board,
after consultation with the addressing authority, shall constitute the assignment of road names and
numbers to the lots in the subdivision. On the final plan showing proposed streets or roads, the
applicant shall mark on the plan, lines or dots, in the center of streets or roads every 100 (one
hundred) feet to aid the assignment of numbers to residence or buildings subsequently constructed.
SECTION 7 EFFECTIVE DATE
This ordinance shall become effective as of its adoption date February 13, 2013. It shall be the duty of
the Fire Department to notify by mail each property owner and the Post Office of a new address at least
30 (thirty) days before the effective date of its use. It shall be the duty of each property owner to comply
with this ordinance, including the posting of new property numbers, within 30 (thirty) days following
notification. On new construction, numbering shall be installed before final inspection or when the
building is first used or occupied, whichever comes first.
SECTION 8 ENFORCEMENT
Enforcement of this Ordinance shall be the responsibility of the Fire Department. The Fire Department
will investigate complaints of violations and notify alleged violator before commencing legal action. Any
person who shall violate any or the restrictions of this Ordinance shall be liable to pay a penalty to the
Town of Fairfield which shall be assessed at the rate of $10.00 per day for each and every day that such
violation shall continue.
SECTION 9 APPEAL
Any person who shall deem himself aggrieved by the administration of this ordinance or by the failure or
refusal of the person authorized to enforce this ordnance may appeal the decision to the Town Council
of the Town of Fairfield at any time within thirty (30) days of notification of violation, by informing the
Fire Department in writing, of said appeal.
SECTION 10 VALIDITY, SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, such decision
shall not invalidate any other section or provision of this Ordinance.
Dated: August 20, 1996
Amended: February 13, 2013
April 14, 2010
March 13, 2013
Town of Fairfield
Subdivision Ordinance
Revised as Regulations on:
October 3, 1988
February 18, 1992
June 6, 1995
December 14, 1995
Accepted as Ordinance as of :
June 9, 1989
Amended: February 12, 1991
August 21, 1991
At the Town Council Meeting of April 14, 2010 the
Council took the following action:
Amend the Subdivision Ordinance, Article XII, Street
& Storm Drainage Design & Construction Standards,
Section 12.2(G) (Street Design Standards) to change
the width of a private right-of-way from sixty (60) feet
to forty (40) feet.
AMENDMENT
April 14, 2010
ARTICLE SECTION PAGE
I PURPOSES 1
II AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION 2
2.1 Authority 2
2.2 Administration 2
III DEFINITION 3
IV ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURE 6
4.1 Purpose 6
4.2 Agenda 6
V PREAPPLICATION 7
5.1 Procedure 7
5.2 Submission 7
5.3 On-site Inspection 7
5.4 Notification and Contour Interval 7
5.5 Rights not Vested 7
VI MINOR SUBDIVISIONS 8
6.1 General 8
6.2 Procedure 8
6.3 Submissions 8
6.4 Final Approval and Filing 10
VII PRELIMINARY PLAN for MAJOR SUBDIVISION 12
7.1 Procedure 12
7.1 Submissions 13
VIII FINAL PLAN for MAJOR SUBDIVISION 16
8.1 Procedure 16
8.2 Submissions 17
8.3 Final Approval and Filing 19
IX REVISIONS to APPROVED PLANS 20
9.1 Procedures 20
9.2 Submissions 20
9.3 Scope of Review 20
X ENFORCEMENT 21
10.1 Inspection of Required Improvements 21
10.2 Violations and Enforcement 21
XI GENERAL STANDARDS 23
11.1 Conformance with Comprehensive Plan 23
11.2 Retention of Open Spaces & Natural Or Historic Features 23
11.3 Blocks 23
11.4 Lots 24
11.5 Utilities 24
11.6 Required Improvements 24
11.7 Land Features 25
11.8 Dedication & Maintenance of Common Open Space & Services 26
11.9 Construction in Flood Hazard Areas 26
11.10 Impact on Ground Water 26
11.11 Access Control & Traffic Impacts 27
11.12 Mobile Home Parks 32
Subdivision Ordinance
TABLE OF CONTENTS
i
ARTICLE SECTION PAGE
XII STREET & STORM DRAINAGE DESIGN & CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 34
12.1 General Requirements 34
12.2 Street Design Standards 35
12.3 Street Construction Standards 39
12.4 Storm Water Management Design Standards 40
12.5 Storm Drainage Construction Standards 41
12.6 Additional Improvements & Requirements 42
12.7 Certification of Construction 43
XIII PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 44
13.1 Types of Guarantees 44
13.2 Contents of Guarantee 44
13.3 Escrow Account 44
13.4 Performance Bond 44
13.5 Letter of Credit 45
13.6 Conditional Agreement 45
13.7 Phasing of Development 45
13.8 Release of Guarantee 45
13.9 Default 45
13.10 Improvement Guaranteed 45
13.11 Inspection Fees 46
XIV WAIVERS 47
14.1 Where Board Makes Written Findings of Fact 47
14.2 Board Makes Written Findings of Fact 47
14.3 In Granting Waivers 47
14.4 Waivers to be Shown on Final Plan 47
XV APPEALS 48
APPENDIX
A TITLE 30-A, M.R.S.A. SUBSECTION 4551 LAND SUBDIVISIONS 49
B SAMPLE LETTER OF CREDIT 55
C MODEL APPLICATION FORM 57
II
The purposes of this ordinance is to assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health, and welfare of the
people, of the Town of Fairfield, to protect the environment and to promote the development of an
economically sound and stable community. To this end, in approving Subdivisions within the Town of
Fairfield, Maine, the Planning Board shall consider the following criteria and before granting approval shall
make findings of fact that the provisions of this ordinance have been met and that the proposed Subdivision
will meet the guidelines of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A. Section 4551, subsection 3. The Subdivision:
1.1 Will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination, the Board shall at
least consider the elevation of the land above the sea level and its relation to the floodplains, the
nature of soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal; the slope
of the land and its effect on effluents;
1.2 Has sufficient water available for the reasonable foreseeable needs of the Subdivision;
1.3 Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be utilized;
1.4 Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water
so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result;
1.5 Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with respect
to use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed;
1.6 Will provide for adequate solid and sewage waste disposal;
1.7 Will not cause an unreasonable burden on the ability of a municipality to dispose of solid waste
and sewage if municipal services are to be utilized.
1.8 Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics,
historic sites or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or visual
access to the shoreline; and
1.9 Is in conformance with a duly adopted subdivision regulation or ordinance, comprehensive plan,
if any;
1.10 The subdivider has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the above stated standards;
1.11 Whenever situated in whole or in part, within 250 feet of any pond, lake, rover, or tidal waters, will
not adversely affect the quality of the body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of that
body of water;
1.12 Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the quality or quantity of
ground water;
1.3 All principle structures within the Subdivision shall be constructed with their lowest floor,
including the basement, at least one foot above the 100 year flood elevation.
ARTICLE I. PURPOSES
1
2.1 Authority
A. These Standards have been prepared in accordance with the provision of Title 30-A, M.R.S.A.,
Section 4551, Subsection 2.
B. These standards shall be known and may be cited as "Subdivision Ordinances of the Town of
Fairfield, Maine".
2.2 Administration
A. The Planning Board of the Town of Fairfield, hereinafter called the Board, shall administer
these standards.
B. The provisions of these standards shall pertain to all land proposed for Subdivision, as defined in
Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4551, Subsection 1, within the boundaries of the Town of Fairfield.
C. Effective date of this Document was October 3, 1988 as revised Regulations, which was adopted
as an Ordinance on June 9, 1989.
ARTICLE 11. AUTHORITY AND ADMINISTRATION
2
In general, words and terms used in this ordinance shall have their customary dictionary meanings. For
greater convenience in clarity the following terms are defined:
Cluster Subdivision: A subdivision in which the lot sizes are reduced below those normally required in the
zoning district in which the development is located in return for the provision of permanent open
space owned in common by lot/unit owners, the Town , or a land conservation organization.
Clustering shall not be used to increase the overall net residential density of the development.
Complete Application: An application shall be considered complete upon submission of the required
fee and all information required by this ordinance for a Final Plan, or by vote by the Board to
waive the submission of required information. The Board shall issue a receipt to the applicant
upon its determination that an application if complete.
Comprehensive Plan or Policy Statement: Any part or element of the overall plan or policy for
development of the municipality as defined in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4502.
Contiguous Lots: Lots which adjoin at any line or point, or are separated at any point by a body of water
less than fifteen (15) feet wide.
Developed Area: Any area on which a site improvement or change is made, including buildings, landscaping,
parking areas and streets.
Driveway: A vehicular access-way serving two (2) dwelling units or less.
Dwelling Unit: A room or suite of rooms used as a habitation which is separated from other such rooms
or suites or rooms, and which contains independent living, cooking, sleeping, bathing and sanitary
facilities; includes single family houses, and the units in a duplex, apartment house, multifamily
dwellings, and residential condominiums.
Final Plan: The final drawings on which the applicant's plan of Subdivision is presented to the Board for
approval and which, if approved, may be recorded at the Registry of Deeds.
High Intensity Soil Survey: A soil survey conducted by a Certified Soil Scientist, meeting the standards
of the National Cooperative Soil Survey, which identifies soil types down to 1/10 acres or less
at a scale equivalent to Subdivision Plan Submitted. The mapping units shall be the soil series.
Single soil test pits and their evaluation shall not be considered to constitute high intensity soil
surveys.
100 Year Flood: The highest level of flood that, on the average, is likely to occur once every one hundred
(100) years (that has a one percent chance of occurring in any year).
Normal High Water Mark of Inland Waters: That line on the shores of banks on non-tidal waters which is
apparent because of the different character and contiguous soil or the vegetation due to the
prolonged action of the water. Relative to vegetation, it is that line where the vegetation changes
from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial (by way of illustration, aquatic vegetation
includes but is not limited to the following plants and plant groups: Water lily, pond lilt, pickerelweed,
cattail, wild rice, sedges, rushes, and marsh grasses; and terrestrial vegetation includes
but is not limited to the following plants and plant groups: upland grasses, aster, lady slipper,
wintergreen, partridge berry, sassparilla, pines, cedars, oaks, ashes, elders, elms, and maples).
In places where the shore or bank is of such character that the high water mark cannot be easily
determined, (rock-slides, ledges, rapidly eroding or slumping banks) the normal high water
elevation shall be estimated from places where it can be determined by the above method. 3
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS
Industrial Park or Development: A Subdivision in an area zoned exclusively for industrial uses, or a
Subdivision planned for industrial uses and developed and managed as a unit, usually with
provision for common services for the users.
Net Residential Acreage: The total acreage available for the Subdivision, and shown on the Proposed
Subdivision Plan, minus the area for the streets or access and the areas which are unsuitable
for development.
Net Residential Density: The average number of dwelling units per net residential acre.
Official Submittal Date: The date upon which the Board issues a receipt indicating a complete application
has been submitted.
Person: Includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as
an individual.
Planned Unit Development: A development controlled by a single developer of a mix of residential,
commercial, and industrial uses. A PUD is undertaken in a manner that treats the developed area
in its entirety to promote the best use of land, including the creation of open space, a reduction
in the length of road and utility systems, and the retention of the natural characteristics of the land.
Planning Board: The Planning Board of the Town of Fairfield, created under Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section
4505
Preliminary Subdivision Plan: The preliminary drawings indicating the proposed layout of the Subdivision
to be submitted to the Board for its consideration.
Recording Plan: A copy of the Final Plan which is recorded at the Registry of Deeds and which need not
show information not relevant to the transfer of an interest in the property, such as sewer and
water line locations and sizes, culverts, and building lines.
Resubdivision: The division of an existing Subdivision or any change in the Plan for an approved Subdivision
which effects the lot lines, including land transactions by the subdivider not indicated on the
approved Plan.
Solar Collector: A device, or combination of devices, structure, or part of a device or structure that transforms
direct solar energy into thermal, chemical, or electrical energy and that contributes to a
building's energy supply.
Street: Public and private ways such as alleys, avenues, boulevards, highways, roads, and other right-of-way,
as well as areas on Subdivision Plans designated as rights-of-way.
Street Classification:
Arterial Street: A major throughfare which serves as a major traffic way for travel between and
through the municipality. The following roadways shall be considered arterial streets: Route 201
and Route 139.
Collector Street: A street servicing at least 200 vehicle trips per day of streets which serve as
feeders to arterial streets, and collectors of traffic from minor streets.
Industrial of Commercial Street: Streets servicing industrial or commercial uses.
Minor Street: A street servicing less than 200 vehicle trips per day.
Note: 200 vehicle trips per day would be generated by twenty (20) single family houses.
Private Right-of-Way: A vehicular access way.
4
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots within any five (5) year period,
which period begins after September 22, 1971, whether accomplished by sale, lease, development,
buildings, or otherwise, provided that a division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order of
court, gift to a person related to the donor by blood, marriage or adoption, unless the intent of such
gift is to avoid the objectives of this Ordinance, or by transfer of any interest in land to the owner
of land abutting thereon, shall not be considered to create a lot or lots for the purpose of this
Ordinance.
In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divided into three (3) or more lots, the first dividing
of such tract or parcel, unless otherwise exempted herein, shall be considered to create the first
two (2) lots and the next dividing of either said first two (2) lots, by whomever accomplished, unless
otherwise exempted herein, shall be considered to create the third lot, unless both such dividing
are accomplished by a subdivider who shall have retained one (1) such second dividing.
A lot of at least forty (40) acres shall not be counted as a lot.
For the purposed of this Ordinance, a tract or parcel of land is defined as all contiguous land in the
same ownership, provided that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall
be considered each a separate tract or parcel of land unless such read was established by the
owner of land on both sides thereof.
The term subdivision shall also include such developments as mobile home parks, multiple family
dwellings, cluster housing, shopping centers, condominiums, and industrial/commercial parks
where there are three or more interests in the ground under or adjoining the units are also being
conveyed.
Subdivision, Major: Any Subdivision containing more than four (4) lots or dwelling units, or any Subdivision
containing a proposed street.
Subdivision, Minor: Any Subdivision containing not more than four (4) lots or dwelling units, and in which no
street is proposed to be constructed.
Tract, or Parcel, of Land: All contiguous land in the same ownership, whether or not the tract is separated
at any point by: an intermittent or non-navigable stream, or a private road established by the
abutting land owners.
5
4.1 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to establish an orderly, equitable and expeditious procedure for reviewing Subdivision.
4.2 Agenda
In order to avoid unnecessary delays in processing applications for Subdivision Review, the Board shall
prepare an agenda for each regularly scheduled meeting. Applicants shall request to be placed on the
Board's agenda at least one week in advance of a regularly scheduled meeting by contacting the Chairman
or designated agent. Applicants who attend a meeting but who are not on the Board's agenda may be
heard but only after all agenda items have been completed, and then only if a majority of the Board so votes,
definitive action may be taken on items not included on the agenda.
6
Article IV. Administrative Procedure
5.1 Procedure
A. Applicant presentation and submission of Sketch Plans.
B. Question and answer period. Board makes specific suggestions to be incorporated by the
applicant into subsequent submission.
C. Scheduling of on-site inspection.
5.2 Submission
The Preapplication Sketch Plan shall show, in simple sketch form, the proposed layout of streets, lots, and
other features in relation to existing conditions. The Sketch Plan, which may be a free-hand penciled sketch,
should be supplemented with general information to describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and
the proposed development. It is recommended that the Sketch Plan be superimposed on or accompanied
by a copy of the Assessor's Map(s) on which the land is located. The Sketch Plan shall be accompanied
by a copy of a portion of the U.S.G.S. Topographic Map of the area showing the outline of the Proposed
Subdivision, unless the Proposed Subdivision is less than ten (10) acres in size.
5.3 On-Site Inspection
The subdivider shall arrange, at a mutually agreeable time, for an on-site inspection of the property in
question with at least one member of the Planning Board or a person appointed by the Board. The applicant
shall place a "flagging" at the center line of the proposed streets, and at approximate intersections of the
street center lines and lot corners, prior to the on-site inspection.
5.4 Notification and Contour Interval
Within thirty (30) days after such preliminary on-site inspection, the Board shall notify the applicant in
writing of the required contour interval on the Preliminary Plan, or Final Plan in the case of a Minor Subdivision.
5.5 Rights not Vested
The submittal or review of the preapplication Sketch Plan shall not be considered the initiation of the review
process for the purposes of bringing the Plan under the protection of Title 1, M.R.S.A., Section 302.
7
Article V. Preapplication
6.1 General
The Board may require, where it deems it necessary for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare,
that a Minor Subdivision comply with all or any of the subdivision requirements for a Major Subdivision.
6.2 Procedure
A. Within six (6) months after the on-site inspection by the Board, the sub-divider shall submit an
application for approval of a Final Plan at least seven (7) days prior to a scheduled meeting of the
Board. Failure to do so shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Board. The Final
Plan shall approximate the layout shown on the Sketch Plan, plus any recommendations
made by the Board.
B. All applications for Final Plan approval for Minor Subdivision shall be accompanied by an application
fee of $80.00 payable by check to the municipality. If a public hearing is deemed necessary
by the Board, an additional fee shall be required to cover additional costs of advertising and
postal notification.
C. The Board or its agent, shall notify in writing all owners of abutting property that an application
for Subdivision approval has been submitted.
D. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Board to
discuss the Final Plan.
E. Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted for review, the Board shall
issue a dated receipt to the subdivider. The Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing
on the Final Plan application.
F. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the hearing within thirty (30) days of
receipt of a complete application, and shall publish notice of the date, time, and place of the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least two (2) times, the date
of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
G. Within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete
application, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit an may be otherwise mutually
agreed to by the Board and the subdivider, the Board shall make findings of fact of the
application, and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Final Plan. The Board shall
specify in writing its findings of facts and reason for any conditions or denial.
6.3 Submissions
A. The Subdivision Plan for a Minor Subdivision shall consist of two (2) reproducible, stable based
transparent originals, one to be recorded at the Registry of Deed, the other to be filed at the
Municipal Office and three copies of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more
than one hundred (100') feet to the inch. Plans for Subdivisions containing more than one hundred
(100) acres may be drawn on a scale of not more than two hundred feet (200' to 1") to the inch
provided all necessary details can be read. Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size,
and shall have a margin of two (2") inches outside of the border lines on the left side for binding
and a one (1") inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides. Space shall be provided
for endorsement by the Board. Three copies of all information accompanying the Plan shall be
submitted. 8
Article VI. Minor Subdivisions
The application for approval of a Minor Subdivision shall include the following information:
1. Proposed name of the Subdivision, or identifying title, and the name of the municipality in
which it is located, plus the Assessor's Map and Lot numbers.
2. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
3. A statement of financial and technical capability needed to complete this project.
4. A field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by bearings
and distances, made and certified by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract shall be
located on the ground and marked by monuments. The Plan shall indicate the type of monument
set or found at each lot corner.
5. A copy of the deed from which the survey was based. A copy of all deed restrictions,
easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the property.
6. A copy of any deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots in the Subdivision.
7. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the Subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public sewer, a
written statement from the Sewer Department stating the Town has the capacity to collect
and treat the wastewater shall be provided.
b. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface waste-water disposal
systems, test pit analysis, prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator, shall be provided.
A map showing the location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
8. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the Subdivision.
a. When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a written statement from a servicing
water district shall be submitted indicating there is adequate supply and pressure for the
Subdivision and approving the plans for extensions where necessary. Where the
district's supply line is to be extended, a written statement from the Fire Chief, stating
approval of the location of fire hydrants, if any, and a written statement from the district
approving the design of the extension shall be submitted.
b. When water is to be supplied by the private wells, evidence of adequate ground water
supply and quality shall be submitted by a well driller or a Hydro geologist familiar
with the area.
9. The date the Plan was prepared, north point, graphic map scale, names and addresses of the
record owner, subdivider, and individual or company who prepared the Plan, and the names
of adjoining property owners. If the subdivider is not the owner of the property, evidence of the
subdivider's right, title or interest to the property.
10. A copy of the portion of the County Soil Survey covering the Subdivision. When the medium
intensity Soil Survey shows soils which generally unsuitable for the uses proposed, the Board
may require the submittal of a High Intensity Soil Survey or a report by a registered Soil
Scientist or Registered Engineer experienced in geotechnics, indicating the suitability of
soil conditions for those uses. 9
11. The number of acres within the proposed Subdivision, location of property lines, existing
buildings, watercourses, vegetative cover sites, and other essential existing physical features.
On wooded sites, the Plan shall indicate the area where clearing for lawns and structures
shall be permitted.
12. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Planning Board, showing elevations in relation
to Mean Sea Level.
13. If any portion of the Subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard
areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on the Plan.
14. A hydrogeologic assessment may be required for development which meet all of the following
criteria:
a. On-site subsurface wastewater disposal;
b. Project is located on a sand and gravel deposit;
c. On-site potable water supply wells; and
d. Any of the lots are less than 80,000 square feet in size.
NOTE: There may be special circumstances which do not meet all the criteria listed above
for which a hydrogeologic assessment may be required.
The hydrogeologic assessment should include at a minimum the information as described
in Paragraph 11.10.
15. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated on a daily basis and
at peak hours.
16. For Subdivisions involving forty (40) or more parking spaces or projected to generate more
than 400 vehicle trips per day, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer with experience in traffic engineering, shall be submitted. The analysis
shall indicate the expected average daily vehicular trips, peak hour volumes, access
conditions at the site, distribution of traffic, types of vehicles expected, effect upon the level
of service of the street giving access to the site and neighboring streets which may be
affected, and recommended level of service on the effected streets. Trip generations rates
used shall be the means described in "I.T.E. Trip Generation Manual", 4th Edition, published
by the Institute of Transportation engineers.
6.4 Final Approval and Filing
A. No plan shall be approved by the Planning Board as long as the subdivider is in default on a previously
approved Plan.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all Standards is Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4551,
Subsection 3, and this Ordinance have been met, and upon voting to approve the Subdivision, the
Board shall sign the Final Plan. The Board shall specify, in writing, its findings of fact and reasons
for any conditions or denial. One copy of the signed Plan shall be retained by the Board as part of
its permanent records. One copy of the signed Plan shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor. One
copy of the signed Plan shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer. Any Subdivision
not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the Plan is
approved and signed by the Board shall become null and void.
C. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made on any Final Plan after the approval
has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed in writing on the Plan, unless the revised Final
Plan is first submitted and the Board approves any modifications, except in accordance with Article
IX. The Board shall make findings that the revised Plan meets the Standards of Title 30-A,
M.R.S.A., Section 4551, subsection 3, and this Ordinance. 10
In the event that a Plan is recorded without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered
null and void, and the Board shall institute proceedings to have the Plan stricken from the records
of the Registry of Deeds.
D. The approval by the Board of a Subdivision Plan shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence
of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or other open space shown on
such Plan. When a park, playground, or other recreation area still have been shown on the Plan to
be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the Plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the
municipality of such areas. The Board shall require the Plan to contain appropriate notes to this
effect. The Board may also require the filing of a written agreement between the applicant and the
Municipal Officers covering future deed and title, dedication, and provisions for the cost of grading,
development, equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
E Failure to commence substantial construction of the Subdivision within five (5) years of the date of
approval and signing of the Plan shall render the Plan null and void. Upon determining that a Subdivision's
approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have a notice placed in the
Registry of Deeds to that effect.
11
7.1 Procedure
A. Within six (6) months after the on-site inspection by the Board, the sub-divider shall submit an
application for approval of a Preliminary Plan at least seven (7) days prior to a scheduled meeting
of the Board. Failure to do so shall require resubmission of the Sketch Plan to the Board. The
Preliminary Plan shall approximate the layout shown on the Sketch Plan, plus any recommendation
made by the Board.
B. All applications for Preliminary Plan approval for a Major Subdivision shall be accompanied by an
application fee of $15.00 per lot or dwelling unit, payable by check to the municipality. In addition,
the applicant shall pay a fee of $25.00 per lot or dwelling unit to be deposited in a special account
designated for that Subdivision application, to be used by the Planning Board for hiring independent
consulting services to review the application and to cover the cost of inspection if required
improvements. If the balance in this special account shall be drawn down by seventy-five (75%)
percent, the Board shall notify the applicant, and require the additional $10.00 per lot or
dwelling unit be deposited as necessary whenever the balance of the account is drawn down by
seventy-five (75%) percent of the original deposit.
C. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Board to
discuss the Preliminary Plan.
D. Upon receipt of an application for Preliminary Plan approval of a Major Subdivision, the Board of its
agent shall notify, in writing, all owners of abutting property that an application for Subdivision
approval has been submitted.
E. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a preliminary Plan application form and fee, the Board shall
notify the applicant, in writing whether or not the application is complete, and what, if any,
additional submissions are required for a complete application.
F. Upon determination that a complete application has been submitted for review, the Board shall
issue a dated receipt to the subdivider. The Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing
on the Preliminary Plan application. If the Board decides to hold a public hearing, it shall hold the
hearing within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application, and shall publish notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at
least two (2) times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
G. The Board shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing, or within sixty (60) days of receipt of a
complete application, if no hearing is held, or within another time limit as may be otherwise
mutually agreed to by the Board and the subdivider, make findings of fact on the application, and
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the fact and reasons for any conditions or denial.
H. When granting approval to a preliminary Plan, the Board shall state the conditions of such approval,
if any, with respect to:
1. The specific changes which it will require in the Final Plan.
2. The character and extent of the required improvements for which waivers may have been
requested and which in the Board's opinion may be waived without jeopardy to the public health,
safety, and general welfare; and 12
Article VII. Preliminary Plan for Major Subdivision
pre-requisite to the approval of the Final Plan.
Approval of a Preliminary Plan shall not constitute approval of the Final Plan or intent to approve the
Final Plan, but rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the design of the Preliminary
Plan as a guide to the preparation of the Final Plan. The Final Plan shall be submitted for approval
of the Board upon fulfillment of the requirements of this Ordinance and the conditions of preliminary
approval, if any. Prior to the approval of the Final Plan, the Board may require additional changes
as a result of the further study of the Subdivision or as a result of new information received.
7.2 Submissions
A. Location Map: The Preliminary Plan shall be accompanied by a Location Map adequate to show
the relationship of the Proposed Subdivision with the municipality. The Location Map shall show:
1. Existing subdivisions in the proximity of the proposed Subdivision.
2. Locations and names of existing and proposed streets.
3. Boundaries and designations of zoning districts.
4. An outline of the Proposed Subdivision and any remaining portion of the owner's property if the
Preliminary Plan submitted covers only a portion of the owner's entire contiguous holding.
B. Preliminary Plan: The Preliminary Plan shall be submitted in three (3) copies of one or more
maps or drawings which may be printed or reproduced on paper, with all dimensions shown in feet
or decimals of a foot. The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn to a scaled of not more than one
hundred (100) feet to the inch. The Board may allow plans for Subdivisions containing more than
one hundred (100) acres to be drawn at a scale of not more than two hundred (200) feet to the
inch provided all necessary details can easily be read. In addition, the subdivider may be required
to furnish one copy of the Plan(s) reduced to a size of 8 1/2 x 11 inches or 11 X 17 inches, and all
accompanying information be mailed to each Board member no less than seven (7) days prior to
the meeting. The following information shall either be shown on the Preliminary Plan or
accompany the application for preliminary approval"
1. Proposed name of the Subdivision and the name of the municipality in which it is located, plus
the Tax Assessor's Map and Lot numbers.
2. Verification of right, title, or interest in the property.
3. A statement of financial and technical capability needed to complete this project.
4. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by
bearings and distances, made and certified by a licensed land surveyor. The corners of the tract
shall be located on the ground and marked by monuments.
5. A copy of the deed from which the survey was based. A copy of all covenants or deed
restrictions, easements, rights-of-way, or other encumbrances currently affecting the property.
6. A copy of any covenants or deed restrictions intended to cover all or part of the lots in the
Subdivision.
7. Contour lines at the interval specified by the Planning Board, showing elevations in relation
to mean Sea Level. 13
8. The number of acres within the proposed Subdivision, location of property lines, existing
buildings, water courses, vegetative cover type, and other essential existing physical features.
9. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the Subdivision.
a. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by connection to the public sewer, a letter
from the Sewer Department indicating there is adequate capacity within the department's
system to transport and treat the sewage shall be submitted.
b. When sewage disposal is to be accomplished by subsurface sewage disposal systems,
test pit analysis, prepared by a Licensed Site Evaluator shall be provided. A map showing
the location of all test pits dug on the site shall be submitted.
10. Indication of the type of water supply system(s) to be used in the Subdivision.
When water is to be supplied by public water supply, a letter from the servicing water district
shall be submitted indicating there is adequate supply and pressure for the Subdivision.
11. The date the Plan was prepared, magnetic north point, graphic map scale, names and
addresses of the record owner, subdivider, and individual or company who prepared the Plan. If the
subdivider is not the owner of the property, evidence of the subdivider's right, title or interest to the
property.
12. The names and addresses of owners of record of adjacent property, including any property
directly across an existing public street from the Subdivision.
13. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the Subdivision.
14. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage
ways on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
15. The location, names, and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways,
easements, building lines, parks and other open spaces on or adjacent to the Subdivision.
16. The width and location of any street or public improvements shown upon the Official Map and
the Comprehensive Plan, if any, within the Subdivision.
17. The proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot areas.
18. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and the conditions of such
dedication.
19. The location of any open space to be preserved and a description of proposed improvement
and management.
20. A copy of that portion of the County Soil Survey covering the Subdivision. When the medium
intensity soil survey shows soils which are generally unsuitable for the uses proposed, the Board
may require the submittal of a report by a Registered Soil Scientist or Registered Professional
Engineer experienced in geotechnics, indicating the suitability of soil conditions for those uses.
21. If any portion if the Subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard
areas and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated on the Plan.
22. A hydrogeologic assessment may be required for developments which meet all of the
following criteria: 14
a. On-site subsurface wastewater disposal;
b. Project is located on a sand and gravel deposit;
c. On-site potable water supply sells; and
d. Any of the lots are less than 80,000 square feet in size.
NOTE: There may be special circumstances which do not meet all the criteria listed above for
which a hydrogeologic assessment may be required.
The hydrogeologic assessment should include at a minimum the information as described
in Paragraph 11.10.
23. An estimate of the amount and type of vehicular traffic to be generated in a daily basis and
at peak hours.
24. For Subdivisions involving forty (40) or more parking spaces or projected to generate more
than 400 vehicle trips per day, a traffic impact analysis, prepared by a registered Professional
Engineer with experience in traffic, types of vehicles expected, effect upon the level of service
of the street giving access to the site and neighboring streets which may be affected, and
recommended improvements to maintain the desired level of service on the affected streets.
Trip generation rates used shall be the mean value reported in I.T.E. Trip Generation Manual 4th
edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
15
8.1 Procedure
A. The Subdivider shall, within six (6) months after the approval of the Preliminary Plan, file with the
Board an application for approval of the Final Plan at least Seven (7) days prior to a schedule
meeting of the Board. If the application for the Final Plan is not submitted within six (6) months
after Preliminary Plan approval, the Board may refuse without prejudice to act on the Final Plan.
The Final Plan shall approximate the layout shown on the Preliminary Plan, plus any recommenddations
made by the Board.
B. All applications for Final Plan approval for Major Subdivision shall be accompanied by an application
fee of $20. per lot or dwelling unit payable by check to the municipality. If a public hearing is
deemed necessary by the Board, an additional fee shall be required to cover the costs of
advertising and postal notification.
C. Prior to submittal of the Final Plan application, the following approvals shall be obtained in writing,
where appropriate:
1. Maine Department of Environmental Protection, under the Site Location of Development Act,
Fresh Water Wetlands Act, Alteration of Streams and Rivers Act, or if a Wastewater Discharge
License is needed.
2. Maine Department of Human Services, if the subdivider proposes to provide a central water
supply system.
3. Maine Department of Human Services, if a centralized or shared subsurface sewage disposal
system(s) is to be utilized.
D. The subdivider, or his duly authorized representative, shall attend the meeting of the Board to discuss
the Final Plan.
E. Upon determining that a complete application has been submitted for review, the Board shall issue
a dated receipt to the subdivider. The Board shall determine whether to hold a public hearing on the
Final Plan application. All owners of abutting property may be notified, in writing, that a Final
Plan application for Subdivision approval has been submitted.
F. A public hearing may be held by the Planning Board within thirty (30) days after the issuance of a
receipt for the submittal of a complete application. This hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper
of local circulation at least two (2) times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7)
days before the hearing and the notice of the hearing shall be posted in at least three (3)
prominent places at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing.
When a subdivision is located within 500 feet of a municipality boundary, and a public hearing is to
to be held, the Planning Board shall notify the Clerk and the Planning Board of the adjacent municipality
involved, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
G. The Planning Board shall notify the Road Commissioner, School Superintendent, Police Chief,
and Fire Chief of the proposed Subdivision, the number of dwelling units proposed, the length of
roadways, and the size and construction characteristics of any multi-family, commercial or industrial
buildings. The Planning Board shall request that these officials comment upon the adequacy
of their department's existing capital facilities to serve the proposed Subdivision.
H. Before the Board grants approval of the Final Plan, the subdivider shall meet the Performance
Guarantee requirements contained in Article XIII.
16
Article VIII. Final Plan for Major Subdivision
If the Subdivision is located in more than one municipality, there shall be a joint meeting of the
Planning Board(s) of the adjacent municipality to discuss the Plan.
J. The Board, within thirty (30) days from the public hearing or within sixty (60) days of receiving a
complete application, if no hearing is held, shall make findings of fact, and conclusions relative to
the standards contained in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4551, Subsection 3 and in this Ordinance.
If the Board finds that all standards of the Statute and this Ordinance have been met, they shall
approve the Final Plan. If the Board finds that any of the standards of the Statute and this
Ordinance have not been met, the Board shall either deny the application or approve the application
with conditions to ensure all of the standards will be met by the Subdivision. The reason for any
conditions shall be stated in the records of the Board.
8.2 Submissions
The Final Plan shall consist of one or more maps or drawings drawn to a scale of not more than one hundred
(100') feet to the inch. Plans for Subdivisions containing more than one hundred (100) acres may be drawn at a
scale of not more than two hundred (200') feet to the inch provided all necessary detail can easily be read.
Plans shall be no larger than 24 by 36 inches in size, and shall have a margin of two (2') inches outside of the
border line on the left side for binding and a one (1") inch margin outside the border along the remaining sides.
Space shall be reserved on the plan for endorsement by the Board. Two reproducible, stable based transparent
originals, one to be recorded at the Registry of Deeds, the other to be filed at the Municipal Offices,
and three (3) copies of the Plan shall be submitted. The subdivider may, instead submit one reproducible
stable based transparent original of the Final Plan and one Recording Plan with three(3) copies of the Final
Plan. In addition, one copy of the Final Plan, reduced to a Size of 8 1/2 X 11 inches or 11x17 inches, and all
accompanying information shall be mailed to each Board member no less than seven (7) days prior to the
meeting.
The application for approval of the Final Plan shall include the following information:
A. Proposed name of the Subdivision and the name of the municipality it is located, plus the
Assessor's Map and Lot numbers.
B. An actual field survey of the boundary lines of the tract, giving complete descriptive data by
bearings and distances, made and certified by a license land surveyor. The corners of the tract
shall be located on the ground and marked by monuments. The Plan shall indicate the type of
monument set or found at each lot corner.
C. The number of acres within the proposed Subdivision, location of property lines, existing buildings,
watercourses, and other essential existing physical features.
D. Indication of the type of sewage disposal to be used in the Subdivision. When sewage disposal
is to be accomplished by connection to the public sewer, a written statement for the Sewer
Department indicating the Department has reviewed and approved the sewerage design shall be
submitted.
E. Indication of the type of water supply(s) to be used in the Subdivision.
1. When water is to be public water supply, a written statement from the servicing water district
shall be submitted indicating the district has reviewed and approved the water system design. A
written statement shall be submitted from the Fire Chief approving all hydrant locations or other
fire protection measures deemed necessary.
2. When water is to be supplied by private wells evidence of adequate ground water supply and
quality shall be submitted by a written statement from either a well driller 17
or a Hydrogeologist familiar with the area.
F. The date the Plan was prepared. Magnetic and true north point, graphic map scale, names and
addresses of the record owner, subdivider, and individual or company who prepared the Plan.
G. The location of any zoning boundaries affecting the Subdivision.
H. The location and size of existing and proposed sewers, water mains, culverts, and drainage ways
on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided.
I. The location, names, and present widths of existing and proposed streets, highways, easements,
building lines, parks, and other open spaces on or adjacent to the Subdivision. The Plan shall
contain sufficient data to allow the location bearing and length of every street line, lot line, and
boundary line to be readily determined and be reproduced upon the ground. These lines shall be
tied to reference points previously established. The length of all straight lines, the deflection
angles radii, length of curves and central angles of curves, tangent distances and tangent bearings
for each street shall be included.
J. A Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan, prepared in accordance with the standards
contained in the latest revised edition of the Environmental Quality Handbook published by
the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
K. A plan for the disposal surface drainage waters prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer,
in accordance with the latest revised edition of Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, published by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
L. The width and location of any streets or public improvements shown upon the Official Map and the
Comprehensive Plan, if any, within the Subdivision.
M. All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public uses and the conditions of such dedication.
Written offers of cession to the municipality of all public open spaces shown on the Plan, and
copies of agreements or other documents showing the manner in which open spaces to be
retained by the developer or lot owners are to be maintained shall be submitted.
N. A list of construction items with cost estimates that will be completed by the developer prior to the
sale of lots. A separate list of construction and maintenance items, with both capital and annual
operating cost estimates, that must be financed by the municipality, or quasi-municipal districts.
These list shall include but not be limited to:
Schools, including busing.
Street maintenance and snow removal.
Police and fire protection.
Solid waste disposal.
Recreation facilities.
Storm water drainage.
Wastewater treatment
Water supply
The developer shall provide an estimate of the net increase in taxable assessed valuation at the
completion of the Subdivision.
O. If any portion of the Subdivision is in a flood-prone area, the boundaries of any flood hazard areas
and the 100-year flood elevation shall be delineated to the Plan. 18
8.3 Final Approval and Filing
A. No Plan shall be approved by the Planning Board as long as the subdivider is in default on a
previously approved Plan.
B. Upon findings of fact and determination that all Standards in Title 30-A, M.R.S.A>, Section 4551,
subsection 3, and this Ordinance have been met, and upon voting to approve the Subdivision, the
Board shall sign the Final Plan. The Board shall specify in writing its findings of fact and reasons
for any conditions or denial. One copy of the signed Plan shall be retained by the Board as part
or its permanent records. One copy of the signed Plan shall be forwarded to the Tax Assessor.
One copy of the signed Plan shall be forwarded to the Code Enforcement Officer. Any Subdivision
not recorded in the Registry of Deeds within ninety (90) days of the date upon which the Plan is
approved and signed by the Board shall become null and void.
C. At the time the Board grants Final Plan approval, it may permit the Plan to be divided into two or
more sections subject to any conditions the Board deems necessary in order to insure the orderly
development of the Plan. If any municipal or quasi-municipal department head notified of the
Proposed Subdivision informs the Board that their department of district does not have adequate
capital facilities to service the Subdivision, the Board shall require the Plan to be divided into two or
more section subject to any conditions the Board deems necessary in order to allow the orderly
planning, financial and provision of public services to the Subdivision.
D. No changes, erasures, modifications, or revisions shall be made in any Final Plan after approval
has been given by the Planning Board and endorsed in writing on the Plan, unless the revised
Final Plan is first submitted and the Board approves any modifications, except in accordance with
Article IX. The Board shall make findings that the revised plan meets the Standards of Title 30-A,
M.R.S.A>, Section 451. subsection 3, and this Ordinance. In the event that a plan is recorded
without complying with this requirement, it shall be considered null and void, and the Board shall
institute proceedings to have the Plan stricken from the records of the Registry of Deeds.
E. The approval by the Board of a Subdivision Plan shall not be deemed to constitute or be evidence
of any acceptance by the municipality of any street, easement, or other open space shown on
such Plan. When a park, playground, or other recreational area shall have been shown on the Plan
to be dedicated to the municipality, approval of the Plan shall not constitute an acceptance by the
municipality of such areas. The Board shall require the Plan contain to appropriate notes to this
effect. The applicant and Municipal Officers covering future deed and title dedication, and provision
fot the cost of grading, development, equipment, and maintenance of any such dedicated area.
F. Failure to commence substantial construction of the Subdivision within five (5) years of the date of
approval and signing the Plan shall render the Plan null and void. Upon determining that a Subdivision's
approval has expired under this paragraph, the Board shall have a notice placed in the
Registry of Deeds to that effect.
Above has been replaced with: "Failure to construct at least SEVENTY-FIVE (75%) per
cent of the infrastructure within TWO (2) years from the date of approval of a Subdivision
Final Plan, shall require a review and reapproval of said Final Plan by the Planning
Board; or shall be subject to being null and void.
The above mentioned infrastructure shall include any roads, sanitary/storm drainage system, water
supply, and other standards as stated in the approved Final Plan and recorded at the Registry of
Deeds.
Also, the Planning Board may extend the above mentioned TWO (2) year period, if the size of subdivision
project merits longer time for completion of infrastructure." (Approved by Town Council
Aug. 21, 1991) 19
9.1 Procedure
An applicant for a revision to a previously approved Plan shall, at least seven (7) days prior to a scheduled
meeting of the Board, request to be placed on the Board's agenda. If the revision involves the creation of
additional lots or dwelling units, the procedures for Preliminary Plan approval shall be followed. If the
revision involves only modifications of the approved Plan, without the creation of additional lots or dwelling
units, the procedures for Final Plan approval shall be followed.
9.2 Submissions
The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved Plan, as well as three (3) copies of the proposed revisions.
The application shall also include enough supporting information to allow the Board to make a determination
that the proposed revisions meet the standards of this Ordinance.
9.3 Scope of Review
The Board's scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the Plan which are proposed to be changed.
20
Article IX. Revisions to Approved Plans
10.1 Inspection or Required Improvements
A. At least five (5) days prior to commencing each major phase of construction or required improvements,
the subdivider or builder shall:
Notify the Code Enforcement Officer in writing of the time when he proposes to commence construction
of such improvements, so that the Municipal Officers can cause inspection to be made to
assure that all municipal specifications and requirements shall be met during the construction of
required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion of improvements and
utilities required by the Board.
B. If the inspecting official finds upon inspection of the improvements that any of the required improvements
have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed by the
subdivider, he shall so report in writing to the Municipal Officers, Planning Board, and the subdivider
or builder. The Municipal Officers shall take any steps necessary to preserve the
municipality's rights.
C. If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it appears to be
necessary or desirable to modify the required improvements, the inspecting official is authorized to
approve minor modifications due to unforeseen circumstances such as encountering hidden out
crops of bedrock, natural springs, etc. The inspecting official in writing shall transmit a copy of the
approval to the Board. Revised plans shall be filed with the Town. For major modifications, such
as relocations of rights-of-way, property boundaries, changes of grade by more than one percent
(1%), etc., the subdivider shall obtain permission to modify the Plans from the Board.
D. At the close of each summer construction season the Town shall, at the expense of the Subdivider,
have the site inspected by a qualified individual. Bu December 1 of each year during which
construction was done on the site, the inspector shall submit a report to the Board based on that
inspection, addressing whether storm water and erosion control measures (both temporary and
permanent) are in place, are properly installed, and appear adequate to do the job they were
designed for. The report shall also include a discussion and recommendations on any problems
which were encountered. No road construction shall be performed from December 1 through
April 1 without permission of the Public Works Director. (Amended 9/13/90).
E. Prior to the sale of any lot, the subdivider shall provide the Board with a letter from a Registered
Land Surveyor, stating that all monumentation shown on the Plan has been installed.
F. Upon completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Municipal Officers to submit a
proposed town way at Town Meeting, a written certification signed by a professional engineer
registered in the State of Maine shall be submitted to the Municipal Officers at the expense of the
applicant, certifying that the proposed town way meet or exceeds the design and construction
requirements of this Ordinance. If there are any underground utilities, the servicing utility shall
certify in writing that they have been installed in a manner acceptable to the utility.
G. The subdivider or builder shall be required to maintain all improvements and provide for snow removal
on streets and sidewalks until acceptance of the improvements by the municipality.
10.2 Violations and Enforcement
A. No Plan of a division of land within the municipality which would constitute a Subdivision shall be
recorded in the Registry of Deeds until a Final Plan has been approved by the 21
Article X. Enforcement
Board in accordance with this Ordinance.
B. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or agree to convey any land in a
Subdivision which has not been approved by the Board and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
C. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may convey, offer or agree to convey any land in
an approved Subdivision which is not shown on the Final Plan as a Separate lot.
D. Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who conveys, offers or agrees to convey any land
in a Subdivision which has not been approved as required by this Ordinance shall be punished by a
fine of not less than $100, and not more than $2,500 for each such conveyance, offering or
agreement. The Municipality may institute proceedings to enjoin the violation of this Section, and
may collect attorney's fees and court costs if it is the prevailing party.
E. No public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind shall serve any
lot in a Subdivision for which a Final Plan has not been approved by the Board.
F. Development of a Subdivision without Board approval shall be a violation of law. Development
includes grading or construction of roads, grading of land or lots, or construction of buildings which
require a Final Plan approved as provided in this Ordinance and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
G. No lot in a Subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed before the street upon which
the lot fronts is completed in accordance with this Ordinance up to and
including the entire frontage of the lot. No unit in a multi-family development shall be occupied
before the street upon which the unit is accessed is complete in accordance with this Ordinance.
22
In reviewing applications for a subdivision, the Board shall consider the following General Standards and make
findings that each has been met prior to the approval of a Final Plan. In all instances the burden of proof shall
be upon the applicant.
11.1 Conformance with Comprehensive Plan. All proposed Subdivisions shall be in conformity with the
Comprehensive Plan or policy statement of the municipality and with the provisions of all pertinent State and
local codes and Ordinance.
11.2 Retention of Open Spaces and Natural or Historic Features.
A. The Plan shall, by notes on the Final Plan and deed restrictions, limit the clearing of all trees to
those areas designated on the Plan.
B. The Board may require the reservation of up to ten percent (10%) of the area of the Subdivision as
open space. In determining the need for open space the Board shall consider the proximity of the
Subdivision to the neighboring dedicated open space or recreation facilities or scenic or natural
beauty of the area; the needs identified in the municipal Comprehensive Plan or Recreation Plan
for open space or recreation facilities in the neighborhood surrounding the Subdivision; the type of
development and the demographic characteristics of potential residents in the Subdivision; and
the density of lot sizes of the development.
C. Land reserved for Open Space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and location suitable
for the particular use intended. (A site intended to be used for active recreation purposes, such as
a playground or a play field, should be relatively level and dry.)
D. Reserved land acceptable to the Town and subdivider may be dedicated to the municipality as a
condition of approval.
E. The Board may acquire that the Development Plans include a Landscape Plan, that shall show the
replacement of trees and vegetation, graded contours, streams and the preservation of scenic
historic or environmentally significant areas. Cutting of trees on the northerly boarders of lots
should be avoided as far as possible, to retain a natural wind buffer.
F. If the proposed Subdivision contains any identified historical or archeological sites, or any area
identified in the Comprehensive Plan or by the Maine Critical Areas Program as rare and irreplaceable
natural areas, these areas shall be included in the open space, or suitably protected by
appropriate covenants and management plans.
11.3 Blocks. Where street lengths exceed 1,000 feet between intersections with other streets, the Board
may require an utility/pedestrian easement, to provide for underground utility crossings and/or a pedestrian
pathway of at least five (5') feet in width constructed in accordance with design Standards in Section 12.2K.
Maintenance obligations of the easement shall be included in the written description of the easement.
11.4 Lots.
A. All lots shall meet the minimum requirements of the Town of Fairfield Land Use Ordinance.
B. Lot configuration and area shall be designed to provide for adequate off-street parking and service
facilities based upon the type of development contemplated. 23
Article XI. General Standards
C. Lots with multiple frontages shall be avoided wherever possible. When lots do have frontage on two
(2) or more roads, the Plan, and deed restrictions shall indicate vehicular access shall be located
on the less traveled way.
D. Wherever possible, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the street.
E. If a lot on one side of a stream, road or other similar barrier fails to meet the minimum requirements
for lot size, it may be combined with a lot on the other side of the stream, or road to meet the
minimum lot size.
F. Flag lots and other odd shaped lots in which narrow strips are joined to other parcel in order to
meet minimum lot size requirements are prohibited.
G. Lots shall be numbered in such a manner as to facilitate mail delivery. Even numbers shall be
assigned to lots on one side of the street, and odd numbers on the opposite side. Where the
proposed Subdivision contains the extension of an existing street or street approved by the
Board, but not yet constructed, the lot numbers shall correspond with the existing lot numbers.
11.5 Utilities. Any underground utilities shall be installed prior to the installation of the final gravel base of
the road.
11.6 Require Improvements. The following improvements are required for all Subdivisions unless waived
by the Board in accordance with provisions of this Ordinance:
A. Monuments:
1. Stone monuments shall be set at all street intersections.
2. Iron Pins shall be set at all comers and angle points of the Subdivision boundaries where the
interior angle of the Subdivision boundaries is 135 feet or less.
3. Stone monuments shall be a minimum of six (6") inches square at the top and six (6') feet
in length, and set in the ground at final grade level. After they are set, drill holes, 1/2 inch deep
shall locate the point or points described above.
4. All other Subdivision boundary corners and angle points, as well as all lot boundary corners
and angle points shall be marked by suitable monumentation.
5. Drill hole in bedrock may be required in areas not suitable to the placement of monuments.
B. Water Supply:
1. When a Subdivision is to be served by a public water system, the complete supply system,
including fire hydrants, shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider.
a. The subdivider shall provide a written statement from the servicing water company or
district that adequate water for both domestic and fire fighting purposes can be provided
without placing an undue burden on the source, treatment facilities or distribution system
involved. The subdivider shall be responsible for paying the costs of system improvements
necessary to serve the Subdivision.
b. The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service connections shall be
reviewed and approved in writing by the servicing water company or district and the Fire
Chief. 24
2. When location of a Subdivision does not allow for a financially reasonable connection to a
public water supply system, the Planning Board may allow the use of individual wells or a private
community water system.
a. Dug wells shall be permitted only if it is demonstrated to be not economically feasible to
develop other ground water sources, and shall be constructed so as to prevent infiltration
of surface water into the well. Unless otherwise permitted by the Board, the subdivider
shall prohibit dug wells by deed restrictions and a note on the Plan.
b. If a central water supply system is provided by the subdivider, the location and protection
of the source, and the design, construction and operation of the system and shall
conform to the Standards of the Maine Rules Relating to Drinking Water (10-44
A.C.M.R. 231).
c. The subdivider shall construct ponds and dry hydrants to provide for adequate water
storage for fire fighting purposes. An easement shall be granted to the municipality
granting access to the dry hydrants where necessary. The Board may waive the
requirement for fire ponds only upon submittal of evidence that the soil types in the
Subdivision will not permit their construction.
C. Sewage Disposal
1. Public System:
a. A sanitary sewer system shall be installed at the expense of the subdivider when there is
a public sanitary sewer line located within 1,000 feet of the proposed Subdivision at its
nearest point. The Sewer Department shall certify that providing service to the proposed
Subdivision is within the capacity of the system's collection and treatment system.
b. The Sewer Department shall review and approve in writing the construction drawings for
the sewage system.
2. Private Systems: The developer shall submit evidence of soil suitability for subsurface
sewage disposal prepared by a Maine Licensed Site Evaluator in full compliance with the
requirements of the State of Maine Subsurface Wastewater Disposal Rules.
D. Surface Drainage: The Storm Water Management Plans submitted in accordance with section
12.4 shall be installed.
11.7 Land Features.
A. Topsoil shall be considered part of the Subdivision and shall not be removed from the site except
for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations.
B. Except for normal thinning, landscaping, and cutting trees to provide access to direct sunlight,
existing vegetation shall be left intact to prevent soil erosion and to minimize storm water runoff.
C. To prevent soil erosion of shoreline areas, tree cutting in a strip extending one hundred feet (100')
inland from the high water mark of any waterbody shall be limited in accordance with the following:
1. No more than thirty (30%) percent of the total length of the strip on each lot shall be cleared.
2. the removal of trees shall not create any single clear-cut opening greater than thirty (30') feet
wide. Adjacent openings shall be separated by a distance of at least seventy (70') feet. 25
3. In the remaining seventy (70%) percent length of the strip, no trees larger than four (4") inches
diameter at four (4') feet height shall be cut, and sufficient cover to preserve natural beauty and
control erosion shall remain.
11.8 Dedication and Maintenance of Common Open Space and Services.
A. All common land facilities and property shall be owned jointly or in common by the owners of the
dwelling units by means of a Homeowners Association, by an association which has its principle
purpose the conservation or preservation of land in essentially its natural condition, or by the
municipality.
B. Further Subdivision of the common land or its use for other than non-commercial recreation or
conservation purposes, except for easements for underground utilities, shall be prohibited. Structures
and buildings accessory to non-commercial recreational or conservation uses may be
erected on the common land.
C. The common open space shall be shown on the Final Plan with appropriate notation on the Plan
to indicate that:
1. It shall not be used for future building lots; and
2. A part or all of the common open space may be dedicated for acceptance by the municipality.
D. If any or all of the common open space and services are to be reserved for use by the residents, the
by-laws of the proposed Homeowners Association shall specify maintenance responsibilities and
shall be submitted to the Board prior to Final Plan approval.
E. Covenants for mandatory membership in the Homeowners Association setting forth the owners'
rights, interests, and privileges in the Association and the common property, shall be reviewed by
the Board and included in the deed for each lot or dwelling.
F. The Homeowners Association shall have the responsibility of maintain the common property.
G. The Association shall levy annual charges against all owners of dwelling units to defray the
expenses connected with the maintenance of common property and tax assessments.
11.9 Construction in Flood Hazard Areas. When any part of a Subdivision is located in a special flood
hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the Plan shall indicate that all
principle structures on lots in the Subdivision shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement,
at least one foot (1') above the 100-year flood elevation. Such a restriction shall be included in the deed
to any lot which is included or partially included in the flood area.
11.10 Impact on Ground Water.
A. When a hydrogeologic assessment is submitted, the assessment shall contain at least the
following information:
1. A map showing the basic soils types.
2. The depth to the water table at representative points throughout the Subdivision.
3. Drainage conditions throughout the Subdivision.
26
4. Data on the existing ground water quality, either from test wells in the Subdivision or from
existing wells on neighboring properties.
5. An analysis and evaluation of the effect of the Subdivision on ground water resources. In the
case of residential developments, the evaluation shall, at a minimum, include a projection of post
development nitrate-nitrogen concentrations at any wells within the Subdivision, at the Subdivision
boundaries and at a distance of 500 feet from potential contamination sources, whichever is a
shorter distance.
6. A map showing the location of any subsurface wastewater disposal systems and drinking
water wells within the Subdivision and within 200 feet of the Subdivision boundaries.
B. Projections of ground water quality shall be based on the assumption of draught conditions
(assuming sixty (60%) percent of annual average precipitation).
C. No Subdivision shall increase any contaminant concentration in the ground water to more than
one-half of the Primary Drinking Water Standards. No subdivision shall increase any contaminant
concentration in the ground water to more than the Secondary Drinking Water Standards.
D. If ground water contains contaminants in excess of the primary standards, and the Subdivision is to
be served by on-site ground water supplies, the applicant shall demonstrate how water quality will
be improved or treated.
E. Subsurface waste water disposal systems and drinking water wells shall be constructed as shown
on the map submitted with the assessment. If construction standards for drinking water wells are
recommended in the assessment, those standards shall be included as a note on the Final Plan,
and as restrictions in the deeds to the affected lots.
11.11 Access Control and Traffic impacts.
A. General: Provision shall be made for vehicular access to the Subdivision and circulation within
the Subdivision in such a manner as to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians in
existing streets and within the Subdivision, to avoid traffic congestion on any street and to provide
safe and convenient circulation on public streets and within the Subdivision. More specifically,
access and circulation shall also conform to the following standards and design criteria below:
1. The vehicular access to the Subdivision shall be arranged to avoid traffic use of existing local
residential streets.
2. Where a lot has frontage in two or more streets, the access to the lot shall be provided to the
the lot across the frontage and to the street where there is lesser potential for traffic congestion
and for hazards to traffic and pedestrians.
3. The street giving access to the Subdivision and neighboring streets which can be expected to
carry traffic to and from the Subdivision shall have traffic carrying capacity and be suitably improved
to accommodate the amount and types of traffic generated to the proposed Subdivision. No Subdivision
shall increase the volume capacity ratio of any street above 0.8 nor reduce the street's
Level of Service to "D" or below.
4. Where necessary to safeguard against hazards to traffic and pedestrians and/or to avoid traffic
congestion, provision shall be made for turning lanes, traffic directional islands, frontage roads, and
traffic controls within public streets. 27
5. Access ways shall be of a design and have sufficient capacity to avoid queuing of entering
vehicles on any street.
6. Where topographic and other conditions allow, provisions shall be made for circulation access
connections to adjoining lots of similar existing or potential use:
a. When such access connection will facilitate fire protection services as approved by the
Fire Chief; or
b. when such services will enable the public to travel between two existing or potential
uses, generally open to the public, without need to travel upon a street.
B. Subdivision Access Design for Subdivision Entering onto Arterial Streets. When the access
to a Subdivision is a street, the street design and construction standards of Article XII shall be met.
Where there is a conflict between the Standards in this Section and the Standards of Article XII,
the stricter or more stringent shall apply.
1. General: Access design shall be based on the estimated volume using the access classificatiion
defined below:
a. Low Volume Access: Less than twenty-five (25) vehicle trips per day.
b. Medium Volume Access: Any access that is not a low volume or high volume access.
c. High Volume Access: Peak hour volume of 400 vehicles or greater.
2. Sight Distances: Accesses shall be designed in profile and grading and located to provide
the required sight distance measured in each direction. Sight distances shall be measured from
the driver's seat of a vehicle a minimum of ten (10') feet behind the curb line or edge of shoulder,
with the height of the eye 3 1/2 feet, to the top of an object 4 1/2 feet above the pavement. The
required sight distances are listed below for various posted speed limits.
a. Two Lane Roads: a sight distance of ten (10') feet for each mile per hour of posted
speed limit shall be maintained or provided.
b. Four Lane Roads: The sight distance provided below are based on passenger cars
exiting from accesses onto four lane roads and are designed to enable exiting
vehicles:
(1) Upon turning left or right to accelerate to the operating speed of the street without
causing approaching vehicles to reduce speed by more than ten (10) miles per hour, and
(2) Upon turning left, to clear the near half of the street without conflicting with vehicles
approaching from the left.
Operating Safe Sight Safe Sight
Speed Distance- Distance-
(mph) Left (ft) Right (ft)
20 130 130
30 220 260
40 380 440
50 620 700
3. Vertical Alignment: Accesses shall be flat enough to prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
Low volume accesses shall slope upward or downward from the gutter line on a straight
slope of two percent (2%) or less for at least twenty-five (25') feet followed by a slope of 28
no greater than ten (10%) percent for the next fifty (50') feet. The maximum grade over the entire
length shall not exceed fifteen (15%) percent. Medium and high volume accesses should slope
upward or downward from the gutter line on a straight slope of two (2%) percent or less for at
least twenty-five (25') feet. Following this landing area, the steepest grade on the access shall
not exceed eight (8%) percent.
4. Low Volume Access:
a. Skew Angle: Low volume accesses shall be two-way operation and shall intersect the
road at an angle as nearly ninety (90) degrees as site conditions permit, but in no less
than sixty (60) degrees.
b. Curb Radius: The curb radius shall be between five (5') feet and fifteen (15') feet, with
a preferred radius of ten (10') feet.
c. Access Width: The width of the access shall be between twelve (12') feet and sixteen
(16') feet, with a preferred width of sixteen (16') feet.
d. Curb-Cut Width: Curb-cut width shall be between twenty-two (22') feet and fortysix
(46') feet, with a preferred width of thirty-six (36') feet.
5. Medium Volume Accesses:
a. Skew Angle: Medium Volume Accesses shall be eight one-way or two-way operation
and shall intersect the road at an angle as nearly ninety (90) degrees as site conditions
permit, but in no case less than sixty (60) degrees.
b. Curb Radius: Curb radii will vary depending if the access is one-way or two-way
operation. On a two-way access the curb radii shall be between twenty-five (25')
and forty (40') feet, with a preferred radius of thirty (30') feet. On one-way accesses,
the curb radii shall be thirty (30') feet for right turns into and out of the site, with a five
(5') foot radius on the opposite curb.
c. Width: On a two-way access the width shall be between twenty-four (24') feet and
twenty-six (26') feet, with a preferred width of twenty-six (26') feet, however, where
truck traffic is anticipated, the width may be no more than thirty (30') feet. On a
one-way access the width shall be between sixteen (16') feet and Twenty (20') feet,
with a preferred width of sixteen (16') feet.
d. Curb-Cut Width: On a two-way access the curb-cut width shall be between seventyfour
(74') feet and one hundred-ten (110') feet with a preferred width of a eighty-six
(86') feet. On a one-way access the curb-cut width shall be between forty-six (46')
feet and seventy (70') feet with a preferred width of fifty-one (51') feet.
6. High Volume Access:
a. Skew Angle: High volume Accesses shall intersect the road at an angle as nearly
ninety (90) degrees as site conditions permit, but in no case less than sixty (60)
degrees.
b. Curb Radius: Without channelization islands for right-turn movements into and out of
the site, the curb radii shall be between thirty (30') feet and fifty (50') feet. With
channelization, the curb radii shall be between seventy-five (75') feet and one hundred
(100') feet. 29
c. Curb-Cut width: Without channelization, curb-cut width shall be between one hundred
six (106') feet and one hundred sixty-two (162') feet with a preferred width of onehundred
fifty-four (154') feet. With channelization, the curb-cut width shall be between
one hundred ninety-six (196') feet and two hundred sixty-two (262') feet with a
preferred width of two hundred fifty-four (254') feet.
d. Entering and exiting accesses shall be separated by a raised median which shall be
between six (6') feet and ten (10') feet in width. Medians separating traffic flows shall
be no less than twenty-five (25') feet in length, with a preferred length of one hundred
(100') feet.
e. Width: Access widths shall be between twenty (20') feet and twenty-six (26') feet on
each side of the median, with a preferred width of twenty-four (24') feet. Right turn
only lanes established by a channelization island shall be between sixteen (16') feet
and twenty (20') feet, with a preferred width of twenty (20') feet.
f. Appropriate traffic control signage shall be erected at the intersection of the access
and the street and on medians and channelization islands.
7. Special Case Accesses: Special case accesses are one-way or two-way drives serving
medium or high volume uses with partial access (right turn only) permitted. These accesses are
appropriate on roadway segments where there is a raised median and no median breaks are
provided opposite the proposed access. These accesses are usually located along the approach
to major signalized intersections where a raised median may be provided to protect left turning
vehicles and separate opposing traffic flows.
a. Perpendicular driveways:
(1) Curb Radii: Curb radii shall be between thirty (30') feet and fifty (50') feet, with a
preferred radius of fifty (50') feet.
(2) Access Width: Access width shall be between twenty-six (26') feet and thirty
(30') feet with a preferred width of thirty (30') feet. On two-way accesses, a triangular
channelization island shall be provided at the intersection with the street. On each side
of the island the one way drive shall be between fifteen (15') feet and twenty-four (24')
feet with a preferred width of twenty (20') feet.
(3) Curb-cut Width: The total curb-cut width shall be between eighty-six (86') feet and
one hundred thirty (130') feet with a preferred width of one hundred thirty (130') feet.
(4) Channelization Island: The channelization island on two way accesses shall be
raised and curbed corner radii shall be two (2') feet.
b. Skewed Accesses:
(1) Skew Angle: The skew angle shall be between 45 degrees and 60 degrees with a
preferred angle of 45 degrees.
(2) Curb Radii: Curb radii shall be between thirty (30') feet and fifty (50') feet on the
obtuse side of the intersection, with a preferred radius if thirty (30') feet. Curb radii shall
be between five (5') feet and ten (10') feet on the acute side of the intersection with a
preferred radius of five (5') feet.
(3) Access width: The width of the access shall be between fifteen (15') feet and
twenty-four (24') feet with a preferred width of twenty (20') feet. Where entering and
exiting accesses meet, the width shall be between twenty- 30
four (24') feet, with a preferred width if thirty (30') feet.
(4) Curb-Cut Width: The curb-cut width for each access shall be between thirty-five
(35') feet and seventy-five (75') feet with a preferred width of forty-two (42') feet.
C. Access Location and Spacing.
1. Minimum Corner Clearance: Corner clearance shall be measured from the point of tangency
(PT) for the corner to the point of tangency for the access. In general the maximum corner clearance
should be provided as practical based on site constraints. Minimum corner clearances are
listed below based upon access or minor street volume and intersection type.
Minimum Corner Clearance (feet)
Intersection Intersection
Access Type Signalized Unsignalized
Low Volume 150 50
Medium Volume 150 50
High Volume 200 250
Special Case
Right turn in only 50 50
Right turn out only 100 50
Right turn in/out only 100 50
Where the minimum standard for a full access drive cannot be met, only a special case access
shall be permitted.
If based on the above criteria, full access to the site cannot be provided on either major or
minor streets, the site shall be restricted to partial access. Alternately, construction of a
shared access drive with an adjacent parcel is recommended.
2. Access Spacing: Access and street intersections shall be separated from adjacent accesses,
streets and property lines as indicated in the table below, in order to allow major through routes to
effectively serve their primary function of conducting through traffic. This distance shall be measured
from the access point of tangency to the access point of tangency for spacing between
accesses and from the access point of tangency to a projection if the property line at the edge of
the roadway for access spacing to the property line.
SEE CHART PAGE 32
31
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR CORNER CLEARANCE
Minimum Spacing to Adjacent Access by Access
Minimum Type² and (DSP)³
Spacing to
Access Type Property Low Medium High High Special
Line (Dpl)¹ (feet) (feet) w/oRT* w/RT* Case
(feet) (feet) (feet) (feet)
Low Volume 5 ***
Medium Volume 10 75
High Volume
(w/oRT)* 75 75 150
High Volume
(x/RT)** 75 75 250 500
Special Case 10 75 75 75 40****
¹ Dpl measured from point of tangency of access to projection of property line on roadway edge.
² For two (2) more accesses serving a single parcel, or from a proposed access from an existing
access.
³ Dsp measured from point of tangency of access to point of tangency of adjacent access.
* High volume access without right-turn channelization.
** High volume with right-turn channelization.
*** Low volume accesses are not permitted in combination with other access types on a single lot.
**** Right-turn-in-only upstream of right-turn-out-only. Right-turn-out followed by right-turn-in not allowed.
D. Number of Access: The maximum number of accesses onto a single street is controlled by the
available site frontage and the table above. In addition, the following criteria shall limit the number
of accesses independent of frontage length.
1. No low traffic generator shall have more than one two-way access onto a single roadway.
2. No medium or high volume traffic generator shall have more than two (2) two-way accesses or
three (3) accesses in total onto a single roadway.
E. Construction Materials/Paving:
1. All accesses entering a curbed street shall be curbed with materials matching the street curbing.
Sloped curbing is required around all raised channelization islands or medians.
2. All accesses shall be paved with bituminous concrete pavement within the street right-of-way.
All commercial accesses regardless of access volume shall be paved with bituminous concrete
pavement within thirty (30') feet of the street right-of-way.
11.12 Mobile Home Parks. No mobile home park shall be established without submittal of a detailed
developmental design to the Planning Board for Subdivision review and subject to the following minimal
guidelines: 32
MINIMUM ACCESS SPACING
A. The total area of every mobile home park shall consist of at least 5,000 square feet per unit if
served by Town water and sewer, and at least 20,000 square feet per unit if NOT served by Town
water and sewer.
B. Any road within a mobile home park shall be accessible by all emergency vehicles at all times.
C. A proper buffer barrier shall be maintained between the mobile home park and adjacent properties,
as determined by the Planning Board.
D. No mobile home nor service structure shall be permitted within fifty (50') feet of any residential
building located on an adjacent lot.
E. Each mobile home, within a park, shall conform to the Land Use set-back requirements.
33
12.1 General Requirements.
A. The Board shall not approve any Subdivision Plan unless proposed streets and storm water
management are designed in accordance with any local ordinance or the specifications contained
in this ordinance. Approval of the Final Plan by the Board, shall not be deemed to constitute or be
evidence of acceptance by the municipality of any street or easement.
B. Subdividers shall submit to the Board, as part of the Final Plan, detailed construction drawings
showing a Plan view, profile, and typical cross-section of the proposed streets and existing within
300 feet of any proposed intersection. The Plan shall included the following information:
1. Date, scale, and magnetic or true north point.
2. Intersections of the proposed street with existing streets.
3. Roadway and right-of-way limits including edge of pavement, edge of shoulder, sidewalks, and
curbs.
4. Kind, size, location, material, profile and cross-section of all existing and proposed drainage
structures and their location with respect to the existing natural waterways and proposed drainage
ways.
5. Complete curve data shall be indicated for all horizontal and vertical curves.
6. Turning radii at all intersections.
7. Center line gradients.
8. Location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities, to include but not be
limited to water, sewer, electricity, telephone, lighting, and cable television.
C. Upon receipt of plans for a proposed public street, the Board shall forward one copy to the Municipal
Officers, the Road Commissioner, and the Municipal Engineer for review and comment. Plans
for streets which are not proposed to be accepted by the municipality shall be sent to the Municipal
Engineer for review and comment.
D. Where the subdivider proposes improvements within existing public streets, the proposed design
and construction details shall be approved in writing by the Road Commissioner or the Maine
Department or Transportation, as appropriate.
E. Where the Subdivision streets are to remain private roads, the following words shall appear on the
recorded plan:
"All roads in this Subdivision shall remain private roads to be maintained by the developer
or the lot owners and shall not be accepted or maintained by the Town".
F. The developer shall be required to pave a new Subdivision street or provide a bond to the Town for
such purpose, prior to the sale of any lot, as a condition of approval by the Planning Board.
G. Any existing street in an already approved Subdivision, which is still privately owned as of December
6, 1995, and with respect to which an application to the Town for acceptance had been made
as of June 9, 1989, shall be excepted from the requirement of this article. (Amended by Town
Council, December 14, 1995). 34
Article XII. Street and Storm Drainage Design and Construction Standards
12.2 Street Design Standards.
A. These design standards shall be met by all streets within Subdivisions, and shall control the roadway,
shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, drainage systems, culverts, and other appurtenances.
B. Streets shall be designed to discourage through traffic within a residential Subdivision.
C. Reserve strips controlling access to street shall be prohibited except where their control is
definitely placed with the municipality.
D. Adjacent to areas zoned and designed for commercial use, or where a change of zoning to a zone
which permits commercial uses is contemplated by the municipality, the street right-of-way
and/or pavement width shall be increased on each side by half of the amount necessary to bring
the road into conformance with the standards for commercial streets in this ordinance.
E. Where a Subdivision borders an existing narrow street (not meeting the width requirements of the
standards for street in this ordinance), or when the Comprehensive Plan indicates plans for
realignment or widening of a road that would require use of the land in the Subdivision, the Plan
shall indicate reserved areas for widening or realigning the road marked "Reserved for Road
Realignment (Widening) Purposes". Land reserved for such purposes may not be included in
computing lot area or setback requirement is indicated on the Official Map, the reserved area shall
not be included in any lot, but shall be reserved to be deeded to the municipality or State.
F. Any Subdivision expected to generate average daily traffic of 200 trips per day or more, shall have
at least two (2) street connections with existing public streets, streets shown on an Official Map,
or streets on any approved Subdivision Plan for which Performance Guarantees have been filed
and accepted. Any street with an average daily traffic of 200 trips per day or more, shall have at
least two (2) street connections leading to existing public streets, streets shown on an Official Map,
or street on an approved Subdivision Plan for which Performance Guarantees have been filed and
accepted.
35
G. The following design standards apply according to street classifications:
Description Arterial Collector Minor
Private
Right-of-
Way Commercial
Minimum R.O.W. Width 80' 60' 60' **60' 60'
Minimum Pavement Width 44' 24' 22' 18' 30'
Sidewalk Width 8' 5' 5' N/A N/A
Minimum Grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5% N/A 0.5%
Maximum Grade 5.0% 8.0% 10.0% 10.0% 5.0%
Minimum Centerline Radius 500' 230' 150' N/A 400'
Minimum Tangent Between
Curves or Rev. Alignment 200' 200' 100' N/A 200'
Roadway Crown 1/4"/ft 1/4"/ft 1/4"/ft N/A 200'
Minimum Angel of Street
Intersection (degrees) 90º 90º 75º 75º
Maximum Curb Radii at
Intersection 2.0% 3.0% 3.0% N/A 2.0%
Minimum Curb Radii at
Intersection 30' 20' 15' N/A 30'*
Minimum Width of shoulders
(each side) 5' 3' 3' ***N/A 9'
Minimum Front Property Line
Abutting Cul-de-sac For All Class 100'
* Pertains to 90 degrees intersections.
** Amended April 14, 2010 from sixty (60) feet to forty (40) feet.
*** Amended March 13, 2013 from 3' to Not Applicable.
H. The centerline of the roadway shall be the centerline of the right-of-way.
I. Dead End Streets: In addition to the design standards above, dead end streets shall be constructed
to provide a cul-de-sac turn-around with the following minimum requirements for radii: Property line
sixty-five (65') feet; outer edge of pavement fifty (50') feet; inner edge of pavement thirty (30') feet.
The Board may require the reservation of a twenty (20') foot easement in line with the street to provide
continuation of pedestrian traffic or utilities to the next street. The Board may also require the reservation
of a sixty (60') foot easement in line with the street to provide continuation of the road where
future subdivision is possible.
An alternate to a cul-de-sac would be a branch type turnaround consisting of a parcel of land at least
sixty (60') feet square and set off at a right angle on either side of a roadway, and whose length of
pavement for said turnaround area from the centerline of the roadway to the end of the branch turnaround
shall be at least fifty (50') feet. Also, the length of pavement from the edge of the inside radius
of the branch turnaround to the end of the street shall be at least sixty (60) to seventy-five (75) feet.
For further reference, please see the diagram below. The branch type turnaround shall be built in
accordance with the street construction provisions adopted by the Town of Fairfield.
SEE DIAGRAM ON PAGE 37
36
The Board, on the advice of the Public Works Director, or an engineer, will set the type of turnaround
required.
THE LENGTH OF THE PAVEMENT FROM THE
EDGE OF THE INSIDE RADIUS OF THE BRANCH
TURNAROUND TO THE END OF THE STREET
SHOULD BE AT LEAST SIXTY (60) TO
SEVENTY-FIVE (75) FEET.
THE LENGTH OF PAVEMENT FROM THE CENTER
LINE OF THE ROADWAY TO THE END OF THE
BRANCH SHALL BE AT LEASE FIFTY (50) FEET.
PARCEL OF LAND AT LEAST SIXTY (60) FEET
SQUARE, SET OFF AT A RIGHT ANGLE ON
EITHER SIDE OF THE ROAD WAY.
BRANCH
J. Grades, Intersection, and Sight Distances.
1. Grades of all streets shall conform in general to the terrain, so that cut fill are minimized while
maintaining the grade standards above.
2. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves to provide the following minimum
stopping sight distances based on the street design speed.
DESIGN SPEED (MPH) 20 25 30 35
Stopping Sight Distance 125 150 200 250
Stopping sight distance shall be calculated with a height of eye at 3.5 feet and the height of object
at 0.5 feet.
3. Where new street intersections or driveway curb-cuts are proposed sight distances, as measured
along the road onto which traffic will be turning, shall be based upon the posted speed
limited and conform to the table below: Sight distances shall be measured for the driver's seat of a
vehicle standing on that portion of the exit with the front of the vehicle a minimum of ten (10') feet
behind the curb line or edge of shoulder, with the height of the eye 3 1/2 feet, to the top of an
object 4 1/2 feet above the pavement.
POSTED SPEED LIMIT (MPH) 25 30 35 40 45 50 55
Sight Distance 250 300 350 400 450 500 550
37
Where necessary, corner lots shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstructions, including
ground excavation, to achieve the required visibility.
4. Cross (four-corner) street intersections shall be avoided insofar as possible, except as shown
on the Comprehensive Plan or at other important traffic intersections. A minimum distance of two
hundred (200') feet shall be maintained between centerlines of side streets.
K. Sidewalks: Where stalled, sidewalks shall meet those minimum requirements.
1. Bituminous Sidewalk:
a. The crushed aggregate base course shall be no less than eight (8") inches thick.
b. The hot bituminous pavement surface course shall be no less than two (2") inches after
compact.
2. Portland Cement Concrete Sidewalks:
a. The sand shall be no less than six (6") inches thick.
b. The Portland Cement concrete shall be reinforced with six (6") inch square, number 10
wire mesh and shall be no less than four (4") inches thick.
L. Granite curbing, if required, shall be installed on a thoroughly compacted gravel base of six (6")
inches minimum thickness. Bituminous curbing, if required, shall be installed on the base course
of the pavement. The specified pavement width above shall be measured between the curbs.
38
12.3 Street Construction Standards.
A. Minimum thickness of material after compaction.
Private
Right - Industrial/
Street Materials Arterial Collector Minor of-way Commercial
Aggregate Sub-base
Course (Max sized
stone 4") 18" 18" 18" 12" 18"
Crushed Aggregate
Base Course 4" 3" 3" 3" 4"
Hot Bituminous
Pavement*
Total Thickness **3 1/2" **3" **3" **3 1/4"
Surface Course 1 1/2" 1" 1" 1 1/4"
Base Course **2" **2" **2" **2"
* Optional - at the discretion of the Board
** Amended March 13,2013
B. Preparation:
1. Before any clearing has started on the right-of-way, the center line and side lines of the new road
shall be staked or flagged at fifty (50') foot intervals.
2. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way shall be cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and
other objectionable materials. All ledge, large boulders, and tree stumps shall be removed from the
right-of-way.
3. All organic materials shall be removed to a depth of two (2') feet below the subgrade of the roadway.
Rocks and boulders shall also be removed to a depth of two (2') feet below the subgrade of the roadway.
On soils which have been identified by the Town Engineer as not suitable for roadways, the subsoil shall
be removed from the street site to a depth of two (2') feet below the subgrade and replaced with material
meeting the specifications for gravel aggregate sub-base below.
4. Except in a ledge cut side slopes shall be no steeper than a slope of three (3') feet horizontal to one
(1') foot vertical and shall be graded, limed, fertilized, and seeded according to the specifications of the
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. Where a cut results in exposed ledge as a side slope no steeper
than four (4') feet vertical to one (1') foot horizontal is permitted.
5. All underground utilities shall be installed prior to paving to avoid cuts in the pavement. Building
sewers and water service connections shall be installed to the edge of the right-of-way prior to paving.
C. Base and Pavement:
1. Bases:
a. The Aggregate Sub-base Courses shall be sand or gravel of hard durable particles free from
vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances. The gradation of the part
that passes a three (3") inch square mesh sieve shall meet the following grading requirements:
39
Minimum Requirments
Percentage by Weight Passing
Sieve Designation Square Mesh Sieves
1/4 inch 25 - 70%
No. 40 0 - 30%
No. 200 0 - 7%
Aggregate for the sub-base shall contain no particles of rock exceeding four (4") inches in any
dimension.
b. The Aggregate Base Courses shall be sand and gravel of hard durable particles free from
vegetative matter, lumps or balls of clay and other deleterious substances. The gradation of the
part that passes a three (3") inch square mesh sieve shall meet the following grading requirements:
Percentage by Weight Passing
Sieve Designation Square Mesh Sieves
1/2 inch 45 - 70%
1/4 inch 30 - 55%
No. 40 0 - 20%
No. 200 0 - 5%
2. Pavement Joints: Where pavement joins an existing pavement, the existing pavement shall
be cut along a smooth line and form a neat, even, vertical joint.
3. Curbs and Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be installed within the urban compact area, or
within any areas designated in the Capital Improvements Plan or Comprehensive Plan as areas of
compact development.
4. Pavements:
a. Minimum standards for the base layer of pavement shall be the M.D.O.T. specifications for
plant mix grade B with an aggregate size no more than one (1") inch maximum.
b. Minimum standards for the surface layer of pavement shall meet the M.D.O.T. specifications
for plan mix grade C with an aggregate size no more than 3/4 inch maximum.
12.4 Storm Water Management Design Standards.
A. Adequate provisions shall be made for disposal of all storm water generated within the Subdivision,
and any drained ground water through a management system of swales, culverts, under drain,
and storm drains. The storm water management system shall be designed to conduct storm
water flows to existing water-courses or storm drains.
1. Where a Subdivision is traversed by a stream, river, or surface water drainage way, or where
the Board feels that surface water runoff to be created by the Subdivision should be controlled,
there shall be provided easements or drainage rights-of-way with swales, culverts, catch basins
or other means of channeling surface water within the Subdivision and over other properties.
This storm water management system shall be designed by a Registered Professional Engineer.
2. Drainage easements for existing water-courses or proposed drainage ways shall be provided at
least thirty (30') feet wide, conforming substantially with the lines of existing natural drainage.
40
3. All components of the storm water management system shall be designed to limit peak discharge
to predevelopment levels for every storm between the two (2) year and the twenty-five year,
twenty-four (24) hour duration, frequencies, based on rainfall data for Portland, Maine. When the
Subdivision discharges directly to a major water body, peak discharge may be increased from
predevelopment levels provided downstream drainage structures are suitably sized.
4. The minimum pipe size for any storm drainage shall be twelve (12") inches. Maximum trench
width at the outside diameter of the pipe plus two (2') feet. Pipe shall be bedded in a fine granular
materials, containing no stones larger than three (3") inches, lumps of clay, or organic matter,
reaching a minimum of six (6") inches below the bottom of the pipe extending to six (6") inches
above the top of the pipe.
B. The storm water management system shall be designed to accommodate upstream drainage,
taking into account existing conditions and approved or planned developments not yet built and
shall include a surplus design capacity factor or twenty-five (25%) percent for potential increases
in up-stream runoff.
C. Downstream drainage requirements shall be studied to determine the effect of the proposed
Subdivision. The storm drainage, taking into account existing conditions and approved or planned
developments not yet built and shall include a surplus design capacity factor of twenty-five (25%)
percent for potential increases in up-stream runoff.
D. Catch basins shall be installed where necessary and located at the curb line.
E Outlets shall be stabilized against soil erosion by stone riprap or other suitable materials to reduce
storm water velocity. Wherever the storm drainage system is not within the right-of-way of a public
street, perpetual easements shall be provided to the Town allowing maintenance and improvement
of the system.
F. Where soils require a subsurface drainage system, the drains shall be installed and maintained
separately from the storm water drainage system.
12.5 Storm Drainage Construction Standards.
A. Materials:
1. Reinforced Concrete Pipe. Reinforced Concrete Pipe shall meet the requirements of ASIM
Designation C-76 (AASHTOM 170). Pipe classes shall be required to meet the soil and traffic
loads with a safety factor of 1.2 on the .01 inch crack strength with a Class B bedding. Joints shall
be of the rubber gasket type meeting ASIM Designation C443-70, or of an approved performed
plastic jointing material such as "Ramnek". Perforated Concrete Pipe shall conform to the requirements
of AASHTOM 175 for the appropriate diameters.
2. Asbestos Cement Pipe. Asbestos Cement Pipe shall meet the requirements of ASIM
Designation C-428 (AASHTOM 198). Pipe classes shall be required to meet the soil and traffic
loads with a safety factor of 1.5 on the crushing strength. Joints shall be of the rubber gasket type
meeting ASIM Designation D-1869-63, or of an approved preformed plastic sleeve type.
3. Corrugate Metal Pipe. Corrugated Metal Pipe shall be bituminous coated meeting the
requirements of AASHTO Designation M 190 Type C for iron and steel pipe or AASHTO Designation
M 196 for aluminum alloy pipe for sectional dimensions and type of bituminous coating.
Pipe gauge shall be as required to meet the soil and traffic loads with a deflection of not more than
five (5%) percent. 41
4. ABS Pipe. ABS (Acrylonitrile-butadiene-sytrene) composite pipe and fittings shall conform
to the requirements of AASHTO M 264 and AASHTO M 265. Perforated pipe shall conform to the
requirements of AASHTO M 36, Type III.
5. Corrugate Plastic Pipe. Corrugated Plastic Pipe shall conform to the requirements of
AASHTO M 252.
6. Manholes. Manholes shall be of precast truncated cone section construction meeting the
requirements of ASIM Designation C 478 or present concrete manhole construction meeting the requirements
of ASIM Designation C 139, radial type. Bases may be cast in place 3,000 psi 28 day
strength concrete or may be of precast concrete, placed on a compacted foundation of uniform
density. Metal frames and traps shall be set in a full mortar bed and with tops shall conform to the
requirements of AASHTO M 103 for carbon steel castings, AASHTO M 105, class 30 for gray iron
castings or AASHTO M (ASTMA 283, Grade B or better) for structural steel.
7. Catch Basins. Catch Basins shall be of precast concrete truncated cone section construction
meeting the requirements of ASIM Designation C 478 or precast concrete manhole block construction
meeting the requirements of ASTM Designation C 139, radial type. Castings shall be
square cast iron sized for the particular inlet condition in place 3,000 psi 28 day strength concrete
or may be of precast concrete, place on a compacted foundation of uniform density. Metal frames
and traps shall be set in a full mortar bed and with tops shall conform to the requirements of
AASHTO M 103 for carbon steel castings, AASHTO M 105, Class 30 for gray iron castings or
AASHTO M 183 (ASTMA 283, Grade b or better) for structural steel.
B. Drain inlet alignment shall be straight in both horizontal and vertical alignment unless specific
approval of curvilinear drain is obtained in writing from the Board, after consultation with the
Municipal Engineer.
C. Manhole shall be provided at all changes in vertical and horizontal alignment and at all junctions.
On straight runs, manholes shall be placed at a maximum of four hundred (400') foot intervals.
D. Upon Completion each catch basin or manhole shall be cleaned of all accumulation of silt, debris
or foreign matter and shall be kept clean until final acceptance.
12.6 Additional Improvements and Requirements.
A. Erosion Control: The procedures outlines in the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan shall be
implemented during the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages.
B. Cleanup: Following street construction, the developer or contractor shall conduct a thorough
clean-up of stumps and other debris from the entire street right-of-way. If on-site disposal of the
stumps and debris is proposed, the site be indicated on the Plan, and be suitably covered with
fill and topsoil, limed, fertilized, and seeded.
C. Street Names, Signs and Lighting: Streets which join and are in alignment with street of abutting
or neighboring properties shall bear the same name. Names of new streets shall not duplicate,
nor bear phonetic resemblance to the names of existing streets within the Municipality, and shall
be subject to the approval of the Board. No street name shall be the common given name of a
person. The developer shall reimburse the Municipality for the costs of installing street name,
traffic safety and control signs. Street lighting shall be installed as approved by the Board.
42
12.7 Certification of Construction. "As built" plans shall be submitted to the Municipal Officers. Upon
completion of street construction and prior to a vote by the Municipal Officers to submit a proposed public way
to the legislative body, a written certification signed by a professional engineer registered in the state of Maine
shall be submitted to the Municipal Officers at the expense of the applicant, certifying that the proposed way
meets the design and construction requirements of this ordinance.
43
13.1 Types of Guarantees. With submittal of the application for Final Plan approval, the subdivider shall
provide one of the following Performance Guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction
costs of all required improvements, taking into account the time span of the construction schedule and the
inflation rate for construction costs.
A. Either a certified check payable to the Town or a savings account certificate of deposit naming
the Town as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account;
B. A Performance Bond payable to the Town issued by a surety company, and acceptable to the
Town.
C. An irrevocable letter of credit (see Appendix B for sample) from a financial institution establishing
funding for the construction of the Subdivision, from which the Town may draw if construction
is inadequate, in such form not substance acceptable by the Town; or
D. An offer of conditional approval limiting the number of units built or lots sold until all required
improvements have been constructed.
The conditions and amount of the Performance Guarantee shall be determined by the Board or its agent, with
the advice of the Town's Engineer, Road Commissioner, Municipal Officers, and/or Town Attorney.
13.2 Contents of Guarantee. The Performance Guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost
estimate for each major phase of construction taking into account inflation, provisions of each phase of
construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the Performance Guarantee to the developer, and a
date after which the developer will be in default and the Town shall have access to the funds to finish constructtion.
13.3 Escrow Account. A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by
either a certified check made out to the municipality, the direct deposit into a savings account, or the purchase
of a certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the subdivider, the municipality shall be
named as owner or co-owner, and the consent of the municipality shall be required for a withdrawal, but the
consent of the subdivider shall not be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account
shall be returned to the subdivider unless the municipality has found it necessary to draw on the account, in
which case the interest earned shall be proportionately divided between the amount returned to the subdivider
and the amount withdrawn to complete the required improvements.
Before the Planning Board grants final approval of the Final Plan, the subdivider shall, in an amount set by the
Planning Board, either filed with the Town a certified check to cover the full cost of the required improvements,
or the subdivider shall file with the Town a Performance Bond to cover the full cost of the improvements. Any
such bond shall be satisfactory to the Town Officers, Town Engineer or designated Engineer and Town Attorney
as to form, sufficiency, manner of execution and surety. A period of one year, not to exceed three years, shall
be set forth in the bond time within which required improvements must be completed. The certified check or
bond shall include an amount required for recreation land or improvements as specified. The applicant shall
present as part of his completed application, a copy of the receipt from the Town. Provisions for phasing road
construction and subdivisions are contained in the Subdivision rules and regulations 13.7. Any certified check
shall be deposited in the name of the Town by the Treasurer, in an interest bearing account and shall bear the
name of the Developer and of the proposed subdivision, and withdrawals shall be made after designated Engineer
has certified the work as completed. The Planning Board shall be duly notified prior to any withdrawal.
Any work which has not been completed, shall be performed at the discretion of the Town and such work shall
be paid from the escrow account. The Planning Board will recommend to the 44
Article XIII. Performance Guarantees
Town Council such disbursements from the escrow account as will pay for completed work in accordance with
an approved disbursement schedule. (Amended by Town Council Feb. 12, 1991).
13.4 Performance Bond. A Performance Bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for
release of the bond or portions of the bond to the subdivider, and the procedures for collection by the municipality.
The bond documents shall specifically reference the Subdivision for which approval is sought.
13.5 Letter of Credit. An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution shall indicate
that funds have been set aside for the construction of the Subdivision and may not be used for any other
project or loan.
13.6 Conditional Agreement. The Board, at its discretion may provide for the subdivider to enter into a
binding agreement with the municipality in lieu of the other financial Performance Guarantees.
Such an agreement shall provide for approval of the Final Plan on the condition that up to four (4) lots may
be sold or built upon until either:
A. It is certified by the Board, or its agent, that all of the required improvements have been installed in
accordance with this Ordinance and the regulations of the appropriate utilities; or
B. A performance Guarantee, acceptable to the municipality, is submitted in an amount necessary
to cover the completion of the required improvements at an amount adjusted for inflation and
pro-rated for the portions of the required improvements already installed.
Notice of the agreement and any conditions shall be on the Final Plan which is recorded at the
Registry of Deeds. Release from the agreement shall follow the procedures for release of the
Performance Guarantees contained in Section 13.8.
13.7 Phasing of Development. The Board may approve the plans to develop a Major Subdivision in
separate and distinct phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots abutting that
Section of the Proposed Subdivision street which is covered by a a Performance Guarantee. When development
is phased, road construction shall commence from an existing public way. Final approval in subsequent
phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases.
13.8 Release of Guarantee. Prior to the release of any part of the Performance Guarantee, the Board
shall determine to its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the Town's Engineer and whatever other agencies
and departments may be involved, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction
requirements for that portion of the improvements for which the release is requested.
13.9 Default. If, upon inspection, the Town Engineer finds that any of the required improvements have not
been constructed in accordance with the Plans and specifications filed as part of the application, he shall so
report in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer, the Municipal Officers, the Board, and the subdivider or
builder. The Municipal Officers shall retain authority to take any steps necessary to preserve the Town's
rights.
13.10 Improvements Guaranteed. Performance Guarantees shall be tendered for all improvements
required by Section 11.7 of this Ordinance, and for the construction of the streets.
45
13.11 Inspection Fees. In addition to other fees for subdivision reviews (including 7.1B) the following fees
are herein established in a separate interest bearing account to defray partially the cost of technical, legal, and
administrative services required for the review, processing, and inspection of roads and streets: An amount
equal to six (6%) percent of the estimated cost of construction to include water and sewer if applicable. This
fee to be paid by the developer to the Town of Fairfield at the time of application for preliminary approval. Any
unexpended monies will be returned to the developer upon completion of the project, and the designated
engineer has certified the work as completed. (Amended by Town Council Feb. 12, 1991).
46
14.1 Where the Board Makes Written Findings of Fact that are special circumstances of a particular
lot proposed to be subdivided, it may waive portions of the submission requirements of the standards, unless
otherwise indicated in this Ordinance, to permit a more practical and economical development, provided the
public health, safety, and welfare are protected, and provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying
the intent and purpose of the Official Map, the Comprehensive Plan, the Zoning Ordinance, or this Ordinance
and provided the criteria of the State Subdivision Law are met.
14.2 Where the Board Makes Written Findings of Fact that due to special circumstances of a particular
lot proposed to be subdivided, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite to provide for the
public health, safety or welfare, or are inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities
adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed Subdivision, it may waive the requirement for such improvements,
subject to appropriate conditions.
14.3 In Granting Waivers to any of this Ordinance in accordance with Sections 14.1 and 14.2, the Board
shall require such conditions as will assure the objectives of this Ordinance are met.
14.4 Waivers to be Shown on Final Plan. When the Board grants a waiver to any of the standards of
this Ordinance, the Final Plan shall indicate the waivers granted and the date on which they were granted.
47
Article XIV. Waivers
15.1 An aggrieved party may appeal any decision of the Board under this Ordinance to Somerset Superior
Court, within thirty (30) days.
48
Article XV. Appeals
1. Defined. A subdivision is the division of a tract or parcel of land into three (3) or more lots within any five
(5) year period, which period begins after September 23, 1971, whether accomplished by sale, lease,
development, buildings, or otherwise, provided that division accomplished by devise, condemnation, order of
court, gift to a person related to the donor by blood, marriage or adoption or a gift to a municipality, unless the
intent of that gift is to avoid the objectives of this Section, or by transfer of any interest in land to the owner of
land abutting thereon, shall not be considered to create a lot or lots for the purposes of this Section.
In determining whether a tract or parcel of land is divide into three (3) or more lots, the first dividing of such tract
or parcel, unless otherwise exempted herein, shall be considered to create the first two (2) lots, by whomever
accomplished by a subdivider who shall have retained one of the lots for his own use as a single family
residence or for open space land as defined in Title 36, Section 1102, for a period of at least five (5) years
prior to that second dividing.
A lot of at least forty (40) acres shall not be counted as a lot except:
A. Where the lot or parcel from which it was divided is located wholly or partly within any shore land
area as defined in Title 38, Section 435; or
B. When a municipality has, by ordinance, or the Municipal Reviewing Authority has, by regulation,
elected to count lots of forty (40) acres or more in size as lots for the purposes of this subsection
where the parcel of land being divided is located wholly outside any shore land area as defined in
Title 38, Section 435.
For purposes of this Section, a tract or parcel of land is defined as all contiguous land in the same ownership,
provided that lands located on opposite sides of a public or private road shall be considered a separate tract or
parcel of land unless such road was established by the owner of the land on both sides thereof.
A "densely developed area" is defined as any commercial, industrial or compact residential area of ten (10)
or more acres with an existing density of at least one principle structure per two (2) acres. A principle
structure is defined as any building other than one which is used for purposes wholly incidental or accessory
to the use of another building on the same premises.
The term Subdivision shall also include such developments as mobile home parks, multiple family dwellings,
cluster housing, shopping centers, condominium, and industrial/commercial parks where there are three or
more interests in the ground under or adjoining the units are also being conveyed.
1-A. Special Protection for the Shore lands of Outstanding River Segments.
In accordance with Title 12, Section 402, outstanding river segments shall include:
A. The Aroostook River from the Canadian Border to the Masardis and T.10, P. 6, W.E.L.S.
town line, excluding the segment in T. 9, R. 5, W.E.L.S.;
49
Appendix A
Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4551. Land Subdivisions
B. The Carrabassett River from the Kennebec River to the Carr Bassett Valley and Mt. Abram Township
town line.
C. The Crooked River From it's inlet into Sebago Lake to the Waterford and Albany Township town line.
D. The Damariscotta River from the Route 1 bridge in Damariscotta to the dam at Damariscotta Mills.
E. The Dennys River from the Route 1 bridge to the outlet of Meddybemps Lake excluding the western
shore in Edmunds Township and NO. 14 Plantation.
F. The East Machias River, including the Maine River, from 1/4 of a mile above the Route 1 bridge to the
East Machias and T. 18, E.D., B.P.P. Townline, from the T.19, E.D., B.P.P. outlet of Crawford Lakes and
from MO. 21 Plantation and Alexander townline to the outlet of Pocomoonshine Lake, excluding Hadley Lake,
Lower Mud Pond and Upper Mud Pond.
G. The Fish River from the bridge at Fort Kent Mills to the Fort Kent and Wallagrass Plantation town line,
from the T.16, R.6, W.E.L.S., and Eagle Lake town line to the Eagle Lake and Winterville Plantation town line,
and from the T.14, R.6, W.E.L.S., and Portage Lake town line to the Portage Lake and T.13, R.7, W.E.L.S.
town line excluding Portage Lake.
H. The Kennebago River from its inlet into Cupsuptic Lake to the Rangely and Lower Cupsuptic Township
town line.
I. The Kennebec River from Thorns Head Narrows in North Bath to the Edwards Dam in Augusta, excluding
Perkins Township, and from the Route 148 bridge in Madison to the Caratunk and The Forks Plantation
town line, excluding the western shore in Concord Township, Pleasant Township and excluding Wyman Lake.
J. The Machias River from the Route 1 bridge to the Northfield and T.19, M.D., B.P.P. town line.
K. The Mattawamkeag River from the Penobscot River to the Mattawamkeag and Kingman Township
town line, and from the Reed Plantation and Bancroft town line to the East Branch in Haynesville.
L. The Narraguagus River from the ice dam above the railroad bridge in Cherryfield to the Beddington
and Devereaux town line, excluding Beddington Lake.
M. The Penobscot River, including the Eastern Channel, from Sandy Point in Stockington Springs to the
Veazie Dam and its tributary, the East Branch of the Penobscot, from the Penobscot River to the East
Millinnocket and Grindstone Township town line.
N. The Piscataquis River from the Penobscot River to the Monson and Blanchard Plantation town line.
O. The Pleasant River from the bridge in Addison to the Columbia and T.18, M.D., B.P.P. town line, and
from the T.24, M.D., B.P.P., and Beddington town line to the outlet of Pleasant River Lake.
P. The Rapid River from the Magelloway Plantation and Upton town line to the outlet of Pond in the River.
Q. The Saco River from the Little Ossipee River to the New Hampshire border.
R. The St. Croix River from the Route 1 bridge in Calais to the Calais and Baning Plantation town line,
from the Baning Plantation and Baileyville town line to the Baileyville and Fowler Township town line, and
from the Lambert Lake Township and Vanceboro town line to Flowage.
50
S. The St. George Lake from the Route 1 bridge in Thomaston to the outlet of Lake St. George
in Liberty, excluding White Oak Pond, Seven Tree Pond, Rounch Pond, Sennebec Pond, Trues
Pond, Stevens Pond and Little Pond.
T. The St. John River from the Van Buren and Hamlin Plantation town line to the Fort Kent and
St. John Plantation town line, and from the St. John Plantation and St. Francis town line to the
Allagash and St. Francis town line.
U. The Sandy River from the Kennebec River to the Madrid and Township E town line.
V. The Sheepscot River from the railroad bridge in Wiscasset to the Halldale Road in Montville,
excluding Long Pond and Sheepscot Pond, including its tributary, the West Branch of the Sheepscot
from its confluence with the Sheepscot River in Whitefield to the outlet of Branch Pond in
China.
W. The West Branch of Pleasant River from the East Branch in Brownville to the Brownville
and Williamsburg Township town line, and
X. The West Branch Union River from the Route 181 bridge in Mariaville to the outlet to
Great Pond in the Town of Great Pond.
2. Municipal Review and Ordinance
A. Reviewing Authority. All request for Subdivision approval shall be reviewed by the Municipal
Planning Board, agency or office or if none, by the Municipal Officers, hereinafter called the
Municipal Reviewing Authority.
B. Ordinance. The Municipal Reviewing Authority may after a public hearing, adopt additional
reasonable policies governing Subdivisions whish shall control, until amended, repealed or replaced,
by Ordinance adopted by the Municipal Legislative Body. The Municipal Reviewing Authority shall
give at least seven (7) days notice of such hearing.
C. Record. On all matters concerning Subdivision review, the Municipal Reviewing Authority
shall maintain a permanent record of all its meeting, proceedings and correspondence.
C - 1 Upon Receiving an Application, the Municipal Reviewing Authority shall issue to the
applicant a dated receipt. Within thirty (30) days from receipt of an application, the
Municipal Reviewing Authority shall notify the applicant in writing either that the
application is a complete application or, if the application is incomplete, the specific
additional material needed to make a complete application. After the Municipal
Reviewing Authority has determined that a complete application has been filed, it shall
notify the applicant and begin its full evaluation of the proposed Subdivision.
D. Hearing Order. In the event that the Municipal Reviewing Authority determines to hold a
public hearing on an application for Subdivision approval, it shall hold such hearing within thirty (30)
days of receipt by it of a completed application, and shall cause notice of the date, time and place
of such hearing to be given to the person making the application and to be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the municipality in which the Subdivision is proposed to be located,
at least two (2) times, the date of the first publication to be at least seven (7) days prior to the
hearing.
51
The Municipal Reviewing Authority shall, within thirty (30) days of a public hearing or within sixty
(60) days of receiving a completed application. If no hearing is held, or within such other time limit
as may be otherwise mutually agreed to, issue an order denying or granting approval of the proposed
Subdivision or granting approval upon such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable
to satisfy the criteria listed in Subsection 3 and to satisfy any other Ordinance adopted by the
Reviewing Authority, and to protect and preserve the public's health, safety and general welfare.
In all instances the burden of proof shall be upon the person(s) proposing the Subdivisions. In
issuing its decision, the Reviewing Authority shall make finding of fact establishing that the
proposed Subdivision does or does not meet the foregoing criteria.
In addition, whenever the initial approval or any subsequent amendment of a Subdivision is based in
part on the granting of a variance from any of the applicable Subdivision approval standards, that
fact shall be expressly noted on the face of the Subdivision Plan to be recorded in the local
Registry of Deeds or, in the case of any amendment if no amended plan is to be recorded, a
certificate indicating the name of the current property owner, identifying the recorded deed in its
chain file and indicating the fact that a variance, including any conditions on the variance, has been
granted and the date of the granting, shall be prepared in recordable form and shall be recorded
in the local Registry of Deeds within thirty (30) days of the final Subdivision approval or the variance
shall be invalid. No rights may accrue to the variance recipient or his heirs, successors or assigns
unless and until the recording is made within the thirty (30) days.
3. Guidelines. When promulgating any Subdivision Ordinance and when reviewing any Subdivision for
for approval, the Planning Board, agency or office, or the Municipal Officers, shall consider the following
criteria and before granting approval shall determine that the proposed Subdivision:
A. Will not result in undue water or air pollution. In making this determination it shall at least
consider: The elevation of land above sea level and its relation to the flood plains, the nature of
soils and subsoils and their ability to adequately support waste disposal; the slope of the land
and its effect on effluents; the availability of streams for disposal of effluents, and the applicable
State and local health and water resources Ordinance;
B. Has sufficient water available for the reasonable foreseeable need of the Subdivision;
C. Will not cause an unreasonable burden on an existing water supply, if one is to be utilized;
D. Will not cause unreasonable soil erosion or reduction in the capacity of the land to hold water
so that a dangerous or unhealthy condition may result;
E. Will not cause unreasonable highway or public road congestion or unsafe conditions with
respect to use of the highways or public roads existing or proposed;
F. Will provide for adequate sewage waste disposal;
G. Will not cause an unreasonable burden on the ability of a municipality to dispose of solid
waste and sewage if municipal services are to be utilized;
H. Will not have an undue adverse effect on the scenic or natural beauty of the area, aesthetics,
historic sites or rare and irreplaceable natural areas or any public rights for physical or visual
access to the shoreline;
52
I. Is in conformance with a duly adopted Subdivision Regulation or Ordinance, Comprehensive
Plan, Development Plan, or Land Use Plan, if any;
J. The subdivider has adequate financial and technical capacity to meet the above state
standards;
K. Whenever, situated, in whole or in part, within 250 feet of any pond, lake, river or tidal waters,
will not adversely affect the quality of that body of water or unreasonably affect the shoreline of that
body of water.
L. Will not, alone or in conjunction with existing activities, adversely affect the quality or quantity
of ground water; and
M. The subdivider will determine, based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
Boundary and Floodway Maps and Flood Insurance Rate Maps, whether the Subdivision is in a
flood prone area. If the Subdivision, or any part of it, is in such an area the subdivider will determine
the 100-year flood elevation and flood hazard boundaries within the Subdivision. The proposed
Subdivision Plan shall include a condition of plat approval requiring that principal structures on lots
in the Subdivision shall be constructed with their lowest floor, including the basement, at least one
foot above the 100-year flood elevation.
3-A. Access to Direct Sunlight. The Planning Board, agency or office or the Municipal Officers may, for
purposes of protecting and assuring access to direct sunlight for solar energy systems, prohibit,
restrict or control development through Subdivision Ordinance. The Ordinance may call for
Subdivision Development Plans containing restrictive covenants, height restrictions, side yard and
setback requirements or other permissible forms of land use controls.
4 Enforcement. No person, firm, corporation or other legal entity may sell, lease, develop, build
upon or convey for consideration any land in a Subdivision which has not been approved by the
Municipal Reviewing Authority of the municipality where the Subdivision is located and recorded
in the proper Registry of Deeds, nor shall such person, firm, corporation or other legal entity sell or
convey any land in such approved Subdivision unless at least one permanent marker is set at one
lot corner of the lot sold or conveyed. The term "permanent marker" includes but is not limited to
the following: A granite monument, a concrete monument, an iron pin or a drill hole in ledge. No
subdivision Plat or Plan shall be recorded by any Registry of Deeds which has not been approved
as required. Approval for the purpose of recording shall appear in writing on the Plat or Plan. No
public utility, water district, sanitary district or any utility company of any kind shall install services
to any lot in a Subdivision unless written authorization attesting to the validity and currency of
all local permits required under this chapter has been issued by the appropriate Municipal
Officials. Following the installation of service, the company or district shall forward the written
authorization to the Municipal Officials indicating that installation has been completed.
Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity who sells, leases, develops, builds upon, or
conveys for consideration, offers or agrees to sell, lease, develop, build upon or convey for
consideration any land in a Subdivision which has not been approved as required by this Section
shall be penalized in accordance with Title 30-A, M.R.S.A., Section 4506. The Attorney
General, the municipality, the Planning Board of any municipality or the appropriate Municipal
Officers may institute proceedings to enjoin the violations of this Section.
All Subdivision Plats or Plans required by this Section shall contain the name and address of the
person under who's responsibility the Subdivision Plat or Plan was prepared. 53
5 Exemptions. This section shall not apply to proposed Subdivisions approved by the Planning
Board or the Municipal Officers prior to September 23, 1971, in accordance with laws then in effect
nor shall it apply to Subdivision as defined by this Section in actual existence on September 23, 1971,
that is not require approval under prior law or to a Subdivision as defined by this Section, a plan of
which had been legally recorded in the proper Registry of Deeds prior to September 23, 1971. The
division of a tract or parcel as defined by this Section into three (3) or more lots and upon all of
Subdivision.
The dividing of a tract or parcel of land and the lot or lots so made, which dividing or lots when made
are not subject to this Section, shall not become subject of this Section by the subsequent
dividing of said tract of parcel of land or any portion thereof, however, the Municipal Reviewing
Authority shall consider the existence of such previously created lot or lots in reviewing a
proposed Subdivision created by such subsequent dividing.
6 Revision to Existing Plat or Plan. Any application for Subdivision approval which constitutes
a revision or amendment to a Subdivision Plan which has been previously approved shall indicate
that the fact on the application and shall identify the original Subdivision Plan being revised or
amended.
If a Subdivision Plat or Plan is presented for recording to a Register of Deeds and that Plat or Plan
is a revision or amendment to an existing Plat or Plan, the Register shall indicate on the index for
the original Plat or Plan that it has been superseded by another Plat or Plan and shall reference
the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the new Plat or Plan is recorded. In addition, the
Register shall ensure that the book and page or cabinet and sheet on which the original Plat or
Plan is recorded is referenced on the new Plat or Plan.
54
Jane Planner, Chairman
You Town Planning Board
Town Hall
Your Town, Me. 04000
Dear Ms. Planner:
RE: Letter of Credit: Developer, Inc., Sunshine Estates, Your Town, Maine.
This letter will confirm to Your Town that the Big Town Savings Bank has issued a loan commitment to
Developer, Inc., for the purpose of constructing all required improvements in the "Sunshine Estates"
Subdivision.
Big Town Saving Bank will set aside $230,000 in a Construction Escrow Account, for completion of the
required improvements. This account can be drawn upon by Your Town in the event that Developer, Inc.,
fails to complete steps a through H listed below for Windy road in or before (two years date of Final Plan).
A. Grub roadways full width of 50 feet - $4/ft. $9,400
B. Shape Sub-base and grade it - $4/ft. 9,400
C. Install under drain culverts - $16/Ft. 37,600
D. Install sewer $22/ft. x 2,050 plus pump $16,500. 61,600
E. Install water mains $14/ft. x 2,400 ft. 33,600
F. Apply and shape 18" gravel base
$8.30/ft. x 2,350 ft. 19,500
G. Apply and shape 3" of crushed gravel;
apply 1-3/4" of base course bituminous concrete
to width of 24 ft., apply bituminous curb and 2"
of bituminous concrete to a width of 5 ft.,
$10/ft. x 2,350 feet, 23,500
H. Apply 3/4" of surface bituminous concrete
to width if 24 ft - $5/ft. 11,800
Big Town Savings Bank understands that Developer, Inc., or the contractor, will notify the Town Engineer or
Code Enforcement Officer before any if the above work has begun and obtain his approval in writing as he
completes each phase of the road construction.
This account shall expire when Your Town acknowledges in writing to Developer, Inc., that the work outlined
is Steps A through H has been completed in accordance with Your Town's Subdivision Regulations and
Street Acceptance Ordinance, and the approved plans of Sunshine Estates. Any funds remaining in the
account on (date specified above) for work outlined in Steps A through H which has not been completed and
approved by the Town on that date shall be released to the Town to complete such work. As the Town
Engineer or Code Enforcement Officer has issued his written approvals for each step above to Developer, Inc.,
the funds in this account will be released based upon the schedule above.
55
Appendix B
Sample Letter of Credit
Approximate length of road 2,350 feet:
Drafts drawn upon this account must be for this particular Subdivision and to complete any work which is
outlined above. Furthermore, drafts must be accompanied by itemized statements showing costs or work to
be completed and must be submitted prior to (six to nine months following date specified above). Your Town
shall not be responsible for repayment or interest cost for any funds released to the Town for work not
completed on or before (date specified above).
Very truly yours,
Loan Officer
SEEN AND AGREED TO:
Developer, Inc.
to be performed.
Your Town
BY:
Town Manager
56
Town of Subdivision Application
Subdivision Name:
Application Number:
Applicant Information
1 Name of Property Owner:
Address:
2 Name of Applicant:
Address:
Telephone:
3 If applicant is a corporation, check if licensed in Maine: yes no
and attach a copy of State's Registration.
4 Name of applicant's authorized agent:
Address:
Telephone:
5 Name of Land Surveyor, Engineer, Architect or other preparing Plan:
Address:
Telephone:
6 Person and address to which all correspondence regarding this application should be sent to:
7 What legal interest does the applicant have in the property to be developed (ownership, option,
purchase and sales contract etc.)?
8 What interest does the applicant have in any abutting property?
Land Information:
9 Location of Property (from County Registry of Deeds): Book Page
(from Tax Maps): Map Lot(s) .
10 Current zoning of property:
11 Is any portion if the property within 250 feet of the high water mark of a pond, river or salt water
body? Yes No
12 Acreage to be developed:
13 Indicate the nature of any restrictive covenants to be place in the deed:
Appendix C
Model Application Form
14 Has this land been part of a prior approved Subdivision? Yes No
or other divisions within the past five (5) years? Yes No
15 Identify existing use(s) of land. (farmland, woodlot, etc.)
16 Does the parcel include any waterbodies? Yes No
17 Is any portion of the property within a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency? Yes No
18 List below the names and mailing address of abutting property owners and owners across the road:
Name: Address:
General Information:
19 Proposed name of development:
20 Number of lots or units:
21 Anticipated date for construction:
22 Anticipated date for completion:
23 Does this development require extension of public infrastructure?
Yes No other
roads storm drainage
sidewalks water lines
sewer lines fire protection equipment
24 Estimated cost for infrastructure improvements: $
25 Identify method of water supply to the proposed development?
individual wells
central well with distribution lines
connection to public water system
other, please state alternative
26 Identify method of sewage disposal to the proposed development?
individual septic tanks
central on-site disposal with distribution lines
connection to public sewer system
other, please state alternative
27 Identify method of fire protection for the proposed development?
hydrants connected to public water system
dry hydrants located on an existing pond or water body
existing fire pond
other, please state alternative 58
28 Does the applicant propose to dedicate to the public any streets, recreation or common lands?
If any:
Street(s) Yes No Estimated Length
Recreation area(s) Yes No Estimated Acreage
Common land(s) Yes No Estimated Acreage
29 Does the applicant intend to request waivers of any of the Subdivision submission requirements?
If yes, list them and state reasons for the request.
To the best of my knowledge, all above stated information submitted in this application is true and correct.
(Signature of applicant) (date)
59
TOWN OF FAIRFIELD
TAX ACQUIRED PROPERTY ORDINANCE
(1) TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as The Town of Fairfield Tax Acquired
Property Ordinance.
(2) AUTHORITY: This Ordinance is enancted pursuant to Title 30-A ss 3001, and
Title 36, ss 941-943.
(3) PURPOSE: The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide the Town Council
authority and guidance regarding properties acquired by the Town for nonpayment
of taxes, sewer bills, costs of abatement of dangerous buildings, or
malfunctioning waste water disposal units.
(4) RETENTION OF PROPERTY: The Town Council may retain property for the
benefit of the Town, if they deem it in the best interest of the Town to do so. By
way of example, but not of limitation, the Town Council might deem it in the
best interest of the Town to retain property where:
1) The property has or will have recreational value or economic value to
the Town.
2) The property has or will have potential for a public facility or additions
to public facilities.
3) Retention of the property will provide a residence for an individual or
individuals who otherwise will require public assistance from the Town.
(4a) If the property is retained for public use, the Town Council may pursue an
action for equitable relief in accordance with the provisions of Title 35 MRSA
Section 946, as amended, as a means of.securing clear title to the property.
(4b) The Town Council may cause the tax-acquired property retained for public
use to be managed and insured as it would any other municipal property.
(5) REPURCHASE: If the Town Council determines that a property should not be
retained under Section 4, that property, at the discretion of the Town Council,
MAY be offered to the taxpayer(s) who lost the property. Also, at the sole
discretion of the Town Council, this may include the taxpayers’ heirs or
successors. Upon the decision that the property may be repurchased, the
taxpayer(s) must pay all outstanding debts to the Town, including, but not
limited to, taxes, sewer, and personal property bills, interest and costs relating to
these bills, the estimated taxes for the current municipal fiscal year if the
conveyance is after April 1, and the amount of any taxes or other charges that
would have been assessed had the property not become tax acquired.
(5a) The Treasurer shall notify the taxpayer(s) of their option to repurchase the
property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to their last known address.
Full payment shall be required within 30 days of the date of the certified notice.
(5b) The Town will issue a Quitclaim Deed at the next regularly scheduled
meeting following receipt of payment.
(6) SALE: If a property is not retained by the Town Council under Section 4, and
if the property is not repurchased under Section 5, the property shall be sold by
sealed bid or any other method approved by the Town Council which, in the sole
judgment of the Town Council, maximizes the return to the Town. The Town
Council reserves the right to accept or reject bids in any bid process. A notice of
intent to sell the property shall be published in a local newspaper, and shall be
posted in those areas where warrants are posted. The notice shall specify the
time and date bids are due and the general terms of the bid.
(6a) Unless the Town Council stipulates otherwise, the minimum bid for any tax
acquired property shall be the total of all outstanding taxes, Interest, and costs,
including estimated taxes for the current year if the conveyance to the grantee is
after April 1.
(6b) The Town Council shall have the authority to retain any part of a property
for Town benefit and sell the remainder.
(6c) Any conveyance by the Town may be subject to such covenants or
conditions as the Council may deem advisable.
(6d) The Town Manager shall review all bids and make recommendations to the
Town Council. The Town Council shall determine the successful bidder.
(6e) If the Town Council rejects all bids, the Council shall have the right to
negotiate, at their option, with any of the bidders a mutually agreed upon buying
price.
Dated: June 18, 1996.
Amended: October 1, 2008 ATTEST: Tracey L. Stevens, Town Clerk

TAX ASSESSMENT ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 OFFICE OF SINGLE ASSESSOR ESTABLISHED
In accordance with the provisions of 30 M.R.S.A. §2060(5), the office of a single
assessor is hereby established. The Town Council shall appoint the single
assessor for a term of three (3) years. The necessary assistants to the assessor
shall be appointed by the Town Council annually.
SECTION 2 BOARD OF ASSESSMENT REVIEW
A Board of Assessment Review consisting of five (5) members shall be appointed
by the Town Council with the responsibility for arbitration of taxpayer appeals
and authority to abate assessments in the light of said appeals. One member
shall be appointed for one year, two members shall be appointed to serve for
two years, and two members shall be appointed to serve for three years.
Thereafter, all appointments shall be for a three year term. Vacancies due to
death, resignation, or other cause shall be filled by Council appointment for the
remainder of the unexpired term. One member shall be chosen annually by the
membership as chairman of the Board of Assessment Review. Abatements shall
require a minimum of 3 votes.
Effective March 17, 1986
WASTE DISPOSAL ORDINANCE
SECTION 1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the public health and property values
of the citizens of the Town of Fairfield by controlling the disposal of all discarded
mater in such a manner as to prevent:
1. The pollution of air, land, or water resources of the town.
2. Littering and unsightliness around disposal areas.
3. The destruction of private wells.
4. Erosion.
5. The destruction of town roads by increased and/or heavy traffic.
SECTION 2 PROHIBITION
The operation of a disposal area in the Town of Fairfield for the disposal of any
waste, unused materials, or discarded matter by any commercial, manufacturing
or industrial organization, governmental or quasi-governmental agency except
any town-owned disposal area without a permit from the Town Council is
prohibited. This permit is not required by farms for waste generated directly from
the raising of livestock, crops, or poultry.
SECTION 3 PERMIT APPLICATION AND PROCEDURES
The prospective operator and the owner of such a site must apply for this permit
by writing a letter to the Town Council stating:
1. The weight and volume per day, week and year to be disposed of.
2. The consistency and chemical composition and origins of the material to be
disposed of.
3. The location of the proposed disposal area.
4. Existing and planned final contours if excavation and fill are contemplated.
5. Plans to screen and reduce any unsightliness and to control access to the site
for protection against accident and public harm.
6. The manner and frequency in which the material will be transported to the
site.
7. The results of site surveys, engineering, evaluations and other studies
supporting the project.
The Town Council may reduce the amount of information needed in the
application for this permit, provided they determine, after a meeting with the
applicant, the information requested is riot applicable to the particular permit. A
public hearing must be held on all applications. The permit shall be granted,
granted with conditions, or denied within 60 days of receipt of a properly
completed application, or if additional information is necessary, within 60 days of
receipt of the additional information.
SECTION 4 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING THE PERMIT
A permit shall be granted after public hearing provided the Town Council find
that:
1. The soils, bedrock formation and ground contours are such that the
ground water and surrounding surface waters will not be affected.
2. There are no toxic or pathagent materials to be disposed of;
3. There will be no open burning and, if the material is combustible,
adequate fire control facilities shall be provided.
4. The site and entrance thereto are properly landscaped to screen, to the
maximum extent possible, the disposal area from all surrounding property,
and that entrance to the site is controlled to prevent accident and public
harm if necessary.
5. Any excavation or open soil will be planned in such a manner as to
minimize erosion and prevent sediment pollution or siltation of any ground
or surface water in the town.
Obtaining this permit in no way relieves the applicant from the
requirement to obtain other applicable Federal, State and local permits.
The Town Council may issue this permit subject to any conditions
necessary to ensure compliance with these criteria and the goals stated in
Section 1. If, after investigation, the Town Council determines that the
disposal area is not being operated in accordance with the criteria herein
or conditions on the permit for the area, then the permit shall be
cancelled and rendered null and void.
SECTION 5 EXISTING DISPOSAL SITES
Existing disposal sites covered by the ordinance must obtain a permit within 2
years of adoption of this ordinance by the town.
SECTION 6 CHANGES IN LOCATION, SIZE OR OPERATION
If the operation or location of any disposal area changes from that specified in
the original permit application, an amendment to that permit must be obtained
by the operator and the owner.
A public hearing on an amendment may or may not be held at the discretion of
the Town Council.
SECTION 7 PENALTY
Any operator or owner who fails to obtain a permit, misrepresents information in
the application, or fails to comply fully with conditions on the permit shall be
individually liable to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day of
each day of violation.
SECTION 8 PERMIT FEE AND TERM
Applications shall be accompanied by a non.-refundable fee of $50.00 payable to
the Town of Fairfield. In addition, the Town Council may assess reasonable
additional costs relating to a specific application. The term of the permit shall be
for one year from date of approval by the Town Council.
Permits are subject to termination at the discretion of the Town Council after 60
days upon written notice.
SECTION 9 SEPARABILITY
The invalidity of any provision of this ordinance shall not invalidate any other
part.
SECTION 10 COMMENCEMENT
This ordinance shall become effective when enacted.
Public Hearing: December 2, 1980
Effective Date: December 16, 1980
TRUE COPY ATTEST: Agnes G. LaPlante
.
.